
Chino Valley, AZ Code of Ordinances


TOWN OF CHINO VALLEY, ARIZONA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2019 S-8 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance No. 18-863, passed 1-8-2019



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY




CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to chapters and sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time; calculation of time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances



   10.17   Conflicting provisions



   10.18   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.19   Section histories; statutory references



   10.20   Authority to correct scrivener’s errors



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated “The Code of the Town of Chino Valley,
Arizona,” and may be so cited.  The code may also be cited as “The Chino
Valley Town Code.”



(2001 Code, Art. 1-1)



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall
be observed in the construction of this code and the ordinances of the town
unless the construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest intent
of the Council or the context of this code or the ordinances of the town.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation
of state law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



(2001 Code, Art. 1-5)



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  All words and phrases shall be construed and
understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar
and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood
according to the peculiar and appropriate meaning.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, MUNICIPALITY or TOWN.  The Town of
Chino Valley, Arizona.



      CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This municipal code
as modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.



      COUNCIL.  The Council of the Town of Chino Valley, Arizona.



      COUNTY.  Yavapai County, Arizona.



      DAY.  The period of time between any midnight and the midnight
following.



      DAYTIME  The period of time between sunrise and sunset.



      DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER or EMPLOYEE. 
Whenever any department, board, commission, office, officer or employee is
referred to, it shall mean a department, board, commission, office, officer
or employee of the town unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.



      EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  Vehicles of the Fire, Police and Public
Service Departments and legally authorized ambulances and emergency vehicles
of the State of Arizona, Yavapai County, or any political subdivisions
thereof, and vehicles of public service corporations.



      EMERGENCY WORK. Any work performed to prevent or alleviate
physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency,
which has or may result in a disruption of service, and which is necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of persons or property.



      IN THE TOWN or WITHIN THE TOWN.  All territory over which the
town now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of
its police powers or other regulatory powers.



      JOINT AUTHORITY.  All words purporting to give a joint authority
to 3 or more town officers or other persons shall be construed as giving the
authority to a majority of the officers or other persons unless it shall be
otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority.



      MAJORITY.  When used in reference to the Town Council, means 51%
of those members in attendance provided that a quorum of the Council is also
present.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      MOTOR VEHICLE. Every self-propelled device in, upon, or by which
any person or property is, or may be, transported upon a public highway,
excepting aircraft and devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks.



      NIGHTTIME.  The period of time between sunset and sunrise.



      OATH.  Includes affirmation or declaration.



      PERSON.  Shall extend and be applied to firms, corporations, or
voluntary associations, as well as to individuals, unless plainly
inapplicable.



      PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes every species of property, except
real property as defined in this section.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  The words PRECEDING and FOLLOWING mean
next before and next after, respectively.



      PROPERTY.  Real and personal property.



      REAL PROPERTY.  Lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



      SHALL or MAY.  SHALL is mandatory and MAY is permissive.



      SHALL HAVE BEEN.  Includes past and future cases.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the signer
cannot write, the signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the
mark by a witness who writes his or her own name near the signer's or
subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be
acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement
only when 2 witnesses so sign their own names thereto.



      STATE.  The State of Arizona.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading.  Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      TENANT or OCCUPANT.  When applied to a building or land shall
include any person holding a written or an oral lease or who occupies the
whole or part of the building or land, either alone or with others.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, except where otherwise provided.



(2001 Code, Art. 1-3)



Statutory reference:



   Definitions and construction of statutes generally, see A.R.S. §§
1-211 through 1-215



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:



   (A)   And/or.  “Or” may be read “and,” and “and” may be
read “or,” if the context requires it.



   (B)   Acts by agents.  When this code or an ordinance requires an
act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the
principal, the requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when
done by an authorized agent.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.



      (1)   Words of the masculine gender include the feminine;
words in the singular number include the plural, and words in the plural
number include the singular.



      (2)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses,
and the future includes the present.



   (D)   General terms.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the
titles, chapters, subchapters, sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of
this code shall be severable, and if any provision of this code is held
unconstitutional for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of the
code.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO CHAPTERS AND SECTIONS.



   (A)   All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and
sections of this code unless otherwise specified.



   (B)   Whenever in 1 section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



(2001 Code, Art. 1-4)



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the town exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within the town for the transaction of all
municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME; CALCULATION OF TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done as provided in this
code or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in
days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last,
except that if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday it shall be
excluded; and when such time is expressed in hours, the whole of Saturday,
Sunday or a holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code, except as otherwise provided in § 10.14.  However, all rights, duties
and obligations created or imposed by the repealed ordinances shall continue
and exist in all respects as if this code had not been adopted and enacted.



(2001 Code, Art. 1-9)



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   The adoption and enactment of this code shall not be construed to
repeal or in any way to modify or affect:



   (A)   Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding franchises,
annexations, dedications or zoning;



   (B)   Any ordinance making an appropriation;



   (C)   Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any bond
issue may have been authorized;



   (D)   The running of the statute of limitations in force at the time
this code becomes effective;



   (E)   The continued existence and operation of any department,
agency, commission or office heretofore legally established or held;



   (F)   Any bond of any public officer;



   (G)   Any taxes, fees, assessments or other charges incurred or
imposed; and



   (H)   Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming, approving
or accepting any compact or contract with any other municipality, the State
of Arizona or any county or subdivision thereof, or with the United States or
any agency or instrumentality thereof.



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.  Ordinances not requiring publication shall
take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be expressly so
provided.  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for any offense committed under
the ordinance repealed.



(2001 Code, Art. 1-9)



§ 10.17  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If any provision of this code conflicts with any other provision of
this code, any other local legislation, or any state or federal law, the
provision which is more stringent or restrictive in nature shall apply unless
the context clearly requires or indicates otherwise.



(2001 Code, Art. 1-4)



§ 10.18  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section.  In addition to the
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.19  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section.  Example:  (Ord. 10, passed
5-13-1960; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute.  Example:  (A.R.S. § 9-240)  (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Am.
Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information.  Example:



      § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



         This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



      Statutory reference:



         Inspection of public records, seeA.R.S. § 39-121



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the town published in 2001 and subsequently amended, the 2001
code section number shall be indicated in the history by “(2001 Code, §  
  ).”



§ 10.20  AUTHORITY TO CORRECT SCRIVENER'S ERRORS.



   (A)   The Town Attorney and Town Clerk are hereby each individually
authorized to correct scrivener's errors in the town code, the Unified
Development Ordinance, and ordinances, resolutions and minutes adopted by the
Council or other public body without the need for re-adoption of the town
code provision, Unified Development Ordinance provision, ordinance,
resolution or minutes.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, a SCRIVENER'S ERROR includes
1 or more of the following:



      (1)   A misspelling;



      (2)   A grammatical error;



      (3)    A numbering error;



      (4)   A cross-referencing error; or



      (5)   An inconsistency with the rules of style adopted for the
reformatted town code and Unified Development Ordinance.



   (C)   A correction to an ordinance, resolution or minutes shall be
accompanied by a scrivener's note on or attached to the corrected ordinance,
resolution or minutes.  Any such correction shall be reported within three
months of such correction at a regular meeting of the Council.



   (D)   Corrections to complete sections of the town code and the
Unified Development Ordinance shall be noted therein.



(Ord. 13-763, passed 1-22-2013)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found responsible for violating any provisions of
this code, except as otherwise provided in this code, shall be responsible
for a civil code infraction, and upon such finding of responsibility therefor
may be punished by a civil sanction not to exceed $500.  Each day that a
violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein provided.



      (1)   In addition to any monetary civil sanction, the Civil
Hearing Officer shall order the defendant to abate the civil code infraction,
unless it has been abated by the date of a finding of responsibility therefor.



      (2)   The Civil Hearing Officer shall have the authority,
within his or her discretion, to suspend the payment of any civil sanction
imposed.



      (3)   In any case involving a civil code infraction relating
to the occupancy or use of land, any monetary civil sanction imposed pursuant
to this section upon a defendant who holds an ownership interest in such land
shall be recordable as a lien upon the land and shall run with the land. 
The town, at its sole option, may record a notice of civil sanction and
abatement order with the  Yavapai County Recorder and thereby cause
compliance by any person(s) or entity thereafter acquiring the property. 
When the property is brought into compliance by the owner or responsible
party, a satisfaction of  notice of civil sanction and abatement order shall
be filed at the request and expense of the owner or responsible party.  It
shall be the property owner’s responsibility to secure the satisfaction of
notice of civil sanction and abatement order from the town.



   (B)   Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any
act required by Title VII of this code constitutes a civil traffic offense
which shall result in a civil penalty not to exceed $250.  In addition, the
court shall levy penalty assessments pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 12-116.01 and
12-116.02.  Civil traffic violations are subject to the provisions of A.R.S.
§§ 28-1592 et seq., as amended.



   (C)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
code which is classified as a Class 1 misdemeanor, upon conviction thereof,
may be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500, by imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 6 months, by a term of probation not to exceed 3 years, or by
any combination of the fine, imprisonment and probation.



   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any person
found to have violated any provision of this code or amendments thereto,
which pursuant to this section is classified as a civil code infraction, and
who has been twice previously found to have violated the provision within the
preceding 24 months, shall, in addition to any penalty prescribed for such
civil code infraction, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500, by imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 6 months, by a term of probation not to exceed 3 years, or by any
combination of the fine, imprisonment and probation.



(2001 Code, Art. 1-8)



Statutory reference:



   Maximum penalty for civil traffic violations, see A.R.S. § 28-1598



   Misdemeanor penalty authorized, see A.R.S. § 9-240(28)(b)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   GOVERNING BODY





         31.   OFFICERS





         32.   FINANCE AND REVENUE





         33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT





         34.   COURT





         35.   CODE OF ETHICS





         36.   LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS





         37.   ELECTIONS




CHAPTER 30:  GOVERNING BODY



Section




Town Council




   30.001   Elected officers



   30.002   Corporate powers



   30.003   Duties of office



   30.004   Vacancies



   30.005   Compensation



   30.006   Oath of office



   30.007   Bond



   30.008   Financial disclosure statement




Mayor




   30.020   Direct election of Mayor



   30.021   Vice Mayor



   30.022   Acting Mayor



   30.023   Powers and duties



   30.024   Absence



   30.025   Failure to sign documents




Council Procedure




   30.065   Meetings



   30.066   [Reserved]



   30.067   Rules



   30.068   Meetings to be public



   30.069   Quorum



   30.070   Agenda; notice of meetings



   30.071   Boards, committees and commissions



   30.072   Voting



   30.073   Suspension of rules



Cross-reference:



   Legislative Provisions, see Chapter 36




TOWN COUNCIL




§ 30.001  ELECTED OFFICERS.



   (A)   The elected officers of the town shall be a Mayor and 6
Council members. The Mayor and Council members shall constitute the Council
and shall continue in office until assumption of duties of office by their
duly elected successors.



   (B)   The term of office of the Mayor shall be 2 years.



   (C)   Council members shall serve 4-year overlapping terms in the
manner provided by state statute.



(2001 Code, § 2-1-1)



§ 30.002  CORPORATE POWERS.



   The corporate powers of the town shall be vested in the Mayor and
Council and shall be exercised only as directed or authorized by law. All
powers of the Council shall be exercised by ordinance, resolution, order or
motion.



(2001 Code, § 2-1-2)



§ 30.003  DUTIES OF OFFICE.



   The Mayor and Council members shall assume the duties of office at the
first regularly scheduled meeting in December following an election at which
the Mayor or Council members were elected.



(2001 Code, § 2-1-3)  (Am. Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)



§ 30.004  VACANCIES.



   The Council shall fill any vacancy that may occur for whatever reason
as provided by state law.



(2001 Code, § 2-1-4)  (Am. Ord. 11-755, passed 11-8-2011)



§ 30.005  COMPENSATION.



   The compensation of elective officers of the town shall be fixed from
time to time by resolution of the Council.



(2001 Code, § 2-1-5)



§ 30.006  OATH OF OFFICE.



   The Mayor and each Council member shall take and subscribe to the oath
of office at the time prescribed by state law.



(2001 Code, § 2-1-6)  (Am. Ord. 11-755, passed 11-8-2011)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 38-232



§ 30.007  BOND.



   Prior to taking office, the Mayor and every Council member shall
execute and file an official bond, enforceable against the principal and his
or her sureties, conditioned on the due and faithful performance of his or
her official duties, payable to the state and to and for the use and benefit
of the town or any person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act
or default of the officer in his or her official capacity. A person so
injured or aggrieved may bring suit on the bond under provisions identical to
those contained in A.R.S. § 38-260. Bonds shall be in such sum as shall be
provided by resolution and the premium for the bonds shall be paid by the
town.



(2001 Code, § 2-1-7)



§ 30.008  FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT.



   The Mayor and each Council member shall file a financial disclosure
statement in a form and with such information as provided by resolution of
the Council.



(2001 Code, § 2-1-8)




MAYOR




§ 30.020  DIRECT ELECTION OF MAYOR.



   The Mayor shall be directly elected by the qualified electors of the
town.



(2001 Code, § 2-2-1)  (Am. Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)



§ 30.021  VICE MAYOR.



   At the first regular meeting in December following an election, the
newly elected Mayor shall nominate 1 of the Council members as Vice Mayor,
and, upon approval by the majority of the Council including the Mayor, the
Vice Mayor shall be so elected and shall serve at the pleasure of the
Council. The Vice Mayor shall perform the duties of the Mayor during the
Mayor’s absence or disability.



(2001 Code, § 2-2-2)  (Am. Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)



§ 30.022  ACTING MAYOR.



   In the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the
Council may designate another of its members to serve as Acting Mayor who
shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities of the mayor during
the absence or disability.



(2001 Code, § 2-2-3)



§ 30.023  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the Mayor shall include the following:



   (A)   He or she shall be the chief executive officer of the town.



   (B)   He or she shall be the Chairperson of the Council and preside
over its meetings. At any meeting where the Mayor is present and able to
preside, the Mayor may designate a Councilmember to preside over that meeting
and, upon designating the Councilmember, the Mayor may relinquish the chair
for that meeting only. The Mayor and any Councilmember designated by the
Mayor to preside over a meeting may make and second motions and shall have a
voice and vote in all Council proceedings.



   (C)   He or she shall enforce the provisions of this code.



   (D)   He or she shall execute and authenticate by his or her
signature such instruments as the Council or any statutes, ordinances or this
code shall require.



   (E)   He or she shall make such recommendations and suggestions to
the Council as he or she may consider proper.



   (F)   He or she may, by proclamation, declare a local emergency to
exist due to fire, conflagration, flood, earthquake, explosion, war, bombing
or any other natural or man-made calamity or disaster or in the event of the
threat or occurrence of riot, rout or affray or other acts of civil
disobedience which endanger life or property within the town.  After
declaration of the emergency, the Mayor shall govern by proclamation and
impose all necessary regulations to preserve the peace and order of the town,
including but not limited to:



      (1)   Imposition of a curfew in all or any portion of the town;



      (2)   Ordering the closing of any business;



      (3)   Closing to public access any public building, street or
other public place; and/or



      (4)   Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement
agencies and organizations within or without the political subdivision for
assistance.



      (5)   The emergency powers of the Mayor shall not continue for
more than 30 consecutive days. Upon cessation of the emergency, the Town
Council shall resume its regular duties.



   (G)   He or she shall perform such other duties required by state
statute and this code as well as those duties required as chief executive
officer of the town.



(2001 Code, § 2-2-4)  (Am. Ord. 15-801, passed 7-28-2015; Am. Ord. 15-802,
passed 9-22-2015)



§ 30.024  ABSENCE.



   The Mayor shall not absent himself or herself from the town for a
greater period than 15 days without the consent of the Council.



(2001 Code, § 2-2-5)



§ 30.025  FAILURE TO SIGN DOCUMENTS.



   If the Mayor refuses or fails to sign any ordinance, resolution,
contract, warrant, demand or other document or instrument requiring his or
her signature for 5 days consecutively, then a majority of the members of the
Council may, at any regular or special meeting, authorize the Vice Mayor or,
in his or her absence, an Acting Mayor to sign the ordinance, resolution,
contract, warrant, demand or other document or instrument which when so
signed shall have the same force and effect as if signed by the Mayor.



(2001 Code, § 2-2-6)




COUNCIL PROCEDURES




§ 30.065  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   (A)   Regular meetings.  The Council shall hold regular meetings on
the second and fourth Tuesday of each month at 6:00 p.m. When deemed
appropriate, any regular meeting date of the Council may be canceled or
rescheduled by the affirmative vote of a majority of the Council, except that
at least 1 regular meeting a month must be held, and notice of the canceled
or rescheduled meeting shall be given to the public as is reasonable and
practicable under the circumstances. All regular meetings of the Council
shall be held in the Town Hall of Chino Valley, or in such other locations as
Council may determine.



   (B)   Special meetings. A special meeting of the Council may be
called at any time by: (1) The Mayor; (2) Any 3 Councilmembers; or (3) a
majority vote of the Council at a public meeting, and by giving notice
thereof to all other Councilmembers of the date, time, place and purpose of
the special meeting. Public notice of such meeting shall be made pursuant to
state law.



   (C)   Study sessions. The Mayor or the Council, by common consent
thereof, may call a study session of the Council at any time by notifying the
Councilmembers of the date, time, place and purpose of the study session.
Notice of the study session shall be made pursuant to state law for public
meetings.



(2001 Code, § 2-4-1)  (Am. Ord. 09-723, passed 10-22-2009; Am. Ord. 10-737,
passed 8-12-2010; Am. Ord. 14-781, passed 2-11-2014)



§ 30.066  [RESERVED].



§ 30.067  RULES.



   The Council may by motion adopt rules of procedure to govern its
proceedings.



(2001 Code, § 2-4-3)



§ 30.068  MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC.



   All proceedings of the Council shall be open to the public, except that
upon approval by a majority vote of the Council, the Council may meet in a
closed executive session pursuant to the provisions of state law. Notice of
meetings shall be given in a manner consistent with state statutes.



(2001 Code, § 2-4-4)



§ 30.069  QUORUM.



   A majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum for transacting
business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel the
attendance of absent members.



(2001 Code, § 2-4-5)



§ 30.070  AGENDA; NOTICE OF MEETINGS.



   According to the time schedule set by motion of Council, the Town Clerk
shall prepare an agenda at the direction of the Mayor and according to the
order of business established by motion of Council. The agenda shall list the
specific matters to be discussed, considered or decided at the meeting.
Notice of executive sessions shall state the specific provision of law
authorizing the executive session but shall be required to include only a
general description of the matters to be considered.  Except in the case of
an actual emergency, the agenda shall be available to the public at least 24
hours prior to the meeting. By motion, the Council shall establish where all
public notices of Council meetings are to be posted. Public notices of
Council meetings shall be posted by the Clerk in 3 or more public places
within the town.



(2001 Code, § 2-4-6)



§ 30.071  BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS.



   The Council may, by motion, resolution or ordinance, create such
boards, committees and commissions, standing or special, as it deems
necessary. The boards, committees and commissions shall consist of as many
members and shall perform such duties as the Council may require and shall
exist at the pleasure of the Council.



(2001 Code, § 2-4-7)



§ 30.072  VOTING.



   (A)   The Mayor shall vote as a member of the Council.



   (B)   Upon the request of any member, the ayes and nays upon any
question shall be taken and entered in the minutes.



(2001 Code, § 2-4-8)



§ 30.073  SUSPENSION OF RULES.



   Any of the provisions of this subchapter may be temporarily suspended
in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of 3/4
of the members present, except that this section shall not be construed to
permit any action that is contrary to state statutes.



(2001 Code, § 2-4-9)



CHAPTER 31:  OFFICERS



Section




General Provisions




   31.01   Creation of offices



   31.02   Additional officers



   31.03   Bond



   31.04   Vacancies; holding more than 1 office



   31.05   Additional powers and duties




Specific Officers




   31.20   Town Manager



   31.21   Town Clerk



   31.22   Town Marshal



   31.23   Town Engineer



   31.24   Town Attorney



   31.25   Town Magistrate



   31.26   Finance Director



   31.27   Organizational chart




Enforcement Officials




   31.40   Purpose



   31.41   General provisions



   31.42   Initiation of enforcement proceedings



   31.43   Investigation



   31.44   Appeals




Volunteers




   31.60   Applicability



   31.61   Obligations of the town to volunteers



   31.62   Obligations of volunteers




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 31.01  CREATION OF OFFICES.



   There are hereby created the Offices of Town Manager, Town Attorney and
Town Magistrate, who shall be appointed by the Council and who shall serve,
with the exception of the Magistrate, at the pleasure of the Council.  The
Magistrate shall be appointed for a term of office as provided in § 34.02(A).



(2001 Code, § 3-1-1)



§ 31.02  ADDITIONAL OFFICERS.



   (A)   The Council may, at its discretion, enter into
intergovernmental agreements for the performance of the duties of town
officers.



   (B)   The Council may appoint and remove from time to time such
other officers as it may deem necessary and that are not provided for in this
code or state statute.



(2001 Code, § 3-1-2)



§ 31.03  BOND.



   The Council shall require each officer of the town to give bond for the
due discharge of his or her duties in such sums and with the security as it
may direct and approve as determined by resolution.  The town shall pay the
costs of the bond.



(2001 Code, § 3-1-3)



§ 31.04  VACANCIES; HOLDING MORE THAN 1 OFFICE.



   Any vacancy that shall occur in any town office shall be filled by
appointment by the Council, provided that 1 person may hold more than 1
office and that at the discretion of the Council, the functions of a town
official may be validly performed and discharged by a deputy or another town
official, or an otherwise qualified individual not holding office but
employed at the pleasure of the Council.



(2001 Code, § 3-1-4)



§ 31.05  ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.



   In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this code, each
officer shall have such further powers, perform such further duties and hold
such other office as may be provided by the Council through ordinance,
resolution or order.



(2001 Code, § 3-1-5)




SPECIFIC OFFICES




§ 31.20  TOWN MANAGER.



   (A)   The Office of the Town Manager of the town is hereby created
and established. The Town Manager shall be appointed by the Council on the
basis of administrative and executive ability. Annual performance evaluations
will be performed by the Council on or before the adoption of the final
fiscal year budget. The Office of Town Manager will function as depicted on
the organization chart. The Town Manager serves at the pleasure of the
Council and is responsible only to the Council.



   (B)   Residency in the town at the time of appointment shall not be
required as a condition of appointment. However, permanent residency in the
Tri-City/Yavapai County area will be required within 1 year of appointment.



   (C)   No member of the Council shall be eligible for appointment as
Town Manager until 1 year has elapsed after the Council member shall have
ceased to a be a member.



   (D)   The Town Manager shall appoint, from among the department
heads, an acting Town Manager to serve in his or her absence for a period of
up to 30 days of planned absence. For Town Manager absences exceeding 30 days
and for absences due to disability, termination or death, the Town Council
shall appoint an Acting Town Manager.



   (E)   The Town Manager shall receive compensation as determined by
the Council. The Town Manager shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary
expenses incurred in the performance of official duties.



   (F)   The Town Manager shall be employed and/or terminated only by
Council action.



   (G)   The Town Manager shall be the head of the administrative
branch of the town government. The Town Manager shall, under the specific
direction and control of the Council, be responsible for the proper
administration of the affairs of the town.



      (1)   Except when excused, the Town Manager shall attend all
meetings of the Council.



      (2)   The Town Manager shall make personnel decisions
regarding the employment of all officers and employees of the town not
appointed by the Council. The Town Manager shall notify the Council, however,
of his or her intentions to hire, suspend, demote or remove a department head
and, if a Council member provides input, shall consider such input prior to
making a final decision regarding the department head.



      (3)   The Town Manager shall have the exclusive authority to
control, order and give directions to each department head, while each
department head shall retain the direct supervision of the employees within
each department.  Personnel decisions involving disciplinary action
concerning employees within a department are within the sound discretion of
the Town Manager, and shall be made by the Town Manager or by the department
head with the approval of the Town Manager.



      (4)   Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its
members shall deal with the town’s administrative functions solely through
the Town Manager.  Neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give
orders directly to, or discuss job performance directly with, any
subordinates of the Town Manager, either publicly or privately, but may
discuss the same directly with the Town Manager.  No individual member of
the Council shall direct or request of the Town Manager the appointment of
any person to office or the removal from office of any employee or any
subordinates.



      (5)   It shall be the duty of the Town Manager to see that all
laws and ordinances of the town and that all franchises, contracts, permits
and privileges granted by the Council are faithfully observed and to report
any failure in that regard to the Council which shall give such instruction
and direction as it may desire for remedial, corrective or terminating action
by the Town Manager.



      (6)   In the discharge of duties, the Town Manager shall
endeavor at all times to exercise the highest degree of tact, patience and
courtesy in contacts with the public and with employees, to the end that the
highest possible standards of public service shall be continuously maintained.



(2001 Code, § 3-2-1)  (Am. Ord. 523, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 13-768,
passed 4-9-2013)



§ 31.21  TOWN CLERK.



   (A)   The Clerk shall keep a true and correct record of all business
transacted by the Council and any other records that either pertain to the
business of the town or that the Council directs.  The Clerk shall number,
plainly label and file separately in a suitable cabinet all ordinances,
resolutions, notices, deeds, surveys, leases, letters, orders and other
documents of whatever nature.



   (B)   The Clerk shall keep convenient for public inspection all
public records and public documents under his or her control, as provided by
state statute.



   (C)   The Clerk shall prepare or cause to be prepared all minutes of
Council proceedings and ensure their correctness and accuracy.



   (D)   Prior to each Council meeting, or on or before the time fixed
by the Council for preparation and distribution of the agenda, whichever is
earlier, the Clerk shall collect all written reports, communications,
ordinances, resolutions, contracts and other documents to be submitted to the
Council, shall prepare an agenda at the direction of the Mayor and according
to the order of business established by motion of Council and shall furnish
each Council member, the Mayor and the Attorney with a copy.  The Clerk
shall process, record, file, publish and, if required by state statute, post
all ordinances, resolutions, budgets and notices that may be passed by the
Council.



   (E)   The Clerk shall be the town election official and perform
those duties required by state statute.



   (F)   The Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued all licenses that
may be prescribed by state statute or this code.



   (G)   The Clerk shall perform those administrative responsibilities
and duties that are conferred upon the Clerk by the Council or the Town
Manager in addition to those specified in this code.



(2001 Code, § 3-2-2)



§ 31.22  TOWN MARSHAL.



   The Marshal shall be the Chief of Police and shall perform such duties
as may be required of the marshal by law and as the Council may deem
necessary herein.



(2001 Code, § 3-2-3)



§ 31.23  TOWN ENGINEER.



   The Town Engineer shall be a registered engineer and shall approve all
plans, which shall be submitted by a licensed engineer, for town streets,
drainage, sewers and waterworks under the jurisdiction of the town and shall
perform such duties as may be required by law and such other duties as the
Council may deem necessary.



(2001 Code, § 3-2-4)



§ 31.24  TOWN ATTORNEY.



   A town attorney may be appointed by Council, shall serve at the
pleasure of Council and shall report directly to Mayor and Council. The
Attorney shall act as the legal counselor and advisor of the Council and
other town officials and, as such, shall give an opinion in writing when
requested.  The Attorney shall draft all deeds, contracts, conveyances,
ordinances, resolutions and other legal instruments when required by the
Council. The Attorney shall approve as to form, in writing, all drafts of
contracts and all official or other bonds before final approval or acceptance
thereof by the Council. The Attorney shall return all ordinances and
resolutions with approval or disapproval as to form noted thereon, together
with the reasons therefor. The Attorney shall prosecute and defend all suits,
actions or causes where the town is a party and shall report to the Council,
when required, the condition of any suit or action to which the town is a
party.



(2001 Code, § 3-2-5)



§ 31.25  TOWN MAGISTRATE.



   The Town Magistrate shall be the presiding officer of the
Magistrate’s Court, shall be selected by the Council to serve a 2 or 4 year
term and shall perform those functions necessary to the maintenance of the
Magistrate’s Court as provided by state statute and as described herein.



(2001 Code, § 3-2-6)



§ 31.26  FINANCE DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Finance Director shall prepare the annual budget for
Council approval and shall implement the same upon final approval.



   (B)   The Finance Director shall make regular financial reports to
the Council as to the fiscal status of the town and make such adjustments to
the budget as recommended to and approved by the Council.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to see that no
indebtedness is incurred nor expenditure made in violation of the Arizona
Constitution, the state budget laws, Arizona Revised Statutes, or the Chino
Valley Procurement Code.



   (D)   The Finance Director shall hold the office of Town Treasurer
and receive and safely keep all monies that shall come to the town and pay
out the same when authorized by the Council.  He or she shall keep a
separate record and account of each different fund provided by the Council,
apportion the monies received among the different funds as prescribed by the
Council, and keep a complete set of books showing:  every money transaction
of the town, the state of each fund, from what source the money in each fund
was derived, and for what purpose expended, and he or she shall make regular
reports to the Council of all receipts and disbursements and the balance in
each fund.  At the end of the fiscal year, he or she shall make a full and
detailed statement of the receipts and expenditures of the town during the
year, specifying the different sources of revenue and the amount received
from each, all appropriations made by the Mayor and Council, and the object
for which they were made, and the amount of money expended under each, the
evidences of indebtedness issued, and what portion remains thereof
outstanding, with the rate and amount of interest due thereon, and the amount
of cash on hand.



§ 31.27  ORGANIZATIONAL CHART.



   The organizational chart of the town is hereby adopted by reference as
part of this code of ordinances as if fully set forth herein.  A copy of the
chart is kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and is available for
public inspection during normal office operating hours.



(Am. Ord. 481, passed - -2001; Am. Ord. 515, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 04-574,
passed 4-22-2004)




ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS




§ 31.40  PURPOSE.



   In order to provide for the fair, orderly and timely enforcement of
town ordinances, resolutions and regulations, it is necessary for the town to
employ an enforcement official and to adopt an enforcement process to
effectuate the provisions of the town's ordinances, resolutions and
regulations, which include, but are not limited to, the sign ordinance,
zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and street naming and numbering
ordinance.



(2001 Code, § 3-3-1)



§ 31.41  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Citizens are encouraged to redress problems with neighbors in
a cooperative manner before involving the town in the problem.



   (B)   The town shall provide no enforcement assistance of deed
restrictions or other restrictive covenants contained in any real property
instrument or conveyance.



(2001 Code, § 3-3-2)



§ 31.42  INITIATION OF ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS.



   Citizens may initiate an investigation of an alleged violation by
filing a complaint on a form provided by the Clerk.  The complaint shall be
filed with the Clerk who shall forward it to the permit, license and zoning
inspector, hereinafter called enforcement official, for the town.



(2001 Code, § 3-3-3)



§ 31.43  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Within 5 working days after a reporting citizen’s complaint
has been duly and properly filed, the enforcement official shall investigate
the allegations contained in the complaint and issue a written report of the
results of the investigation.



   (B)   Within 3 working days from the date the enforcement
official’s written report is completed, a copy of the report shall be
served, by reasonable service, upon the reporting citizen and the alleged
violator.



   (C)   If the enforcement official’s written report indicates that
a town ordinance, resolution or regulation has been violated, the enforcement
official shall issue a written notice of violation within 3 working days from
the date of the issuance of the written report as described in division (A)
of this section. The notice of violation shall specify the nature of the
violation and the ordinance, resolution or regulation violated.  The notice
of violation shall be posted on the site where the violation is alleged to
have occurred.  Further, a copy of the notice and a copy of this subchapter
shall be personally served upon the alleged violator.



   (D)   Within 30 days after the written notice is served and posted
as stated in division (C) above, the alleged violator shall correct the
alleged violation.



   (E)   A complete record of all investigations and actions taken on
any reporting citizen’s complaint shall be kept on file by the enforcement
official in the town hall.



(2001 Code, § 3-3-4)



§ 31.44  APPEALS.



   (A)   If either the reporting citizen or the alleged violator
disagrees with the results of the decision contained in the enforcement
official’s written report, either or both persons shall, within 30 days
from the date of receiving a copy of the report, request a hearing before the
Board of Adjustment.  The request for hearing shall be filed with the Clerk.



      (1)   If a hearing is requested, it shall be granted no sooner
than 15 days, nor more than 30 days after the request for hearing has been
received by the Clerk.



      (2)   At the conclusion of the hearing and, after due
deliberation, the Board of Adjustment shall issue a written opinion,
containing appropriate findings of fact, either affirming, modifying or
negating the decision of the enforcement official.  If the Board of
Adjustment affirms the decision of the enforcement official, the Board of
Adjustment shall also set a reasonable time in which the alleged violator
shall correct the alleged violation.



   (B)   The written opinion of the Board of Adjustment shall be
appealable directly to the Council by either the reporting citizen or the
alleged violator.  A hearing to review the Board of Adjustment’s final
decision shall be heard by the Council at its next regularly scheduled
meeting.



      (1)   At the hearing before the Council, the reporting
citizen, the alleged violator and a designated member of the Board of
Adjustment shall present testimony to the Council.



      (2)   At the conclusion of the Council hearing, and after due
deliberation, the Council shall issue a written decision, containing
appropriate findings of fact, either affirming, modifying or negating the
decision of the Board of Adjustment.



      (3)   If either the reporting citizen or the alleged violator
is dissatisfied with the decision of the Council, he or she may appeal the
action to the Yavapai County Superior Court.



(2001 Code, § 3-3-5)




VOLUNTEERS




§ 31.60  APPLICABILITY.



   The Town of Chino Valley hereby establishes the following policy for
all town volunteers.



(2001 Code, § 3-4-1)



§ 31.61  OBLIGATIONS OF THE TOWN TO VOLUNTEERS.



   (A)   The town recognizes the need to supplement its work force with
volunteers in various departments for the betterment of the community.



   (B)   The town does not pay its volunteers, either directly through
the town budget or indirectly through any town-sponsored group or
organization.



   (C)   The town will recognize its volunteers during an annual
ceremony held in their honor.



   (D)   Upon prior approval of the Town Manager, the town may
reimburse volunteers for expenses, such as special clothing, incurred while
serving the town.



(2001 Code, § 3-4-2)



§ 31.62  OBLIGATIONS OF VOLUNTEERS.



   (A)   Volunteers are encouraged to keep accurate records of their
mileage and other deductible expenses for IRS purposes while serving.



   (B)   Volunteers are expected to give timely notice to their
supervisor of their absence from any scheduled assignment.  Volunteers whose
absence would cause undue pressure on staff are encouraged to provide a
replacement whenever possible.  Volunteers are also to notify their
supervisor at least 2 weeks in advance of an extended leave of absence or a
planned resignation.



   (C)   Volunteers are expected to attend orientation and on-going
training sessions if provided.



   (D)   Volunteers are expected to contribute to a smooth working
relationship with paid staff and other volunteers.



   (E)   Volunteers must consult with their supervisor before assuming
any new volunteer responsibilities.



   (F)   Volunteers are to respect and accept the town’s right to
dismiss any volunteer for reasons including, but not limited to, poor
performance, poor attendance, unwillingness to accept directions or any other
violation of this subchapter.



(2001 Code, § 3-4-3)



CHAPTER 32:  FINANCE AND REVENUE



Section




Procurement Policy




   32.01   Scope



   32.02   Definitions



   32.03   Council approval; when required



   32.04   Emergency purchases; procedure



   32.05   Purchases in general; bids



   32.06   Lowest responsible bidder



   32.07   Performance bond



   32.08   Exceptions



   32.09   Professional and technical services



   32.10   Forms and rules



   32.11   Waiver by Town Council




Tax Code




   32.25   Adopted by reference




Fees




   32.40   Adopted by resolution




PROCUREMENT POLICY




§ 32.01  SCOPE.



   This subchapter shall govern the purchase of all goods and services for
or on behalf of the town.  No purchase or contract for supplies or services
of any kind or description, payment for which is to be made from funds of the
town, shall be made by the purchasing agent, or any officer, employee or
agent of the town, except in the manner set forth in this subchapter, and
unless the purchase is in accordance with the adopted town budget.



(2001 Code, Art. 3A-1)  (Am. Ord. 13-775, passed 10-22-2013)



§ 32.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BID.  To offer goods or services to the town in response to an oral or
written request for bids or a formal invitation for bids.



   BUSINESS.  Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole
proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture or any other private legal
entity.



   CONSTRUCTION.  The process of building, altering, improving,
demolishing or relocating any public structure or building, or other public
improvements of any kind to any public real property. CONSTRUCTION does not
include the routine operation, repair or maintenance of existing structures,
buildings or real property.



   CONTRACT.  All types of town agreements, regardless of what they may
be called, for the procurement of goods, services or construction or the
disposal of materials.



   COOPERATIVE PURCHASE CONTRACT.  A contract previously bid through a
competitive process by another governmental entity, including purchases from
the state bid list or from a purchasing cooperative.



   EMERGENCY PURCHASE.  Procurement when goods or services are needed for
a situation where time is of the essence to provide for the health, safety or
welfare of the public.



   GOODS.  Any materials, supplies, equipment, printing, insurance and
leases of property and equipment.



   IN HOUSE CONSTRUCTION PROJECT.  A capital project, as defined in the
current budget, that is constructed using primarily regularly employed town
personnel or volunteer labor, pursuant to A.R.S. § 34-201, as amended.



   INVITATION FOR BID (IFB).  All documents, including those attached or
incorporated by reference, used for soliciting bids where price is the sole
determining factor.



   PROCUREMENT.  Buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise
acquiring any goods, services or construction, to include contracted
professional services not exempt by Arizona Revised Statutes.



   PROPOSAL. An offer to sell goods or services or a combination of goods
and services to the town in response to a request for proposals.



   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFP).  All documents, including those attached
or incorporated by reference, used for soliciting proposals.



   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER OR PROPOSER.  A bidder or proposer who has the
capability to fully perform the contract requirements and the reliability
which will assure performance of the contract.



   SERVICES.  The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor
which does not involve the delivery of a specific end product other than
required reports and performance.



   TOWN MANAGER. The manager of the town or his designee.



(2001 Code, Art. 3A-2)  (Am. Ord. 13-775, passed 10-22-2013)



§ 32.03  COUNCIL APPROVAL; WHEN REQUIRED.



   Council approval shall be obtained prior to making a purchase in the
following instances:



   (A)   Where the funds for the purchase are not provided in the
budget as adopted;



   (B)   For the expenditure of funds in the amount of $25,000 or more.



   (C)   For an expenditure of funds in the amount of $50,000 or more,
where the Council has determined that a capital project shall be constructed
as an in house construction project. 



(2001 Code, Art. 3A-3)  (Am. Ord. 06-637, passed 1-12-2005; Am. Ord. 13-775,
passed 10-22-2013)



§ 32.04  EMERGENCY PURCHASES; PROCEDURE.



   In case of an emergency which requires immediate purchases of supplies
or services and when time is of the essence, a special meeting of the Council
shall be called if possible for approval of an emergency purchase. In the
event time prevents such a meeting, the Mayor shall be empowered to authorize
the Town Manager to purchase goods or services without complying with the
requirements and procedures in this chapter.  A full report of the
circumstances of the emergency purchase and the goods or services obtained
shall be made to the Council at its next regular meeting for ratification of
the emergency action.



(2001 Code, Art. 3A-4)  (Am. Ord. 13-775, passed 10-22-2013)



§ 32.05  PURCHASES IN GENERAL; BIDS.



   (A)   Purchase orders.  Division managers are authorized to issue
minor purchase orders up to $25,000.



      (1)   Budgeted items over $5,000.  Purchase orders shall be
submitted to and processed by the finance director prior to the goods and
services being ordered.



      (2)   Non-budgeted items over $5,000 but less than $25,000
shall be approved by the town manager before the goods or services are
ordered.



      (3)   Each division will be issued a block of pre-numbered
purchase order forms.  All completed purchase orders shall be presented to
the finance department for payment.



      (4)   Any purchase of goods or services over $25,000 for
purchase that are not in house construction projects and purchase of goods or
services over $50,000 for in house construction projects shall require
Council approval, as required in § 32.03, above.



   (B)   Oral bids. For purchases of goods or services totaling more
than $2,500, but less than $10,000, 3 oral bids shall be obtained whenever
possible.



   (C)   Informal written bids. For purchases of $10,000 up to $25,000
for goods or services 3 written bids shall be obtained. In some cases, it may
be impossible to obtain 3 written bids, in which case 1 or 2 bids shall be
obtained.  The bids received shall be submitted with the purchase order.



   (D)   Competitive sealed bids and proposals. Whenever any
contemplated purchase or contract for services is for the sum of $25,000 or
more, the Town Manager shall cause a notice of invitation for bids to be
published pursuant to the procedures set forth in A.R.S. § 39-204. The
notice shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or
services to be performed and the time and place for opening bids and, for
projects governed by A.R.S. Title 34, Chapter 2, all information set forth in
A.R.S. § 34-201. The Town Manager shall post the notice inviting bids in the
town’s regular posting places and on the town website and may also mail a
copy of the notice to all responsible prospective suppliers.



      (1)   Competitive sealed bids. The Town Manager shall follow
the procedure set forth below  for all purchases and contracts subject to
the bidding process:



         (a)   A notice of invitation for bids shall state the
date, time and place of opening and the place and time period within which
bids shall be submitted.



         (b)   The notice shall state, with particularity, the
goods or services required.



         (c)   The invitation for bids shall be issued and shall
include a description of the goods or services to be purchased and all
contractual specifications, terms and conditions applicable to the
procurement.



         (d)   Bids shall be submitted in a sealed envelope
clearly identified as a bid on the front of the envelope. Any bids not
received within the time period allowed shall be rejected.



         (e)   All bids shall be opened in public at the time and
place specified, and a tabulation of all bids received shall be posted in
town hall for public inspection.



         (f)   The Town Manager and the Council shall have the
right to reject any and all bids and parts of bids and to re-advertise or
re-solicit for bids.



         (g)   Upon a finding by the Town Council that a
reasonable basis for constructing a capital project in house and that the
project is not being constructed in house for the purpose of avoiding the
bidding requirements, the Town Council may determine that a capital project
shall be constructed as an in-house construction project.  If the project is
for construction of a building, structure, addition or alteration, the
materials and equipment used in the project shall be bid in compliance with
this subchapter.



      (2)   Competitive sealed proposals. If the Town Manager
determines, in writing, that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either
not practical or not advantageous to the town, a contract may be entered into
by competitive sealed proposals, except that the competitive sealed proposal
method may not be used for construction contracts. A request for proposals
may be used when the town wishes to exercise competitive negotiation, the
award will be based on criteria other than price, or if the town is unable to
provide bid specifications for a project and requests prospective bidders to
specify what goods and services will be needed to perform the project.



         (a)   Competitive sealed proposals shall be solicited
according to the same procedure for bid solicitation.



         (b)   Proposals shall be opened publicly at the time and
place designated in the request for proposals. The name of each proposer, and
such other relevant information as is specified by regulations, shall be
publicly read and recorded. All other information contained in the proposals
shall be confidential so as to avoid disclosure of contents prejudicial to
competing proposers during the process of negotiation. The proposals shall be
open for public inspection after the contract is awarded.



         (c)   The request for proposals shall state the relative
importance of price and other evaluation factors.



         (d)   Discussions may be conducted with responsible
proposers for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of,
and responsiveness to, the solicitation requirements. Proposers shall be
accorded fair treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and
revision of proposals and such revisions may be permitted after submissions
and before award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In
conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of any information
derived from proposals submitted by competing proposers.



         (e)   The award shall be made to the responsible
proposer whose proposal is determined to be the most advantageous to the
town, taking into consideration the evaluation factors set forth in the
request for proposals. No other factors or criteria may be used in the
evaluation. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is
made. The award shall be approved by the Council.



   (F)   Contracting authority. The Town Manager or his or her designee
shall execute all contracts in the amounts between $10,000 and $25,000.  All
contracts for purchases totaling $25,000 or more shall be approved by the
Town Council and executed by the Mayor.



(2001 Code, Art. 3A-5)  (Am. Ord. 05-614, passed 8-11-2005; Am. Ord. 13-775,
passed 10-22-2013)



§ 32.06  LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.



   (A)   Unless the Council or the Town Manager, as appropriate,
exercises the right of rejection, bids for all supplies, goods and services
in an amount in excess of $25,000 shall be awarded to the lowest responsible
bidder, except as provided in §§ 32.05 and 32.08.



   (B)   In determining the lowest responsible bidder, the Council or
the Town Manager may consider:



      (1)   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to
perform the contract or provide the service required in a timely manner;



      (2)   The quality of performance of previous contracts
together with previous and existing compliance with the ordinances of the
town or state law;



      (3)   The financial resources and ability of the bidder to
perform under the terms of the contract;



      (4)   The quality, availability, and adaptability of the goods
or services.



(2001 Code, Art. 3A-6)  (Am. Ord. 06-637, passed 1-12-2005; Am. Ord. 13-775,
passed 10-22-2013)



§ 32.07  PERFORMANCE BOND.



   The Town Manager shall have the authority to require a performance
bond, in such amount as deemed sufficient, to secure the execution of a
contract.



(2001 Code, Art. 3A-7)



§ 32.08  EXCEPTIONS.



   The following procurements are exempt from the requirements of this
subchapter to the extent set forth below:



   (A)   Sole source provider. If there is only 1 known person or
entity capable of providing a particular commodity or service, the
requirement of this subchapter concerning bidding procedures shall not be
applicable. Documentation and justification of the sole source provider shall
be included in writing with submission of the purchase order.



   (B)   Used equipment. Upon recommendation of the Town Manager, the
Council may elect to waive the bid procedures with respect to the purchase of
used equipment.



   (C)   Cooperative purchasing. The Council may approve a cooperative
purchase or award a contract for service without a formal bidding process
whenever another governmental units or public procurement unit has done so
for the same item or service if, in the opinion of the Town Manager, a
separate bidding process is not likely to result in a lower price for the
items or services.



   (D)   Public works. All public works contracts shall be bid in
accordance with the provisions of A.R.S. Title 34.



   (E)   Construction projects.  Construction projects shall comply
with A.R.S. Title 34, except that  where the Town Council has determined
that a project shall be constructed as an in-house construction project,
public bidding shall not be required.



   (F)   Intergovernmental agreements.



   (G)   Emergency purchases. Emergency purchases, as set forth in §
32-04.



(2001 Code, Art. 3A-8)  (Am. Ord. 13-775, passed 10-22-2013)



§ 32.09  PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL SERVICES.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to
professional or technical services when the services are provided by licensed
professionals such as engineers, architects, or attorneys, provided however,
that the town manager may issue a request for proposals or invitation for
bids for such services in his discretion.



   (B)   No person or firm practicing in a professional or technical
field for which a license is required by state law shall be engaged by the
town unless possessing a current license in good standing.



(2001 Code, Art. 3A-9)  (Am. Ord. 13-775, passed 10-22-2013)



§ 32.10  FORMS AND RULES.



   The Town Manager shall prescribe and maintain the forms and rules as he
or she shall find necessary for the operation of the provisions of this
subchapter.



(2001 Code, Art. 3A-10)  (Am. Ord. 13-775, passed 10-22-2013)



§ 32.11  WAIVER BY TOWN COUNCIL.



   Except as otherwise required by Arizona law, the town council may waive
the requirements set forth in this subchapter upon finding that doing so is
in the best interest of the town. Criteria justifying such a finding include
but are not limited to: situations where timing or expediency is critical;
special or unique qualifications of an individual, firm, vendor or item(s);
the procurement of additional goods or services under an existing contract;
or to comply with specific requirements of a gift or grant.



(Ord. 13-775, passed 10-22-2013)




TAX CODE




§ 32.25  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Tax Code is adopted by reference and hereby adopted by reference
and incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Am. Res. 614, passed - -2000; Am. Ord. 537, passed - -2003; Am. Res. 614,
passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 04-581, passed 6-24-2004; Am. Ord. 06-658, passed
5-25-2006; Am. Res. 06-791, passed 5-25-2006; Am. Res. 06-824, passed
12-14-2006; Am. Ord. 06-681, passed 12-14-2006; Am. Res. 08-876, passed
6-12-2008; Am. Ord. 08-704, passed 6-12-2008; Am. Res. 09-916, passed
9-10-2009; Am. Ord. 09-722, passed 9-10-2009; Am. Res. 11-967, passed
9-13-2011; Am. Ord. 11-751, passed 9-13-2011; Am. Ord. 16-826, passed
12-13-2016; Am. Ord. 18-843, passed 2-13-2018)




FEES




§ 32.40  ADOPTED BY RESOLUTION.



   All fees, fines, and charges shall be adopted by resolution of the
Council.



CHAPTER 33:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



   33.01   Created; composition



   33.02   Appointment of officers



   33.03   Compensation of officers



   33.04   Departmental rules and regulations



   33.05   Duties



   33.06   Answering calls outside town



   33.07   Meet and confer



Cross-reference:



   Powers and duties of animal control officers, see § 90.07



§ 33.01  CREATED; COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created a Police Department for the town which shall
consist of a Chief of Police, who shall also serve as Town Marshal, and as
many police officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the
safety and good order of the town.



(2001 Code, § 4-1-1)



§ 33.02  APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.



   The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Town Manager.



(2001 Code, § 4-1-2)



§ 33.03  COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS.



   The Chief of Police and the police officers of the town shall be
compensated as determined by the Council.  The Chief of Police shall not
receive any perquisites, commissions or compensation for his or her services
as Chief of Police, except as the Council may prescribe.



(2001 Code, § 4-1-3)



§ 33.04  DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Chief shall formulate a set of rules and regulations to govern the
department and shall be responsible to the Town Manager for Department
personnel, morale and general efficiency of the Department.



(2001 Code, § 4-1-4)



§ 33.05  DUTIES.



   It is the duty of the Police Department, under the direction of the
Chief of Police, to:



   (A)   Enforce this code and the statutes of the State of Arizona
within jurisdictional limits as conferred by law and to arrest and charge the
violators thereof;



   (B)   Render such account of the Police Department, its duties and
receipts as may be required by the Council, and keep records of the office
open to inspection by the Council at any time, except those records as may be
exempted by stated or federal law;



   (C)   Enforce the traffic regulations of the town as specified
herein and enforce the traffic laws of the state within the limits of the
town; and



   (D)   Perform such additional duties as may be required by the
Council.



(2001 Code, § 4-1-5)



§ 33.06  ANSWERING CALLS OUTSIDE TOWN.



   The members of the Police Department of the town are duly authorized to
answer calls for aid and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the town
pursuant to mutual aid agreements and state statutes.



(2001 Code, § 4-1-6)



§ 33.07  MEET AND CONFER.



   (A)   Findings and purpose.  The town hereby finds and declares
that:



      (1)   The town has a fundamental interest in the development
of harmonious and cooperative relations between town management, elected
officials, administrators and the law enforcement employees of the town.



      (2)   Recognition by the town of the fundamental rights of
public law enforcement employees to organize, and full acceptance of the
principle and procedure of full communication between public employers and
public law enforcement employees can alleviate various forms of strife and
unrest.



      (3)   The town, its law enforcement employees and law
enforcement employee organization, have a basic obligation to the public to
assure the orderly and continuous operations and functions of government.



      (4)   Strikes, work stoppages, slowdowns and other concerted
efforts designated to disrupt town services, are contrary to the public good
and are strictly prohibited. Participation in such efforts may be grounds for
termination.



      (5)   It is the purpose of this section to obligate the town
management, town law enforcement employees and their representatives, acting
within the framework of the law, to enter into discussions with affirmative
willingness to resolve issues, grievances and disputes relating to working
conditions, wages, benefits and safety regulations. It is also the purpose of
this section to promote harmonious employer-law enforcement employee
relations by providing a uniform basis for recognizing the right of public
law enforcement employees to join, or refrain from joining, an organization
of their own choice.  Also, it is their right to be represented by such
organization in their dealing with the town in accordance with the provisions
of this section. Additionally, this section provides that the results of
agreements between the employer and its law enforcement employees shall be
drafted into written memorandums of understanding.



   (B)   Law enforcement employee group.



      (1)   There shall be 1 law enforcement employee group within
the town. It shall include:  police officers, field training officers,
detectives, sergeants, animal control officers, dispatch supervisors,
dispatchers, and records employees of the Police Department.



      (2)   Authorized representation of a law enforcement employee
group shall be determined by the presentation of a petition, or signed
membership cards, to the Town Manager containing the signatures of at least
50% plus 1 of the law enforcement employees in the above-designated law
enforcement group. The petition/membership card shall designate the law
enforcement employee group and the law enforcement employee organization
designated to represent those employees. Upon verification of the signatures,
the Town Manager shall designate the named law enforcement employee
organization as the official and exclusive law enforcement employee
organization for representation purposes provided for by this section. The
designated law enforcement employee organization shall have the right to
bi-weekly or monthly dues deductions, if approved by the law enforcement
employees of the organization.



   (C)   Meeting and conferring.



      (1)   The law enforcement employee organization that has been
verified by the Town Manager, may submit a proposal to the Town Manager
relating to wages, benefits, safety regulations and other working conditions,
by January 15 each year.



      (2)   Upon receiving a proposal from a verified law
enforcement employee organization, the Town Manager shall submit a written
response to the proposal to the law enforcement employee organization within
30 days.



      (3)   Within 10 days from the receipt of the Town Manager’s
response, the Town Manager and representatives of the law enforcement
employee organization shall begin meeting and conferring at mutually agreed
upon locations and times, for the purpose of entering into a written
memorandum of understanding relating to the proposal regarding wages,
benefits, safety regulations, and/or other working conditions. Meetings shall
be at least 3 hours in duration, unless mutually agreed otherwise.  Meetings
shall take place in accordance with a mutually agreed upon schedule until an
agreement is reached or an impasse is declared.



      (4)   The Town Manager, or a designated representative, and
the representative of the law enforcement employee organization, shall reduce
any areas of agreement to writing and initial the same.  Those areas in
which an impasse is declared shall be outlined as areas in dispute.



      (5)   On or before May 1 each year, all areas of agreement, as
well as those areas in dispute, shall be submitted by the Town Manager to the
Mayor and Council for consideration. The Mayor and Council may accept, reject
or modify those areas of agreement. The Mayor and Council may also take
whatever actions they feel appropriate with regard to those areas in dispute.
Final action by the Mayor and Council shall constitute the memorandum of
understanding for the following fiscal year(s).



   (D)   Amendments.  The provisions of this section shall only be
amended, changed or altered in accordance with applicable state law.



(Ord. 08-705, passed 8-14-2008)



CHAPTER 34:  COURT



Section




General Provisions




   34.01   Magistrate Court established; jurisdiction



   34.02   Presiding officer



   34.03   Proceedings of Court



   34.04   Costs of confinement




Municipal Court Fees




   34.20   Authority to set fee amounts



   34.21   Establishment of funds and allocation of fees



   34.22   Establishment of court fees



   34.23   Court collection fees




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 34.01  MAGISTRATE COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION.



   There is hereby established in the town a Magistrate Court which shall
have jurisdiction of over all cases arising under this code. The Court shall
have jurisdiction, concurrently with justices of the peace of the precinct in
which the town is located, of violations of the state laws within the limits
of the town.



(2001 Code, Art. 5-1)  (Am. Ord. 492, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 12-759,
passed 6-26-2012)



§ 34.02  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   (A)   Presiding Magistrate.



      (1)   The Council shall appoint a presiding Magistrate of the
Court who shall serve a minimum term of 2 years upon initial appointment. 
Thereafter, the Council may reappoint the presiding Magistrate for terms of
not less than 2 nor more than 4 years. The beginning and end of each term
shall be specified at the time of appointment or reappointment. The Council
shall remove the presiding Magistrate only for cause, in accordance with the
Arizona Constitution and state law.



      (2)   The presiding Magistrate may appoint associate
magistrates, special magistrates and hearing officers as are necessary for
the efficient and continuing operation of the Court. Those persons who are
appointed shall provide services for the Court in the absence or disability
of the presiding Magistrate, and in those cases where the presiding
Magistrate is recused from any matter or proceeding. Any associate magistrate
or special magistrate shall be a sitting or retired judge, judge pro tempore,
or magistrate. Any hearing officer who does not meet the qualifications of an
associate or special magistrate shall be approved by the Council prior to
appointment.



      (3)   Associate or special magistrates and hearing officers
appointed by the presiding Magistrate shall serve on a case-by-case basis or
for specific periods of time as assigned. They may serve on a voluntary basis
or are eligible for compensation from the “other professional services”
account of the Court, subject to the policies and rates of pay established by
the Court.



(2001 Code, § 5-2-1)



   (B)   Powers and duties of Town Magistrate.  The powers and duties
of the Magistrate shall include:



      (1)   The powers and duties set forth and conferred upon him
or her under the provisions of the state constitution and statutes, this code
and the ordinances and resolutions of the town;



      (2)   The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered each
action and the proceedings of the Court therein;



      (3)   The responsibility for fixing and receiving all bonds
and bails and receiving and accounting for all fines, penalties, fees and
other monies as provided by law;



      (4)   Payment to appropriate town, county or state officials
of all fees, fines, penalties and other monies collected by the Court;



      (5)   Submitting a monthly report to the Council summarizing
Court activities for that month and assuring that the town’s Finance
Department conducts quarterly reviews of the Court financial records;



      (6)   Preparation of a schedule of traffic violations not
involving the death of a person, listing specific bail for each violation; and



      (7)   The Magistrate may hire Court clerks as may become
necessary subject to budget restrictions and the provisions of the personnel
policy manual.



(2001 Code, § 5-2-2)



(Am. Ord. 492, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 12-759, passed 6-26-2012)



§ 34.03  PROCEEDINGS OF COURT.



   (A)   The proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the
state constitution, the applicable state statutes and rules of the state’s
Supreme Court pertaining to police courts.  The proceedings shall also be
conducted in accordance with the rules of criminal procedure for the Superior
Court, unless otherwise prescribed, and providing this code and resolutions
of the town are not in conflict therewith.



   (B)   The Magistrate Court proceedings shall be commenced by
complaint under oath and in the name of the state setting forth the offense
charged with and such particulars of time, place, person and property as to
enable the defendant to understand distinctly the character of the offense
complained of and to answer the complaint.



   (C)   If the Magistrate is satisfied that the offense complained of
has been committed by the person charged, he or she shall issue a summons or
a warrant of arrest.  Before issuing a summons or warrant of arrest on a
complaint, the Magistrate may subpoena and examine witnesses as to the truth
of the complaint.



(2001 Code, Art. 5-3)  (Am. Ord. 492, passed - -2002)



§ 34.04  COSTS OF CONFINEMENT.



   (A)   Payment of costs of confinement.



      (1)   Any person who is convicted of a misdemeanor criminal
offense in the Municipal Court and who, as a consequence, is incarcerated in
the Yavapai County Jail, may as part of any sentence imposed by the Municipal
Court be required to reimburse through the Municipal Court to Yavapai County
for actual expenses incurred by reason of such confinement at the daily
prisoner cost rate or fee imposed by Yavapai County. The fees, if collected
by the Municipal Court, shall be forwarded to Yavapai County.



      (2)   In the event the daily prisoner cost charges, rate or
fee by Yavapai County should increase or decrease following August 28, 1992,
then the fee imposed herein shall similarly be increased or decreased.



(2001 Code, § 5-4-1)



   (B)   Waiver of costs for indigents.  No person shall be required
to pay the fee established by this chapter who is found by the Municipal
Court to be indigent.



(2001 Code, § 5-4-2)



   (C)   Collection of fee.  In addition to any other remedies which
may be allowed by law, the Town Attorney is authorized to institute any
appropriate civil suit in a court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of
the fee referred to in this chapter.



(2001 Code, § 5-4-3)



(Am. Ord. 492, passed - -2002)




MUNICIPAL COURT FEES




§ 34.20  AUTHORITY TO SET FEE AMOUNTS.



   (A)   Presiding magistrate to set and submit to Council.  The
amount to be charged by Municipal Court for all fees set forth in this
chapter is to be set by the presiding Magistrate of the Municipal Court and
submitted by resolution to the Town Council for approval.  Fees can not be
changed more often than every six months.



   (B)   Resubmission.  If the Town Council does not approve the fee
schedule submitted by the presiding Magistrate, the presiding Magistrate may
resubmit a new fee schedule for approval as often as deemed necessary. The
most recent fee schedule will remain in effect until a new fee schedule is
approved.



   (C)   Automatic annual adjustment.  On July 1 of each year,
commencing in 2007, the amount of the Municipal Court fees to be paid to the
town pursuant to this section shall be increased by the percentage change in
the annual average of the Engineering News Record (ENR) index between the
prior 2 calendar years.  The Finance Director shall make the required
calculation by April 1 of each year, and the amount of the Municipal Court
fees for the next 12-month period, beginning July 1 of that year, as
calculated by the Finance Director based upon such calculation, without the
necessity of further action by the Council.  In no event shall the amount of
the Municipal Court fees be reduced based upon a change in the ENR index. 
No later than 60 days prior to the Municipal Court fees being adjusted each
year as provided in this section, the Town Clerk shall cause the proposed
fees to be posted on the town’s home page. In the event the ENR index
information for the prior calendar years is unavailable by April 1, the
Municipal Court fees as previously fixed for the prior fiscal year (July 1 to
June 30) shall continue in effect until such time as the ENR index for the
prior year is available; the Finance Director makes the required calculation;
and the proposed fees are posted on the town’s home page for at least 60
days prior to becoming effective.



(2001 Code, Art. 5-5-1)  (Ord. 06-656, passed 4-13-2006; Am. Ord. 16-809,
passed 1-26-2016)



§ 34.21  ESTABLISHMENT OF FUNDS AND ALLOCATION OF FEES.



   (A)   Municipal Court Improvement Account.  There is hereby
established a Municipal Court Improvement Account, which shall be used
exclusively to enhance the technological, operational, and security
capabilities of the Municipal Court.  The Municipal Court Improvement
Account shall be established as an interest bearing account in accordance
with town policies and procedures.  The Municipal Court shall collect the
court improvement fees as defined in this section and deposit them in the
court improvement account on a monthly basis.



   (B)   Municipal Court Collection Account.  There is hereby
established a Municipal Court Collection Account, which shall be used
exclusively to enhance the technological, operational, and security
capabilities of the Municipal Court collection program. The Court Collection
Account shall be established as an interest bearing account in accordance
with town policies and procedures. The Municipal Court shall collect warrant
and suspended license fees, as set forth in § 34.22 and deposit them in the
court collection account on a monthly basis.



   (C)   Traffic case processing fee.  All such fees shall be
distributed to the town’s General Fund.



   (D)   Allocation of fees.  All current and future fees not
designated to be deposited in a specific account, as defined in this section,
are to be included in the court’s monthly remittance to the town’s
general account as reimbursement for costs of court operations.



(2001 Code, Art. 5-5-2)  (Ord. 06-656, passed 4-13-2006; Am. Ord. 06-662,
passed 6-8-2006; Am. Ord. 09-717, passed 3-12-2009; Am. Ord. 16-809, passed
1-26-2016)



§ 34.22  ESTABLISHMENT OF COURT FEES.



   (A)   The following fees are hereby established to be collected by
the Municipal Court:



      (1)   Court improvement fee.  A court improvement fee shall
be applied to each case in which  fines, sanctions, penalties, and
assessments are imposed by the Municipal Court.  The improvement fee shall
also apply to fees collected for court authorized diversion programs.  COURT
AUTHORIZED DIVERSION PROGRAM, as used in this section, means a program in
which an individual charged with any civil, criminal, or petty offense is not
prosecuted for the offense on successful completion of an authorized
diversion program and includes authorized defensive driving courses.



      (2)   Warrant fee.  A warrant fee shall be imposed for each
warrant issued by the court.  Any person who has a warrant issued by the
court for failure to appear, failure to comply with a court order, or any
other warrant from the bench shall be required to pay this fee to the town
for the cost of issuing and servicing the warrant.



      (3)   Suspended license fee.  A suspended license fee shall
be imposed for each driver’s license suspension issued by the court.  Any
person who has had a suspension issued by the court for failure to pay a
civil traffic fine or for any other reason shall be required to pay this fee
to the town for the cost of issuing and servicing the suspension.



      (4)   Traffic case processing fee.  The Municipal Court shall
collect a traffic case processing fee, in addition to the fine imposed by the
Court, upon the finding of responsibility or guilt for a traffic violation. 
For purposes of this section, TRAFFIC VIOLATION means a violation of Title
VII of this code of ordinances, entitled “Traffic Code,” relating to
traffic movement or control; or Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 28, as
follows: (i) Chapter 3, Articles 1-15; (ii) Chapter 4; (iii) Chapter 5; (iv)
Chapter 7, Article 5; (v) Chapter 8, Articles 4, 6 and 8; (vi) Chapter 9,
Article 4; or (vii) Chapter 25, Article 3,  except for federal 
licensing,  registration  and  insurance disclosure requirements pursuant
to A.R.S. §§ 28-8271, 28-8272 and 28-8275, as may be amended from time to
time.  The Court shall impose a single traffic case processing fee per case,
regardless of the number of traffic violations arising out of any one case or
complaint.



      (5)   NSF service fee.  An NSF service fee shall be applied
to any person who issues a check to the court in payment of a fee or fine
where the check is returned by the financial institution for insufficient
funds.



      (6)   Research fee.  A research fee shall be required of any
person who requests extensive records searches and case file copying who is
not a victim of the crime alleged by the case or complaint for which he is
requesting records. The fee shall be paid prior to the person receiving the
records requested unless prior arrangements have been made with the court
administrator due to extenuating circumstances.



      (7)   Case file copies fee.  A case file copies fee shall be
charged to any person who is a non-party to a lawsuit who requests a copy of
the case file. The case file copies fee shall be per page of copies provided.



      (8)   Deferred prosecution fee.  A deferred prosecution fee
shall be assessed on every defendant who enters a deferred prosecution
agreement with the municipal court.



      (9)   Suspended sentencing fee.  When a person's sentence is
suspended by the court, the person shall pay to the court a suspended
sentencing fee.



      (10)   Indigent defense fee.  An indigent defense fee shall
be added by the court to sentencing terms when a defendant is represented in
court by a public defender.



   (B)   If a person has been found by the Municipal Court to be
indigent, the Municipal Court Magistrate may reduce the amount of any fee set
forth in this section based upon the individual's ability to pay.



   (C)   In addition to any other remedies which may be allowed by law,
the Town Attorney is authorized to institute civil legal proceedings in any
court of competent jurisdiction to recover any fee owing under this section.



(2001 Code, Art. 5-5-3)  (Ord. 06-656, passed 4-13-2006; Am. Ord. 09-717,
passed 3-12-2009; Am. Ord. 16-809, passed 1-26-2016)



§ 34.23  COURT COLLECTION FEES.



   (A)   The Municipal Court is hereby authorized to assess a “court
collection service fee” or may authorize the payment by a defendant of
collection costs directly to a collection agency or attorney.  The fee
imposed or payment authorized is to be in an amount, determined by the Court,
based on the actual costs of collection, and explained as follows:



      (1)   A defendant who defaults in his or her obligation for
the payment of monies owed or due to the Municipal Court, including but not
limited to restitution, fines, sanctions, surcharges, assessments, penalties,
bonds, costs, and/or fees, is liable for any and all fees and charges
assessed by a collection agency that is licensed, pursuant to A.R.S. 32-1021
et seq. (Title 32, Chapter 9, Article 2), or a duly licensed attorney, that
has been engaged by the Municipal Court to collect and enforce such payment.



      (2)   The collection fees and charges assessed by the
collection agency or the attorney shall be added to the sum or sums due from
and chargeable against the defendant.



   (B)   The Magistrate is authorized to enter into an agreement or
agreements on behalf of the Municipal Court with any collection agency that
is licensed, pursuant to A.R.S. 32-1021 et seq. (Title 32, Chapter 9, Article
2), and/or any duly licensed attorney, for the purpose of providing
collection services for the Court.  Said agreement(s) is to be authorized
without cost to the Municipal Court or to the town, unless otherwise
specifically budgeted and approved for payment from the Municipal Court’s
other professional services account.



   (C)   The effective date of any assessments authorized herein shall
be May 12, 2002.  All defendants who are in default in his or her
obligation(s) for the payment of monies owed or due to the Municipal Court,
including but not limited to restitution, fines, sanctions, surcharges,
assessments, penalties, bonds, costs, and/or fees, prior to the above date
shall be provided with written notice to the defendant’s last known address
that they shall have a 30-day grace period to satisfy said obligation(s)
before assessments are imposed upon them.



(2001 Code, Art. 5-5-4)  (Am. Ord. 492, passed  - -2002; Ord. 06-656,
passed 4-13-2006)



CHAPTER 35:  CODE OF ETHICS



Section



   35.01   Generally



   35.02   Responsibilities of public office



   35.03   Conflict of interest



   35.04   Conduct in public office



   35.05   Code of ethics complaints; filings and procedures



§ 35.01  GENERALLY.



   (A)   ETHICS is defined here as the rules or standards governing
those persons functioning as representatives of the town. These rules and
standards are based upon a set of values judged to be moral to the extent
that they enhance society and an individual’s relationship to others.



   (B)   A representative of the town is defined here as a public
official, elected or appointed, salaried or unpaid, including the Mayor,
Council members and any board or commission member.



   (C)   The purpose of this code is to establish ethical standards of
conduct for these public officials acting in their official public capacity.



(2001 Code, § 2-6-1)



§ 35.02  RESPONSIBILITIES OF PUBLIC OFFICE.



   (A)   By oath of office each representative is responsible to uphold
the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of
Arizona and the ordinances and regulations of the town. The public official
shall perform his obligations in a manner that is impartial and responsible
to all people.



   (B)   The public official shall not use his position for personal or
monetary gain.



   (C)   The public official shall not disclose confidential
information concerning the property, government or affairs of the town
without proper legal authorization.



(2001 Code, § 2-6-2)



§ 35.03  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   (A)   This code shall reinforce any existing affirmation regarding
conflict of interest contained in the public official’s oath of office. 
When acting in a public capacity, the public official shall abstain from
participating in discussion and vote on any pending matter that would result
in his or her financial or private gain.



   (B)   The public official shall not directly or indirectly solicit,
accept or receive any gift, whether it be money, services, loan, travel,
entertainment, hospitality, promise or any other form that could be
reasonably inferred to influence the performance of his or her official
duties and actions or serve as a reward for any official action.



(2001 Code, § 2-6-3)



§ 35.04  CONDUCT IN PUBLIC OFFICE.



   (A)   The public official shall not discuss or divulge confidential
information acquired by him or her in the course of his or her official
duties nor shall he or she use this information for his or her own personal
interest or aggrandizement.



   (B)   The public official shall respect the rights, privileges and
opinions of his or her fellow officials, staff and the public at large.
Council members shall exhibit respect for the public, other governmental
units and agencies, and the professional and ethical conduct of the Town
Manager and staff. Propriety dictates that the public official be sensitive
to the possible confidential or personal nature of directives addressed to
other individuals. In bringing honor to the title and in recognition of the
weighty respect due the role of public official, those elected to public
office shall:



      (1)   Lead by example;



      (2)   Demonstrate civil and courteous conduct at all times;



      (3)   Seek and speak the truth;



      (4)   Respect all people;



      (5)   Accept respectful dissension as a civic right.



   (C)   In his or her dealings with town employees, the public
official shall maintain professional conduct with respect to the employee’s
work assignments and obligations, and shall refrain from directly influencing
the professional management of the town's administration by any means other
than direct communication with the Town Manager. The office of the public
official shall in no situation be used to wrongfully obtain information or
administrative outcomes, either by intimidation or by deliberately violating
the privacy of an employee’s work station.



   (D)   All public officials shall comply with this code of ethics.



(2001 Code, § 2-6-4)  (Am. Ord. 13-768, passed 4-9-2013; Am. Ord. 15-796,
passed 4-28-2015)



§ 35.05  CODE OF ETHICS COMPLAINTS; FILINGS AND PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Code of ethics violations are Council matters and complaints
shall only be made by members of the Town Council.



   (B)   Complaints alleging violations to this chapter shall be in
writing and filed by the complainant with the Mayor and/or Vice Mayor, unless
the Mayor and/or Vice Mayor file or are named in the complaint. In that
event, the complaint shall be filed with the Town Attorney. Any and all
documents in support of the complaint shall be attached to the complaint at
the time it is filed.



   (C)   Complaints will be addressed by the council within 60 days of
receipt by the Mayor, Vice Mayor or Town Attorney in compliance with the
procedures set forth in this section.



   (D)   The Mayor, Vice Mayor or Town Attorney who receive a complaint
shall forward it and all attachments to the Town Clerk within 3 business days
of receipt and at least 3 weeks prior to the complaint being placed on
council's agenda.



   (E)   At least 2 weeks prior to the Council's consideration of the
complaint, the Town Clerk shall provide a copy of the complaint and all
supporting documents to the respondent. 



   (F)   Only one complaint alleging a violation of the ethics code
shall be addressed at any 1 Council meeting.



   (G)   Only 1 person may be accused of a code of ethics violation per
complaint.



   (H)   If the Mayor is either the complainant or the respondent, the
Council's consideration of the ethics complaint shall be chaired by the Vice
Mayor.



   (I)   Council's procedure for addressing the complaint during its
meeting shall be as follows:



      (1)   Introduction of item;



      (2)   Presentation by complainant (10 minutes maximum);



      (3)   Presentation by respondent (10 minutes maximum);



      (4)   Additional information by complainant (if any) (5
minutes maximum);



      (5)   Additional information by respondent (if any) (5 minutes
maximum);



      (6)   Council discussion; and



      (7)   Council decision.



(Ord. 15-796, passed 4-28-2015; Am. Ord. 15-800, passed 6-9-2015)



CHAPTER 36:  LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS



Section




Ordinances, Resolutions, and Contracts




   36.01   Prior approval



   36.02   Introduction



   36.03   Requirements for an ordinance



   36.04   Effective date of ordinances



   36.05   Signatures required



   36.06   Publishing required



   36.07   Posting required




ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, AND CONTRACTS




§ 36.01  PRIOR APPROVAL.



   All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall, before
presentation to the Council, have been reviewed as to form by the attorney
and shall, when there are substantive matters of administration involved, be
referred to the person who is charged with the administration of the matters.
Such person shall have an opportunity to present his or her objections, if
any, prior to the passage of the ordinance, resolution or acceptance of the
contract.



(2001 Code, § 2-5-1)



§ 36.02  INTRODUCTION.



   Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action
by the Council shall be introduced and sponsored by a member of the Council,
except that a town employee with the approval of the Town Manager or the Town
Attorney may present ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects
to the Council, and any member of the Council may assume sponsorship thereof
by moving that such ordinance, resolution, matter, or subject be adopted;
otherwise, they shall not be considered.



(2001 Code, § 2-5-2)



§ 36.03  REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ORDINANCE.



   Each ordinance should have but 1 subject, the nature of which is
clearly expressed in the title. Whenever possible, each ordinance shall be
introduced as an amendment to this code or to an existing ordinance, and, in
such case, the title of the sections to be amended shall be included in the
ordinance.



(2001 Code, § 2-5-3)



§ 36.04  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   No ordinance, resolution or franchise shall become operative until 30
days after its passage by the Council and approval by the Mayor, except
measures necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health or
safety of the town, but such an emergency measure shall not become
immediately operative unless it states in a separate section the reason why
it is necessary that it should become immediately operative, and unless it is
approved by the affirmative vote of 3/4 of all the members elected to the
Council, taken by ayes and nays and approved by the Mayor.



(2001 Code, § 2-5-4)



§ 36.05  SIGNATURES REQUIRED.



   Every ordinance passed by the Council shall, before it becomes
effective, be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk.



(2001 Code, § 2-5-5)



§ 36.06  PUBLISHING REQUIRED.



   Only such orders, resolutions, motions, regulations or proceedings of
the Council shall be published as may be required by state statutes or
expressly ordered by the Council.



(2001 Code, § 2-5-6)



§ 36.07  POSTING REQUIRED.



   Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture, or other
punishment shall, after passage, be posted by the Clerk in 3 or more public
places within the town, and a declaration of the person who posted the
ordinance shall be filed in the office of the Clerk as proof of posting.



(2001 Code, § 2-5-7)  (Am. Ord. 05-617, passed 8-11-2006)



CHAPTER 37:  ELECTIONS



Section




General




   37.001   Election day




Council Elections




   37.020   Non-political ballot



   37.021   Election of Mayor or Councilmember



   37.022   General election nomination



   37.023   Election to office



   37.024   Candidate financial disclosure




Initiative and Referendum Elections




   37.030   Power reserved



   37.031   Time of election



   37.032   Number of signatures



GENERAL



§ 37.001  ELECTION DAY.



   Commencing with the elections in 2014, the primary election shall be
held on the date of the primary election of the State of Arizona.  The
general election shall be held on the date of the general election of the
State of Arizona.



(Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)



COUNCIL ELECTIONS



§ 37.020  NON-POLITICAL BALLOT.



   Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the source
of the candidacy or support of the candidate.



(Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)



§ 37.021  ELECTION OF MAYOR OR COUNCILMEMBER.



   (A)   At the primary election, any candidate for the office of Mayor
or Town Council who receives a majority of all votes cast for that office at
such election shall be declared elected to the office for which he or she is
a candidate, effective as of the date of the general election, and no further
election shall be held as to such candidate.



   (B)   If more candidates receive a majority of votes cast than there
are seats to be filled for the office, then the candidates who receive the
highest number of votes equal to the number of seats to be filled for the
office shall be declared elected to that office.



   (C)    The majority of votes cast shall be as determined by state
law.



(Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014; Am. Ord. 16-807, passed 1-12-2016)



§ 37.022  GENERAL ELECTION NOMINATION.



   If at a primary election there is any office for which no candidate was
elected, then as to that office, the election shall be considered to be a
primary election for nomination of candidates for the office, and a general
election shall be held to vote for candidates to fulfill the office.
Candidates to be placed on the ballot at the general election shall be those
not elected at the primary election, shall be equal in number to twice the
number to be elected to any given office or less than that number if there
are fewer than that number named on the primary election ballot, and persons
who receive the highest number of votes for the respective offices at the
primary election shall be the only candidates at the general election;
provided, that if there is any person who, under the provisions of this
subchapter, would have been entitled to become a candidate for any office
except for the fact that some other candidate received an equal number of
votes therefor, then all such persons receiving an equal number of votes
shall likewise become candidates for the office.



(Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)



§ 37.023  ELECTION TO OFFICE.



   The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive
the highest number of votes shall be declared elected.



(Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)



§ 37.024  CANDIDATE FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.



   Each candidate for the Office of Mayor or Councilmember shall file a
financial disclosure statement when the candidate files a nomination paper.
The statement shall contain such information as required by resolution of the
council pursuant to state law.



INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM ELECTIONS



§ 37.030  POWER RESERVED.



   There is reserved to the qualified electors of the town the power of
the initiative and referendum as prescribed by the state constitution.



(Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)



§ 37.031  TIME OF ELECTION.



   (A)   When a referendum or initiative is required to be placed upon
the ballot, the Council shall do so either:



      (1)    At the next regularly scheduled town primary or general
election or state general election; or



      (2)   At its discretion, the council may call a special
election to be held on any date authorized by A.R.S. § 16-204 to place a
referendum or initiative upon the ballot.



   (B)   At all times the citizens shall retain the right to vote by
absentee ballot.



(Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)



§ 37.032  NUMBER OF SIGNATURES.



   (A)   The basis upon which the number of qualified electors of the
town required to file an initiative petition shall be the total number of
registered voters qualified to vote in the last town election, whether
primary, general, or special, immediately preceding the date upon which any
initiative petition is filed.



   (B)   The basis upon which the number of qualified electors of the
town required to file a referendum petition shall be as determined by state
law.



(Ord. 14-783, passed 4-22-2014)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter




         50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         51.   WATER AND SEWERS





         52.   REMOVAL OF RUBBISH, TRASH AND THE LIKE, AND
CULVERT MAINTENANCE




CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   On-site restroom facilities




Utility Department




   50.15   Public Works Director



   50.16   Duties



   50.17   Right of entry for inspection; credentials



   50.18   Records to be kept




Prohibitions




   50.30   Ownership of main extensions, service pipes and appurtenant
equipment



   50.31   Interference, digging and tampering prohibited



   50.32   Water system shut-off valves



   50.33   Obstruction of waster and sewer system



   50.34   Only authorized persons to turn on water



   50.35   Fire hydrants




General Regulations




   50.50   Application for service, activation or reactivation of
service; information required



   50.51   Interruption of service



   50.52   Street works; utility relocation; notice to Utility
Department



   50.53   Protection of water supply and sewerage systems



   50.54   Services and materials to be property of Utility Department;
consumers to pay for damages



   50.55   Permit required for consumer to supply water or sewer
service to others



   50.56   Effluent collection, treatment and recharge policy




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADEQ.  The Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.



   ADWR.  The Arizona Department of Water Resources.



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The Director in an NPDES state with an approved
state pretreatment program and the appropriate U.S. EPA regional
administrator in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state
pretreatment program.



   APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY (ASSEMBLY).  Any testable
assembly, with the exception of an approved air gap, which has been issued a
certificate of approval by the USC- FCCCHR or such other third party
certifying entity, unrelated to the product’s manufacturer or vendor, which
may be acceptable to ADEQ.  A list of assemblies shall be maintained by the
Utility Department.



   APPROVED LABORATORY PROCEDURES.  The measurements, tests and analyses
of the characteristics of water and wastes in accordance with analytical
procedures as established in Title 40 C.F.R. part 136, as revised, that are
performed by an environmental laboratory licensed by the state pursuant to
A.R.S. §§ 36-495 et seq.  Alternative procedures may be approved by the
Director in accordance with applicable federal regulations.



   AVERAGE QUALITY.  The arithmetic average (weighted by flow value) of
all the “daily determinations of concentrations”, as that term is defined
herein, made during a calendar month.



   AVERAGE DAILY EFFLUENT LIMITATION.  The maximum allowable
concentration in the discharge as measured in a representative sample during
a sampling day.  In determining compliance with the daily average effluent
limitation, town samples shall not be combined with non-town samples.



   AWWA.  American Water Works Association.



   BACKFLOW.  The undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of
water and other liquids, gasses or other substances into the distribution
system of the public potable water supply.



   BACKPRESSURE.  A form of backflow due to any elevation of pressure in
the downstream piping system (by pump, elevation of piping or steam and/or
air pressure) above the supply pressure at the point of service delivery
which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of
flow through the backflow prevention assembly.



   BACKSIPHONAGE.  A form of backflow due to a reduction in system
pressure which causes a negative or sub-atmospheric pressure to exist at a
site in the water system.



   BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES).  Measures or practices used to reduce
the amount of pollution entering the sanitary sewer system, surface water,
land or groundwaters.



   BOD (BIOLOGICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
conditions for 5 days at a temperature of 20°C, expressed in milligrams per
liter.



   BODY OF WATER.  A manmade lake, pond, lagoon or swimming pool that has
a surface area greater than 12,320 square feet, and that is used wholly or
partly for landscape, scenic or recreational purposes.  BODY OF WATER does
not include a manmade lake or basin used for groundwater recharge pursuant to
A.R.S. § 45-565(A)(6).  For purposes of this chapter, 2 or more bodies of
water that are connected, or that are designed to function as a unit shall be
considered 1 lake.



   BRANCH SEWER.  An arbitrary term for a sewer which receives sewage
from more than 1 public sewer from a relatively small area.



   BUILDING CONNECTION.  The extension from a sewer tap to the property
line, or to the easement line, of the property to be served.



   BUILDING OFFICIAL.  The officer or other designated authority charged
with the administration and enforcement of the building codes adopted by the
town.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the building
connection or other place of disposal.



   BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of wastes from any portion of a
treatment facility.



   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS (NATIONAL/FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARDS).  Those standards promulgated by the EPA under the authority of
§ 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C § 1317) which apply to a
specific category of industrial user and which are published in Title 40
C.F.R. chapter I, subchapter N (parts 405-471) and are incorporated in this
chapter by reference.



   CERTIFIED TESTER.  An individual certified to test backflow prevention
assemblies by the California-Nevada Section of the AWWA or the Arizona State
Environmental Technology Training (ASETT) Center or other agencies or
organizations involved with the training and certification of testers if they
are acceptable to ADEQ.



   C.F.R.  Code of Federal Regulations.



   COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen consumed from a
chemical oxidation of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or
wastewater, expressed in milligrams per liter.



   COMMERCIAL USER.  Any nonresidential user which provides a service or
one connected with commerce and which is not classified as an industrial
user.  The Director maintains a list of the types of businesses that are
commercial users and has the authority to classify specific users.



   COMMON AREA. A recreational or open space or areas maintained for the
benefit of the residents of a housing development, which is owned and
operated as a single integrated facility.



   COMPOSITE SAMPLE.  A combination of individual samples obtained at
regular intervals over a specified time period.  The volume of each
individual sample shall be either proportional to the flow rate during the
sample period (flow composite) or constant and collected at equal time
intervals during the composite period (time composite) as defined in the
permit.



   COMPOSITE SAMPLE QUALITY.  The concentration of some parameter tested
in a “composite sample”, as that term is defined herein.



   CONTIGUOUS.  In contact at any point along a boundary or part of the
same master planned community.  Two parcels of land are contiguous even if
they are separated by 1 or more of the following:  a road, easement or
right-of-way.



   COOLING WATER.  The clean wastewater discharged from any heat transfer
system such as condensation, air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration.



   CROSS CONNECTION.  Any unprotected or potential connection or
structural arrangement between a public or a customer’s potable water
system and any other source or system through which it is possible to
introduce into any part of the potable water system any used water,
industrial fluid, gas or substance other than the intended potable water with
which the system is supplied.  Bypass arrangements, jumper connections,
removable sections, swivel or changeover devices and other temporary or
permanent devices through which, or because of which, “backflow” can or
may occur are considered to be cross connections.  Compliance with the
town’s Plumbing Code creates a rebuttable presumption that a cross
connection does not exist.



   CTR.  The publicly owned sewer collection, treatment works and
effluent recharge system which is owned and/or operated, in whole or in part,
by the town and which provides the town with wastewater collection, treatment
and recharge services.



   CTR RESIDUALS.  All CTR effluent and/or solids, including sludge,
scum, screenings and grit, which are the byproduct of wastewater treatment
operations and which must be discharged to the environment for ultimate
disposal and/or reuse.



   CUSTOMER.  Any person, partnership, association, company, private
corporation, public corporation, political subdivision, the United States and
the State of Arizona who receives potable water and/or sewage service from
the town.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Utility Department of the town.



   DEVELOPER.  Any person engaged in the organizing and financing of a
wastewater collection system within an area contributing to a branch, main or
a trunk sewer of the town sewer system.  Such may be either a subdivider or
a legally constituted improvement district.



   DIRECTOR.  The Public Works Director, or his or her authorized deputy,
agent or representative.



   DISCHARGE.  The disposal of any sewage, pollutant(s), water or any
liquid from any sewer into the sewerage system.



   DOMESTIC USER.  A typical user who discharges only domestic wastewater.



   DOMESTIC WASTE.  A typical residential-type waste which requires no
pretreatment under the provisions of this chapter before discharging into the
sanitary sewer system, excluding all commercial, manufacturing and industrial
wastes.



   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER.  Any waterborne wastes, derived from the ordinary
living processes in a residential dwelling unit, of such character as to
permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, by conventional CTR
processes.



   EPA.  The United States Environmental Protection Agency.



   ESTABLISHMENT, PLANT.  Any establishment or plant producing liquid
waste, with or without suspended solids, required to be discharged into the
town sewer system.



   FREE ACCESS. The ability of town personnel to enter user facilities
under safe and non- hazardous conditions with a minimum of delay to inspect
any and all parts of the user’s facility.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce and other foodstuffs.



   GENERATOR.  A person who generates septage.



   GRAB SAMPLE.  An individual sample of effluent collected in less than
15 minutes without regard to flow or time of day.



   GRAB SAMPLE QUALITY.  The concentration of some parameter tested in a
grab sample, as that term is defined herein.



   INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE.  Any introduction into the CTR system of a
non-domestic pollutant which:



      (1)   Is produced by a source which would be subject to any
categorical standards or pretreatment requirements if such source were to be
discharged into the CTR system; or



      (2)   Contains any substance or pollutant for which a
discharge limitation or prohibition has been established by any categorical
standard or pretreatment requirement.



   INDUSTRIAL USER.



      (1)   A source of industrial discharge;



      (2)   Any non-residential user of the sewer system which
discharges more than the equivalent strength of 25,000 gallons per day of
domestic wastes;



      (3)   Any significant industrial user;



      (4)   Has control over the disposal of a waste as described in
divisions (1), (2) or (3) of this definition; or



      (5)   Has the right of possession and control over any
property which produces a waste described in divisions (1), (2), (3) or (4)
above.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Any liquid, free-flowing waste, including cooling
water, resulting from any industrial or manufacturing process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, with or without
suspended solids, excluding uncontaminated water.



   INFLOW.  Water other than wastewater that enters a sewerage system
(including sewer service connections) from sources such as roof leaders,
cellar drains, foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy areas,
manhole covers, cross connections between storm sewers and sanitary sewers,
catch basins, cooling towers, storm waters, surface runoff, street wash
waters or drainage.



   INSTANTANEOUS EFFLUENT LIMITATION.  The maximum allowable
concentration in the discharge at any time as measured in a grab sample.  In
determining compliance with the instantaneous limitation, town samples shall
not be combined with non-town samples.



   INTERFERENCE.  A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources both:



      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the CTR system, its treatment
processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and



      (2)   Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement
of any environmentally related permit issued by a governmental entity
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following
statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more
stringent state and local regulations): § 405 of the Clean Water Act, being
33  U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.;) the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), being
42  U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.) (including title II, more commonly referred to
as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) and including state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant
to subtitle D of the SWDA; The Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control
Act, being 15  U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.); and the Marine Protection,
Research and Sanctuaries Act, being 33  U.S.C. §§ 1401 et seq.



   LANDSCAPE WATERING.  The application of water from any source,
including effluent, by a turf related facility to a water intensive
landscaped area, a low water use area or revegatation acres.



   LANDSCAPE PLANT.  Any member of the kingdom plantae, including any
tree, shrub, vine, herb, flower, succulent, ground cover or grass species
that grows or has been planted out-of-doors and is used for landscaping
purposes.



   LIQUID WASTE HAULER,HAULER or WASTE HAULER.  Any person carrying on or
engaging in vehicular transport of wastewater or wastes as part of, or
incidental to, any business for the purpose of discharging such waste into
the town’s treatment works.



   LOT.  A parcel of land or 2 or more contiguous parcels to be used as a
unit.



   MAIN SEWER.  A sewer which receives sewage from 2 or more branch
sewers as tributaries.



   MAINTENANCE.  Keeping the water or sewerage works in a state of
repair, including expenditures necessary to maintain the capacity
(capability) for which said works were designed and constructed.



   NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD.  Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with § 301(b) and (c)
of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1317 et seq.) which applies to
industrial users.  This term includes prohibitive discharge limits
established pursuant to Title 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch or other body of
surface water or ground water, or into a dry channel, wash or tributary of
any of the above.



   NET LOT AREA. That portion of a lot excluding all dedicated streets or
alleys and roadway or alley easements.



   NEW SOURCE.  Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed standards under § 307(c) of the
Clean Water Act which will be applicable to the source if the standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, and as stated in
detail in Title 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(k).



   NHLW (NON-HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTES).  The wastes specifically
identified herein.



   NON-POTABLE WATER.  Reclaimed water, storm water runoff that is not
subject to appropriation under A.R.S. § 45-141; water withdrawn pursuant to
poor quality groundwater withdrawal permit pursuant to A.R.S. § 45-516;
groundwater withdrawn pursuant to Type 1 or Type 2 non-irrigation
certificates of grandfathered right issued pursuant to ADWR, or other
non-potable water source of a quality suitable for landscape irrigation,
which meets all local, state and federal water quality requirements for full
body contact, except untreated Central Arizona Project water.



   NPDES PERMIT.  A national pollutant discharge elimination system
permit, issued to the town by the EPA, which imposes federal standards
governing the quality of the treated effluent discharged from the sewage
treatment plant.



   OIL AND GREASE.  The measure of oil and grease content of a sample as
determined by EPA Method 413.1, or other equivalent method approved by the
director.



   OIL AND GREASE (TPH).  For purposes of determining compliance with the
oil and grease limitation contained herein, oil and grease is defined as the
measure of a petroleum and mineral oil (total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH))
content of a sample as determined by EPA Method 418.1, or other equivalent
test method approved by the Director.



   PASS-THROUGH.  A discharge which exits the treatment plant into waters
of the United States, or groundwaters, in quantities or concentrations which,
alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is
a cause of a violation of any requirement of the treatment plant NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or which
causes or contributes to a violation of an applicable numeric or narrative
water quality standard.



   PERMIT.  A written control mechanism that the Director issues to
particular users or class of users under the authority of this chapter, also
similar control mechanisms issued by state or federal regulatory agencies.



   PERMITTEE, PERMIT HOLDER.  Any person, firm, association, corporation,
trust or governmental body which owns, operates processes or controls an
establishment or plant operated under a valid permit to discharge wastewater
into the town CTR system.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, state, municipality,
Indian tribe, political subdivisions of the state or federal governmental
agency or any other legal entity, including their legal representatives,
agents or assigns.



   pH.  The logarithm of reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions per
liter of solution.



   POINT OF SERVICE DELIVERY.  The terminal end of a service connection
from the public water system.  If a meter is installed at the end of the
service connection, then the point of service delivery shall mean the
downstream end (i.e., customer’s side) of the meter.



   POLLUTANT.  Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes.



   POLLUTION PREVENTION.  Source reduction and other practices that
reduce or eliminate the creation of pollutants through:



      (1)   Increased efficiency in the use of raw materials,
energy, water or other resources; or



      (2)   Protection of natural resources by conservation.



   POTABLE WATER.  Water delivered through the town’s domestic water
delivery system after treatment designed to meet EPA and ADEQ drinking water
standards.



   PRETREATMENT.  The physical, chemical, biological or other treatment
of any industrial discharge, prior to discharge to the CTR system, for the
purpose of:



      (1)   Reducing the amount of concentration of any pollutant;



      (2)   Eliminating the discharge of any pollutant; or



      (3)   Altering the nature of any pollutant characteristic to a
less harmful state.



   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  All of the duties or responsibilities
imposed upon CTR system users by this chapter.



   PRODUCER.  Any person, firm, association, corporation or trust which
owns, operates, possesses or controls an establishment or plant, whether or
not a permittee.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  Garbage that has been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/4 of an
inch in any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  A branch, main, or trunk sewer controlled and
maintained by the town.



   RECYCLING.  A material is recycled if it is used, reused or
reclaimed.  A material is used or reused if it is either:



      (1)   Employed as an ingredient (including its use as an
intermediate) to make a product; however a material will not satisfy this
condition if distinct components of the material are recovered as separate
end products (as when metals are recovered from metal containing secondary
materials); or



      (2)   Employed in a particular function as an effective
substitute for a commercial product.  A material is reclaimed if it is
processed to recover a useful product or if it is regenerated.  Examples
include the recovery of lead values from spent batteries and the regeneration
of spent solvents.



   REPLACEMENT. Those expenditures made for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories and/or appurtenances during the useful life of the
treatment works which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance
of the treatment works for which they were designed and constructed.



   REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE.  A composite sample obtained by flow
proportional sampling techniques where feasible.  When the Director
determines that flow proportionate sampling is not feasible, the Director may
allow or conduct composite sampling by time-proportional techniques or by the
compositing or averaging of 1 or more grab samples.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm
waters, surface waters and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



   SCHOOL. A place of general instruction including colleges, but not
including business colleges, nursery schools, dancing schools, riding
academies or specialized trade or vocational schools.



   SEPTAGE.  Aerobic wastewater originating from a domestic source, be it
from a residential, commercial or industrial facility that is not hazardous
waste and is compatible with the biological wastewater treatment plant
process.



   SEWAGE.  A combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such ground waters, surface waters and storm waters as may be present.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.  Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.



   SEWAGE WORKS.  All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.  As used in this chapter the term SEWER SYSTEM or
SEWERAGE WORKS shall have the same meaning and definition as SEWAGE WORKS.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



   SEWER TAP.  The wye, saddle or other device placed on a public sewer
to receive a building connection.



   SIU (SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER).



      (1)   All users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under Title 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and Title 40 C.F.R. chapter I, subchapter N
(parts 405-471).



      (2)   Any other user that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or
more of process wastewater to the CTR facility (excluding sanitary,
non-contact cooling and boiler blow-down wastewater); or



         (b)   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up
5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
CTR system; or



         (c)   Is designated as such by the Director on the basis
that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the CTR system’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



   SNC (SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE).  An industrial user is in a state of
significant noncompliance (SNC) when violations meet 1 or more of the
following criteria:



      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken
during a 6-month period exceeded (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit
or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter:



      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here
as those in which 33% or more of all measurements for each pollutant taken
during a 6-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum
limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC equals 1.4
for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH).



      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit
(daily maximum or longer-term average) that the Director determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass-through (including endangering the health of CTR personnel or the
general public);



      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted
in the CTR’s exercise of its emergency authority under this chapter to halt
or prevent such a discharge;



      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date,
a compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement order
for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final
compliance;



      (6)   Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date,
required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;



      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or



      (8)   Any other violation, or group of violations, which the
Director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.



   SLUG DISCHARGE.  Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature,
including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch
discharge.



   SOURCE REDUCTION.  Any practice which:



      (1)   Reduces the amount of any pollutant or contaminant
entering any waste stream or otherwise released into the environment
(including fugitive emissions) prior to recycling, treatment or disposal; and



      (2)   Reduces the hazards to public health and the environment
associated with the release of such substances, pollutants or contaminants.



   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC).  A coded classification of
industries based upon economic activity developed by the U.S.  Department of
Commerce as published in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972,
Office of Management and Budget.



   STANDARD METHODS.  The procedure as described in the most current
edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
published by the American Health Association, or the most current edition of
Manual Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes published by the EPA.



   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN.  A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS).  Solids measured in milligrams per liter that
either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater or
other liquids and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration
device, as defined in the Standard Methods, as defined herein.



   SWIMMING POOL.  An artificially constructed pool for swimming purposes
that meets the applicable design standards and specifications for swimming
pools provided by the Arizona Department of Health Services pursuant to
A.R.S. § 36-136(H)(10).



   SYSTEM DESIGN CAPACITY.  The design capacity for normal domestic
wastewater as established by accepted engineering standards.



   TOTAL ORGANIC CARBON (TOC).  The total of all organic compounds
expressed in milligrams per liter as determined by the combustion-infrared
method prescribed by approved laboratory procedures.



   TREATMENT PARAMETER.  A fundamental characteristic of sewage around
which treatment is designed, such as, but not limited to:  flow, BOD and
suspended solids.



   TRUNK SEWER.  A sewer which receives sewage from many tributary main
sewers and serves as an outlet for a large territory.



   UPSET.  An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with technology-based permit effluent limitations
because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the permittee, excluding
such factors as operational error, improperly designed or inadequate
treatment facilities or improper operation and maintenance thereof.



   USC-FCCCHR or USC MANUAL.  University of Southern California
Foundation for Cross- Connection Control and Hydraulic Research.



   USED WATER.  Any water supplied by the town from the public potable
water system to a customer’s water system, after it has passed through the
point of service delivery.



   USER.  Any person, lot, parcel of land, building, premises, municipal
corporation or other political subdivision that discharges, causes or permits
the discharge of wastewater into the sewage system.



   WASTE MINIMIZATION.  An activity which eliminates or reduces the
amount of any pollutant from entering the waste stream or the environment. 
This may include a change in raw materials, operational improvement, process
improvement, product reformulation reuse or reclamation.



   WASTEWATER.  Any liquid or water-carried pollutant, including an
industrial discharge, which is introduced into the CTR system from any source.



   WATER FEATURE.  Use of water in a landscaped area other than for
irrigation and includes fountains, artificial streams, ponds and waterfalls.



   WATER FROM ANY SOURCE.  Any water, including reclaimed wastewater from
a wastewater treatment facility or cooling tower.



   WATERCOURSE.  A channel in which the flow of water occurs either
continuously or intermittently.



   ZERO PROCESS DISCHARGE USER.  Those users that only discharge domestic
wastes or have no discharge, but have significant quantities of hazardous
material or high strength wastes which, if discharged, would be regulated by
this chapter.  The facilities may be regulated by requiring them to have 0
discharge of process wastes, thus allowing only domestic wastes to be
discharged.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-1)  (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 50.02  ON-SITE RESTROOM FACILITIES.



   All construction sites shall provide on-site restroom facilities for
employees while construction is occurring in conformance with all of the
following provisions:



   (A)   There shall be a minimum of 1 toilet provided on-site for
every single-family residential construction project. When the same general
contractor has 2 single-family residential construction projects on adjoining
lots with the same street frontage, 1 toilet located as close as possible to
the common property shall fulfill the requirements of this section for both
sites.



   (B)   When there is a non-single-family residential construction
site, there shall be 1 toilet facility for every 5,000 square feet of
building area. Any fraction thereof shall be rounded up to require the
additional toilet facility.



(2001 Code, Art. 9-6)




UTILITY DEPARTMENT




§ 50.15  PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.



   (A)   (1)   The Public Works Director, herein referred to as
“the Director”, shall be the general executive officer in charge of all
personnel, the entire operation, equipment and facilities of the Utility
Department (water and wastewater), herein referred to as “the Department.”



      (2)   He or she shall be responsible for the enforcement of
the policies regarding water and wastewater contained in this chapter.  He
or she shall also have general supervision over, subject to the approval of
the Town Manager, all charges for water and sewer services, departmental
policies, agreements, new connections, repairs and the like, and for all
charges not expressly provided for in this chapter.  He or she shall also
control the water supply and at all times insure the sufficiency thereof and
shall notify the public, unless an emergency requires otherwise, of the
necessity of shutting off any pipeline for the purpose of making repairs,
extensions or connections, should he have cause to expect to know beforehand
of the necessity to so shut off water from any line.



      (3)   The Director shall have the authority to waive the
collection or imposition of risk deposits, delinquent fees or late charge
fees imposed by the provisions of this chapter.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-2)



   (B)   The Director shall have the authority to decide any questions
that may arise which is not fully covered by the provisions contained in this
chapter and his or her decision in such cases shall be final subject only to
the general direction of the Town Manager.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-3)



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 50.16  DUTIES.



   The Department shall make all water service connections and inspect all
sewer service connections except those in new subdivisions where the
developer is required to install water and sewer service connections, set and
read all meters for service, make all repairs on mains, meters and services,
and check all valves and fire hydrants, and maintain them in good working
order, change all meters as necessary to maintain good working order and
accuracy, shall operate and maintain all water and sewer system facilities,
shall maintain compliance with local, state and federal regulations and shall
perform such other duties as required by the Director, subject to the
approval of the Town Manager.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-4)  (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 50.17  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION; CREDENTIALS.



   (A)   By accepting utility services from the town, customers
acknowledge and agree that any authorized employee of the Public Works or
Utility Department, upon presentation of his or her credentials, shall have
free access as that term is herein defined at all reasonable hours to any
residential, commercial or industrial premises connected to the town’s
water service area and/or connected to the town’s sewer system for purposes
of assessing applicability and/or compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.



   (B)   Any user or potential user shall allow all inspection,
monitoring, copying of records and the like, reasonably needed by the
Director or his or her agent to perform the duties required or needed under
this chapter.



   (C)   In case any authorized employee of the Department is refused
or delayed admittance to any premises, or, upon being admitted, shall be
hindered or prevented from making the inspection, examination or review of
records the Director may cause the water to be turned off from the premises
after giving 24 hours notice to the owner or occupant of the premises of his
or her intention to do so.



   (D)   Servicepersons and other employees of the Department whose
duty it may be to enter upon private premises to make inspections, collect
samples, examine pipes, fixtures or attachments or to measure the quantity or
quality of wastes delivered to the town sewer, shall be provided with
credentials to identify the employees as authorized representatives of the
Department.



   (E)   (1)   No person not an authorized employee of the
Department shall have or exhibit credentials of the Department.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of each employee of the Department
upon resignation or dismissal to surrender and deliver, at the office of the
human resources Director, all credentials of the Department.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-5)  (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 50.18  RECORDS TO BE KEPT.



   The Department shall keep a record of all water and sewer taps, the
exact locations, the purpose for which they are to be used, together with the
name of the owner of the property, his or her agent or representative, date
of installation, repair history and other pertinent data for all water and
sewer infrastructure as it is constructed, repaired or modified.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-6)  (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)




PROHIBITIONS




§ 50.30  OWNERSHIP OF MAIN EXTENSIONS, SERVICE PIPES AND APPURTENANT
EQUIPMENT.



   The ownership of all water mains, sewer mains, fire lines, service
pipes and appurtenant equipment maintained by the Utility Department shall be
vested in the town department and in no case shall the owner of any premises
have the right to claim any part except where otherwise provided.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-7)  (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 50.31  INTERFERENCE, DIGGING AND TAMPERING PROHIBITED.



   Every person who shall in any way interfere with employees of the
Public Works and Utility Departments in any discharge of their duties, either
in the tapping of any water or sewer pipe, main or lateral belonging to the
town, or the cleaning, laying or connection of any such pipe or main or
lateral, or the inspection of any such construction or discharging facility,
or who shall dig up or cause to be dug up any street, alley or easement in
the town for the purpose of connecting with the water or sewer system of the
town without first obtaining a permit from the Department, or who, having a
permit, shall dig up any portion of any street, alley or easement of the town
for the purpose of connecting to the water or sewer system of the town and
shall fail or neglect to place the street, alley or easement in its original
or better condition, or who shall maliciously or willfully break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the municipal water and sewerage works shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, except for the damages or/and penalties as may be
assessed on the town which total over $5,000 in which case the persons shall
be guilty of a felony.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-8)  (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 50.32  WATER SYSTEM SHUT-OFF VALVES.



   All shutoff valves on the public water system are installed by the town
for the use of the Department.  The shutoff valves shall not be used or in
any way operated, tampered with or manipulated by consumers of water or any
member of the public.  All consumers shall provide their own valve for
ordinary usage.  This valve shall be located on the consumer’s side of the
meter ahead of the first water outlet.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-9)  (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 50.33  OBSTRUCTION OF WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM.



   No person shall place upon or about any valve, valve box, curb stop,
water meter box, water gate, manhole or cleanout with the water or sewer
system of the town any object, materials, debris, fence or structure of any
kind that shall prevent free access to the same at all times or in any manner
tamper with or injure the appurtenances.  No person shall deposit any
material in, fill up or cover over any valve or meter box, or any manhole or
cleanout.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-10)  (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 50.34  ONLY AUTHORIZED PERSONS TO TURN ON WATER.



   (A)   No person other than an official or employee of the town’s
Utility Department shall turn on water from the town mains without written
permission from the Director.



   (B)   Should the water be turned on to the premises by anyone except
an employee of the Department, after it has been turned off at the town’s
curb stop, it will be turned off at the main and will not be turned on again
until a flat charge covering the cost of excavation and replacing the paving,
as established by the Director subject to the approval of the Town Manager,
shall have been paid in full.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-11)  (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 50.35  FIRE HYDRANTS.



   (A)   Fire hydrants are provided for the primary purpose of
extinguishing fires and shall be opened and used only by the Utility
Department, the Fire Department, or such persons as may be authorized by the
Director.  No permit shall be issued and existing permits shall be cancelled
to any person who has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or whose
indebtedness to the town for water used or damage to hydrants is
delinquent.  Every person authorized to open fire hydrants will be required
to replace caps on the outlets when such are not in use and will keep hose
connections in good repair.  Failure to do so will be sufficient cause to
prohibit further use of the hydrants and the refusal to grant subsequent
permits for the use of the fire hydrants.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-12)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the access to
any fire hydrant by placing around, on or within 20 feet of the hydrant any
stone, brick, lumber, dirt, rubbish, fence or other material or to open or
operate any fire hydrant or to draw or attempt to draw water or to willfully
or carelessly injure the hydrants or in any manner to tamper with or injure
the hydrants.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-13)



   (C)   (1)   When water for construction is required by a
contractor, it shall be supplied through a meter whenever possible.  When an
existing service connection is not available, or is of insufficient size, the
contractor may apply to the Department for a fire hydrant meter.  The
application may be approved subject to the applicant’s compliance with all
rules and regulations established by the Department pertaining to the use of
construction water from fire hydrants and the payment of applicable deposits,
fees and charges.  The contractor shall be responsible for any damage to the
hydrant meter, costs of which shall be determined by the Director.



      (2)   Whenever the use of un-metered water on a street,
pipeline or other public improvement project is approved by the Director, it
shall be the duty of the Utility Department to furnish the Finance Department
with an estimate of all un-metered water used.  The water shall be billed to
the contractor at the same rate as water taken through a fire hydrant
meter.  In addition, there will be a charge equal to the cost plus overhead
for any work performed, and materials used by the town to provide
construction water access for the contractor.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-14)



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99




GENERAL REGULATIONS




§ 50.50  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE, ACTIVATION OR REACTIVATION OF SERVICE;
INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Each person making application for a water and/or sewer
connection shall present a valid plumbing permit issued by the town’s
Building Department to the Utility Department as a prerequisite for the
approval of the requested service connection.



   (B)   The applicant shall state the following in his or her
application for a new service tap:



      (1)   Name;



      (2)   Description of the lot, block and addition;



      (3)   The desired location where the town main is to be tapped;



      (4)   The desired tap size to be made;



      (5)   The official house or building address assigned to the
premises; and



      (6)   The purpose for which the water will be used.



   (C)   The Department, as a condition to granting the application and
furnishing water and/or sewer to the premises, is authorized to and shall
require payment for the installation of service connections and meters.



   (D)   Service applications are required of all customers requesting
activation or reactivation of water and/or sewer service.  Application
information must be submitted for each service address.  An application must
also be submitted when requesting the transfer of service from one customer
to another.  Service applications will require the following information:



      (1)   Residential.



         (a)   Name of responsible party (must be an individual);



         (c)   Social security number;



         (d)   Address;



         (e)   Mailing address;



         (f)   Service address;



         (g)   If property owner, escrow number and title company;



         (h)   If tenant, landlord’s name and address;



         (i)   If agent, proof of agency;



         (j)   Employers name, address and phone; and



         (k)   Requested turn-on date.



      (2)   Commercial.



         (a)   Legal name of firm;



         (b)   Service address;



         (c)   Contact person;



         (d)   Nature of business;



         (e)   Dining on premises?;



         (f)   Employer’s ID number;



         (g)   Town business license number;



         (h)   Mailing address;



         (i)   Name and address of owner(s);



         (j)   If property owner, escrow number and title company;



         (k)   If tenant, landlord’s name and address;



         (l)   If agent, proof of agency; and



         (m)   Requested turn-on date.



   (E)   A service fee for activation or reactivation of service will
include obtaining a beginning water meter reading and will be charged a fee.
The fee shall be reviewed and may be revised by Council resolution.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-15)  (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 50.51  INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.



   By accepting utility service from the town, customers acknowledge, and
accept that the water may at any time be shut off from the town’s mains
without notice due to emergencies or for the purpose of making repairs,
extensions or any other necessary work.  The town will not be liable for any
damage that may occur on account of the water cut off for any purpose or on
account of the breaking of any pipe or fixtures by the water from the
town’s mains.  Water consumers who have any machinery, material, process
or plant which requires a constant supply of water shall install upon the
premises such water storage facilities as will prevent any damage in case the
town water supply may, for any reason, be interrupted or discontinued.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-16)  (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 50.52  STREET WORKS; UTILITY RELOCATION; NOTICE TO UTILITY DEPARTMENT.



   All persons handling street work, such as grading, re-grading, filling
and trenching or paving and the like, shall give the Director written notice
in case it becomes necessary during the work to remove, displace or change
any water or sewer mains, taps, pipes, fittings, meters, gates, valves or
other appurtenances that may interfere with the prosecution of the work. 
Where the amount of work to be done does not exceed the amount of $300, the
notice shall be delivered not less than 48 hours before the services of the
Department are required.  Where the amount of work does exceed the amount of
$300, notice shall be delivered not less than 5 days before the services of
the Department are required.  Failure to furnish the notice shall make the
person liable to the Department in case damages should result from the
failure.  Costs and responsibility for the protection and relocation of
existing utilities shall be borne by the person or firm requiring the
relocation.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-17)  (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 50.53  PROTECTION OF WATER SUPPLY AND SEWERAGE SYSTEMS.



   The Director and the town’s Building Official may, with the approval
of the Town Manager, make such additional rules and regulations in
furtherance of the purposes of this code, and not inconsistent with specific
provisions of this code, as may be deemed necessary to properly protect the
town water supply system or the sewage collection, treatment and recharge
facilities.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-18)  (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 50.54  SERVICES AND MATERIALS TO BE PROPERTY OF UTILITY DEPARTMENT;
CONSUMERS TO PAY FOR DAMAGES.



   All water and/or sewer service and water meters and all materials
supplied by the Department in the installation or repair of any meter and all
materials supplied in the installation of any service connection with town
water and/or sewer mains shall remain at all times the property of the
Department and shall be maintained, repaired and renewed by the Department
when rendered unserviceable through normal use.  Where replacements, repairs
to pipes, meters or other materials are rendered necessary by the acts,
negligence or carelessness of the consumer or any member of his or her
family, guest or person in his or her employ, any expenses caused to the
Department for the repair shall be charged against and collected from the
consumer.  The Department may refuse to furnish water through the service
until the account is paid in full.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-19)  (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 50.55  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONSUMER TO SUPPLY WATER OR SEWER SERVICE TO
OTHERS.



   No owner or lessee of property supplied with water and/or sewer service
from town mains shall furnish water or sewer service to other persons or
property without first obtaining written permission to do so from the
Director.  The permit may be issued only for emergencies or other unusual
circumstances on a temporary basis.  No permit will be issued until the
person desiring to use the water or sewer has obtained and filed with the
Director the written consent of the owner or lessee of the property from
which the service is to be taken, stating the location of the property by
street and address number and the location by street and address number of
the property to be supplied and stating the purpose for which it will be
used.  Upon receipt of a proper permit from the owner or lessee of the
property from which the water or sewer service is to be taken, the Director
may issue a temporary permit for a specific time frame allowing the service
to be supplied to other persons or property.



(2001 Code, § 15-1-20)  (Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 50.56  EFFLUENT COLLECTION, TREATMENT AND RECHARGE POLICY.



   (A)   All new developments, subdivided and unsubdivided, containing
1 or more lots of less than 1 acre shall be required to construct an effluent
collection system as approved by the town and connect to the town’s
Effluent CTR system.



   (B)   The town will design, build and operate an effluent CTR system
on its own schedule.  If a development requires additional effluent
collection, treatment and recharge capacity prior to the time such services
or capacity is available from the town, the development shall provide
financial resources sufficient to construct the additional capacity as
requested, at their own expense, at the town’s facilities only.  The
developments shall receive reimbursement of financial resources provided
according to the schedule as per the development agreement.



   (C)   New development, subdivided and unsubdivided, shall be
required to install septic tanks as the first stage of wastewater treatment
and install lines and other required components to connect with the town’s
effluent CTR system as system collection lines are extended to within 400
feet of the septic tank. They shall be required to maintain their septic
tanks in proper working order as directed by the town as part of the town
wastewater treatment process.



   (D)   Current septic tank owners, at the effective date of this
section, shall be required to connect to the effluent CTR system as system
collection lines are extended to within 400 feet of the septic tank. They
shall be required to maintain their septic tanks in proper working order as
directed by the town as part of the town wastewater treatment process.



   (E)   At the time of building permit application for a new residence
or a new commercial building, the permitee shall pay an effluent CTR system
hookup fee as adopted in the fee schedule(s), which may be amended from time
to time.



   (F)   All new developments, subdivided and unsubdivided, shall be
required to demonstrate adequate financial capability and assurance, as
approved by the Town of Chino Valley, to design and construct the effluent
CTR system components sufficient to serve the new development and other areas
as approved by the town.



   (G)   Package wastewater treatment plants shall not be allowed.



   (H)   The town reaffirms its ownership and control of all effluent
produced within the town’s Regional 208 Planning Area.



(Ord. 485, passed 12-13-2001)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER AND SEWERS



Section




Private Water and Sewer Systems




   51.001   Definitions



   51.002   Private sewer systems; approval Required; violation;
enforcement.




Water Wells




   51.020   Land boundaries




Water Use Policy




   51.035   Commercial water credits



   51.036   Residential assured water supply



   51.037   Development; allocation of water credits



   51.038   Development non-performance; forfeiture of water rights



   51.039   Assured water supply; application of existing rights and
transfer to town



   51.040   Limitation of usage



   51.041   Development of water system master plan




Water and Sewer Main Extensions




   51.055   Approval by Town Engineer and Public Works Director required



   51.056   Main extensions; connection with distribution system and
collection systems



   51.057   Extensions; construction, ownership and maintenance



   51.058   Extensions; policy of town generally



   51.059   Repayments; mains by developers (approach mains)



   51.060   Extensions in subdivisions, single lots and sublot
developments and all other developments



   51.061   Approach mains; bids for construction and methods of
repayment



   51.062   Extensions; inapplicability of provisions to existing
agreements; no interest to be paid




Water Service Connections




   51.075   Connection to water mains required, existing residential
optional



   51.076   Buildings to have separate service connections; exceptions



   51.077   Unauthorized connections with water mains



   51.078   Service connections on existing mains



   51.079   Developer to install service connections on new mains in
new subdivisions



   51.080   Connection of existing service to new main



   51.081   Changes to existing service connection




Meters




   51.095   Services to be metered



   51.096   Location of meters



   51.097   Cost of changing size of meter of service



   51.098   Removal of meters



   51.099   Replacement of meters



   51.100   Maintenance and repair; consumer to pay for damages



   51.101   Testing meter accuracy




Backflow Prevention




   51.115   Declaration of policy; authorization



   51.116   Cross connections from or to source of water supply other
than that of town



   51.117   Responsibility for backflow prevention control



   51.118   Backflow prevention methods



   51.119   Appeals



   51.120   Remedies




Wastewater Collection, Treatment, and Recharge Policy




   51.135   Wastewater collection required; generally



   51.136   Wastewater collection; treatment and recharge; schedule of
construction



   51.137   [Reserved]



   51.138   CTR system buy-in fee



   51.139   [Reserved]



   51.140   [Reserved]



   51.141   [Reserved]



   51.142   Effluent; control and ownership




Connections to Public Sewers, Pumping




   51.156   Permit required



   51.157   Application for sewer tap, sewer dye test



   51.158   Public Works Director to approve design, quantity,
location, size and construction of sewer services



   51.159   Special provisions for installing sewer taps in new
subdivisions and developments



   51.160   Installation of sewer taps



   51.161   Property owner responsible for cleaning, repair and
replacement of building sewers and connections



   51.162   Sewer service line repair and replacement in the public
right-of-way



   51.163   Pumping charges; basin boundaries




Use of Public Sewers and Limitations




   51.175   Unsanitary disposal of excrement prohibited



   51.176   Treatment of polluted wastes required



   51.177   General user requirements



   51.178   Authority of Director to establish prohibitions and
effluent limitations



   51.179   Preliminary treatment; required approval; maintenance of
facilities



   51.180   Interceptors; requirements; type, capacity, location;
construction of grease and oil interceptors; maintenance



   51.181   Control manholes



   51.182   Discharges to be reported



   51.183   Tests and analyses




Industrial and Pretreatment Requirements




   51.195   General industrial user requirements



   51.196   Significant industrial user requirements



   51.197   Special discharges



   51.198   Authority of the Director



   51.199   Permit appeals process



   51.200   Confidential information




Accidental Discharge




   51.215   Permittee provides protection



   51.216   Permittee shall notify town of accidental discharge



   51.217   Permittee will notify employees



   51.218   Permittee shall label accidental discharge points




Haulage of Non-Hazardous Liquid Wastes




   51.230   Prohibition on wastes from industrial sites discharged to
CTR system



   51.231   Permit required



   51.232   Exemption



   51.233   Authority of the Director; permittee limitations and
requirements



   51.234   Mixing of non-hazardous liquid waste



   51.235   Hazardous liquid waste



   51.236   Non-hazardous liquid waste fees



   51.237   Cessation of acceptance of non-hazardous liquid wastes



   51.238   Violation




Utility Fees




   51.250   Utility service deposits



   51.251   Water system new service buy-in fee



   51.252   Water service connection and meter installation charges



   51.253   Sewer system new service buy-in fees



   51.254   Determination of wastewater quality



   51.255   Other user charge provisions



   51.256   Other sewer service charges



   51.257   Low income citizen’s rate



   51.258   Residential water rates



   51.259   Commercial and industrial water rates



   51.260   Rates for private fire connections



   51.261   Fees and assessments due




Enforcement




   51.275   Interference with or obstructing facilities



   51.276   Authority of Utility Department to turn off water and/or
sewer service



   51.277   Rules and regulations to be enforced, exception



   51.278   Criminal penalty



   51.279   Civil penalty



   51.280   Remedies



   51.281   Effective date



Lien Enforcement



   51.290   Lien enforcement for unpaid utility user fees




PRIVATE WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS




§ 51.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACRE.  43,560 square feet including utility and easements for ingress
and egress.



   LOT.  A parcel of land occupied by 1 building and the accessory
buildings or uses customarily incident to it, including such open spaces as
are arranged and designed to be used in connection with the buildings.



   PACKAGE WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT.  A decentralized wastewater
treatment system utilizing biological extended aeration principle of
operation, or other activated sludge treatment process.



   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.  A septic tank system with leach field.



   PRIVATE WELL.  A domestic well serving a single family only.



   SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING UNIT.  A detached residential dwelling unit
designed for and occupied by 1 family only.



(2001 Code, § 9-7-1)  (Am. Ord. 16-815, passed 3-22-2016)



§ 51.002  PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEMS; APPROVAL REQUIRED; VIOLATION; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Except as provided in this section, it is unlawful to
construct or maintain within the town any privy, vault, cesspool, package
wastewater treatment plant, or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage, except that a private sewage disposal system constructed
and maintained according to standards prescribed by the town or appropriate
county agency may continue operating as long as it is viable and compliant
with town and county standards.



   (B)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available within the
town, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system, in full compliance and as approved by the Yavapai County Health
Department and ADEQ.



   (C)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
disposal system located within the town, the owner shall first obtain a
written permit from the town and appropriate county agent.  A permit for
operation of a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the town or county
inspector, as appropriate.



   (D)   The appropriate town or county agency shall be allowed to
inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the proper agency when the work is
ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.



   (E)   A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the town or
appropriate county agency at the time the application is filed.



   (F)   On-site wastewater treatment systems may be allowed, at the
town's discretion, in areas north of granite creek lane. The design,
construction and operation of any such system shall be at the sole expense of
the developer. At such time as the town's collection lines are extended to
within 400 feet of the subject development, the developer shall connect to
the town's line, pay the appropriate buy-in fee and close the private system
in accordance with ADEQ procedures, all at the developer's sole expense.



   (G)   Violation; enforcement.  Any person allegedly violating this
section shall be notified by the town or county in writing stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time for the satisfactory
correction thereof.  The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
the notice, permanently cease all violations. If the violation continues past
the date or period of time shown on the notice, a civil citation may be
issued as set forth in § 10.99 of this code.  Thereafter, each day the
violation continues constitutes a separate violation.



(2001 Code, § 9-7-2)  (Am. Ord. 16-815, passed 3-22-2016)  Penalty, see
10.99




WATER WELLS




§ 51.020  LAND BOUNDARIES.



   From and after December 15, 1972, no further land within the boundaries
of the town shall be purchased or leased for the purpose of drilling a water
well, or for pumping from an existing well, to secure water for transmission
or carriage to another city, town or using agency outside the Granite Creek
Critical Water Basin, Yavapai County, Arizona.



(2001 Code, Art. 9-8)




WATER USE POLICY




§ 51.035  COMMERCIAL WATER CREDITS.



   Non-residential commercial water users may lease water credits from the
town’s water portfolio provided that such developments allocate at least
75% of the square footage to retail sales tenants, and provided that sewer
collection services are available within 400 feet of the property line or are
scheduled to be constructed within 5 years. The entire commercial development
shall be required to connect to the CTR system and pay all fees and satisfy
additional conditions as approved by the town.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.036  RESIDENTIAL ASSURED WATER SUPPLY.



   All new residential subdivisions shall demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the town  an application has been submitted to the Arizona Department of
Water Resources for a 100-year Assured Water Supply for any new development
in the Prescott Active Management Area with the filing for preliminary plat
approval with the town.  The 100-year assured water supply certificate,
issued by ADWR, shall be submitted with the final plat application.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.037  DEVELOPMENT; ALLOCATION OF WATER CREDITS.



   Allocation of water credits to development from the town’s water
portfolio will only be considered using the following minimum criteria
(additional conditions may be required):



   (A)   The development must provide a water budget that meets or
exceeds the water use and water conservation goals of the Arizona Department
of Water Resources’ Third Management Plan for Prescott Active Management
Area, 2000-2010.



   (B)   The development shall participate in the town’s CTR program,
or be able to participate within 5 years per the towns’ then current and
adopted Capital Improvement Plan, at the town’s discretion, and construct
dry service laterals and wastewater collection main lines.



   (C)   The development shall pay the effluent CTR system buy-in fees,
according to the then adopted fee schedule(s).



   (D)   The development shall pay a water portfolio access fee
according to the then adopted fee schedule(s).



   (E)   The initial water portfolio access fee shall be paid at the
rate set by Council resolution  per acre-foot for a 100 year assured water
supply. The Town Council may adjust this rate from time to time by resolution.



   (F)   The development shall construct, as approved by the town
Engineer and Public Works Director, a central water delivery system,
including production and storage as required, at their own expense, which
ownership shall transfer to the Town of Chino Valley at no cost to the town
at the final acceptance of the development infrastructure or at a date
negotiated by the developer and the town at the time of request for
development.



   (G)   The development shall provide, to the town’s satisfaction,
the financial capability and assurances to complete the development in a
timely manner, as approved by the Town of Chino Valley.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.038  DEVELOPMENT NON-PERFORMANCE; FORFEITURE OF WATER RIGHTS.



   Once a development has received a water allocation from the town’s
water portfolio, the developer shall perform as per the development
agreement.  If the developer does not perform as per the development
agreement, and begin construction within 2 years, the developer’s town
water allocation shall be forfeited and no fees shall be refunded.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.039  ASSURED WATER SUPPLY; APPLICATION OF EXISTING RIGHTS AND TRANSFER
TO TOWN.



   (A)   All water rights applicable to a specific parcel of land must
be utilized to demonstrate a 100-year assured water supply for that parcel,
before the developer is allowed to acquire any water rights or credits from
the town for that parcel.



   (B)   Parties seeking access to the town’s water portfolio are
required to transfer to the town, at no cost to the town, prior to the
recording of final plat, all water rights and credits used by the developer
to demonstrate a 100-year assured water supply for that subdivision.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.040  LIMITATION OF USAGE.



   The town at its discretion may make its water, effluent rights and
credits available for purchase by developers submitting a preliminary
subdivision plat.  The purchased water rights shall be utilized only for the
platted subdivision, and may not be sold or transferred without the town’s
express written permission.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.041  DEVELOPMENT OF WATER SYSTEM MASTER PLAN.



   (A)   The town will develop a water system master plan to identify
the general location and sizing of all central water system infrastructure
required throughout certain designated areas of the community.



   (B)   The developer will be responsible for all costs for the
design, and construction of all water system infrastructure in general
conformance with the master plan, or any revisions thereto.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)




WATER AND SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS




§ 51.055  APPROVAL BY TOWN ENGINEER AND PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR REQUIRED.



   No public water or sewer extensions shall be made until the plans and
specifications are approved by the town Engineer and the Public Works
Director. Water and sewer main extensions shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with ADEQ Bulletin 10, ADEQ Bulletin 11, AWWA Standards, YAG
Standards and MAG standards, as appropriate. With the concurrence of the Town
Engineer, the Director may authorize variances from the standards and
specifications.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.056  MAIN EXTENSIONS; CONNECTION WITH DISTRIBUTION AND COLLECTION
SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Persons desiring to connect water and sewer main extensions to
the existing distribution and collection systems shall make application to
the Utility Department in writing and shall pay all established fees and
charges.



   (B)   In new subdivisions, shopping centers, industrial tracts or
other similar developments, the developer shall furnish and install, to town
specifications, all water mains, valves, service lines, sewer lines, manholes
and all required appurtenances for each type of main extension within the
boundary of the designated area of development.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.057  EXTENSIONS; CONSTRUCTION, OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   In new subdivisions and developments where public sewers
and/or water mains are authorized by the Director, the mains, service lines
and appurtenances, including storage tanks and pump stations, shall be
designed and constructed at the developer’s expense in accordance with
plans and specifications approved by the Director. Review and inspection fees
shall be paid in accordance with provisions of the town code. The costs for
the preparation of the plans and specifications, the staking of the location
of the lines, the cost of inspection and testing, the cost of acquiring
rights-of-way and easements, and preparation of as-built plans shall be the
responsibility of the developer. The town will perform inspection during
construction.



   (B)   Subsequent to final approval and acceptance of construction,
the person responsible for the construction of the extension shall relinquish
all right to, or interest in, the ownership of the extension and the
Department shall exercise complete control over such extension.



   (C)   Upon acceptance of construction, water main extensions and
service connections shall be maintained by the Utility Department, up to and
including the consumer’s meter and shall be operated by the Department, as
part of the distribution system. The Department shall maintain all public
sewer lines, pumping stations, treatment facilities and other appurtenances,
except for the package pumping stations as may be required for individual
residences or businesses to access to the gravity system. The Department
shall exercise complete operational control over all such extensions and
appurtenances.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.058  EXTENSIONS; POLICY OF TOWN GENERALLY.



   The water and sewer main extension policy of the town for areas beyond
present town trunk mains and the policy to be followed in connection
therewith shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, as follows:  The
town desires to encourage the development of undeveloped areas through
repayment for extra costs incurred in construction of “off-site” mains
that are necessary to serve new developments, and bring service to existing
developments, in order to distribute the costs of extending the mains between
2 or more developers. This policy would apply where a main extension was
constructed by 1 developer and connected to or utilized at a later date by 1
or more developers or property owners. For this purpose, a water or sewer
main is defined as a main constructed from the town’s existing point of
connection to, and along, the frontage or boundary of the development with
the capacity to serve additional developments. However, the developer must
pay all costs for engineering design and construction of mains of such size
as to afford adequate capacity and service for specific “service areas”
to be served by such mains.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.059  REPAYMENTS; MAINS BY DEVELOPERS (APPROACH MAINS).



   (A)   In the event that a proposed new development or project finds
it necessary to extend water or sewer mains from a distant point in order to
serve the project or development, the cost of the main extension, designated
as an “approach main”, will be included in a separate agreement. Should
others in the service area desire to join with the developer in constructing
the proposed “approach main”, the agreement will be considered as
including such others. The town will limit the maximum size of the approach
main entirely at the developer’s costs to 12 inches in diameter for water
mains and 18 inches in diameter for sewer mains.



   (B)   The town reserves the right to increase the diameter of the
approach main, if it deems advisable, but under this condition the town will
participate in the cost of the difference between the larger size and the
maximum size stated in division (A) above so that the laid cost of the
approach main of larger pipe diameter to the developer will not exceed the
laid cost of the same extension if it were 12 or 18 inches in diameter, as
appropriate.



   (C)   The final detailed plans and specifications for the
“approach main” extension must be approved by the Town Engineer and
Public Works Director prior to construction. The engineering cost for the
preparation of plans, specifications, ADEQ and/or Yavapai County Review fees,
and permit fees, and construction staking of the “approach main” incurred
by the developer may be included in the agreed upon construction costs as
provided for in this section. The plans and bid line items for the approach
mains shall be clearly and distinctly separated from all other on-site plan
sheets and bid items.



   (D)   The cost of distribution mains within the boundary of the
development shall not be eligible for repayment. Where booster pumps and
storage tanks are necessary to maintain reserve, peak and fire flow capacity
and/or to maintain adequate pressures in the water mains due to the
development being near or above the hydraulic gradient in the town service
area, the developer shall provide adequate land, and construct, at his or her
own expense, the necessary storage facility and booster pumping station to
town specifications. The town will assume ownership, maintenance and
operation of the property and facilities upon completion and acceptance by
the town.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.060  EXTENSIONS IN SUBDIVISIONS, SINGLE LOTS AND SUBLOT DEVELOPMENTS
AND ALL OTHER DEVELOPMENTS.



   Where main line trunk sewers and/or water mains exist adjacent to the
nearest property line of a single, existing residential lot, created with a
dry lot subdivision or by the lot split process or any other method, but no
water or sewer main exists along the frontage of the lot, and the developer
or owner of the lot requests water and/or sewer service, sufficient length of
main shall be constructed by the developer or owner to extend the main from
the point of connection at the existing main to the far property line of the
lot. If the Director determines after a review of the size, length and
location of the line that an approach main repayment agreement is practical
and warranted, and the applicant desires to enter into such an agreement, the
new main(s) shall be constructed to and across the entire lot frontage.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.061  APPROACH MAINS; BIDS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND METHODS OF REPAYMENT.



   (A)   Approach mains shall be procured by the developer in
accordance with the provisions of the Town of Chino Valley procurement code.
The approach main reimbursement cost shall be estimated by the developer’s
design engineer and approved by the Town Engineer to determine the applicable
method of procurement to be utilized. These are as follows:



      (1)   Total cost less than $5,000. Purchases of goods and
services totaling less than $5,000 shall require the solicitation of 3 oral
bids. In some cases 3 bids may not be secured, in which case all attempts
shall be documented and any non-bidders listed as “no bid submitted”. The
low bidder shall provide a detailed, written breakdown of the total bid cost,
which will be used to determine the total reimbursement allowed.



      (2)   Total cost greater than $5,000 but less than or equal to
$10,000. Purchases of $5,000 up to $10,000 for goods and services shall
require 3 written bids providing a detailed, written breakdown of the total
bid cost, which will be used to determine the total reimbursement allowed.
The Director shall review the bids for accuracy and completeness and, if
satisfied, recommend award to the low bidder. The Town Council will have
final authority to award the bid and the reimbursement agreement.



      (3)   Total cost greater than $10,000. Purchases of goods and
services with a value greater than $10,000 shall be procured through
competitive sealed bids.



         (a)   A notice of solicitation of construction for and
payment by the developer shall be posted at town hall and advertised, as a
minimum, in local newspapers at least 10 days prior to the date set for
receipt of bids. The solicitation may also be mailed directly to all
responsible prospective bidders who may have expressed interest in similar
type projects.



         (b)   The notice shall state the date, time and place of
opening submitted bids, along with a general description of the services
required.



         (c)   The notice shall include a contact name, telephone
number and location where project plans and specifications, along with the
bid submittal package, may be obtained.



         (d)   Bids shall be submitted at the location specified
in the solicitation, prior to the time specified for opening, in a sealed
envelope clearly marked as a bid for the specific project name and the name
of the person or firm submitting the bid. Any bid not received within the
time period allowed shall be rejected and returned unopened.



         (e)   All bids shall be publicly opened at the time and
place specified, and read aloud. The bids shall be reviewed by the Town
Engineer for completeness and any mathematical errors. A tabulation of all
bids received shall be posted in town hall for public inspection.



         (f)   The town and the developer each reserve the right
to reject any or all bids. The construction cost of the approach mains shall
be determined prior to the commencement of construction and shall be approved
by the Public Works Director for inclusion in the repayment agreement. The
Town Council shall have final authority to approve the repayment agreement
and cost.



         (g)   All construction of approach mains and
appurtenances shall be in accordance with standards and procedures of the
Town of Chino Valley.



   (B)   (1)   Buy-in fee.  Based upon the cost of construction
determined under § 51.059, the developer may be credited for reimbursement
the cost of utility buy-in fees at the then current rate as established by
Council resolution. Agreements for extensions may be executed with 1 or more
developers as circumstances dictate. The total amount reimbursed shall not
exceed the buy-in cost unless specifically approved and budgeted by Council.
In the event the buy-in exceeds the cost of construction, no cash
reimbursement shall be paid to the developer and the balance of the buy-in
fees shall be due and paid to the town.



      (2)   Line charge.  Where a utility line extends past several
properties, and a multi-party extension agreement is not executed, the Town
Council may provide by resolution a charge be placed on the line to recover
additional expenses that exceed the buy-in fees or to recover town
contributions. Such charge shall apply to all subsequent developers and
property owners that connect to the utility line. Line charges so applied
shall be for a period not to exceed 10 years. Line charges collected for
amounts in excess of the original developers construction cost, and paid by
the original developer for the extension, shall be reimbursed to the original
developer.



      (3)   Improvement or community facility districts.  Where
either of the above methods are not applicable due to the scope or cost of
anticipated construction costs, a community facilities district or an
improvement district may be formed in accordance with provisions of state and
local ordinances.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.062  EXTENSIONS; INAPPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS TO EXISTING AGREEMENTS,
NO INTEREST TO BE PAID.



   This policy is not retroactive to existing agreements signed under
previous policies. No interest will be applicable on, nor applied to, the
agreed “approach main” construction cost.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)




WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS




§ 51.075  CONNECTION TO WATER MAINS REQUIRED; EXISTING RESIDENTIAL OPTIONAL.



   (A)   Where commercial, industrial and other non-residential
property is located upon a street in which a water main is laid, the property
shall be connected with the water system. These services shall extend at
right angles from the main to the curbside, or property line, and shall be
installed in accordance with town standard details.



   (B)   A new home on residential property located upon a street where
a town water main is located shall be connected with the town water system.
The connection shall not prohibit the construction and operation of a
non-exempt well in accordance with state ADWR regulations.



   (C)   Where a new water main is laid on a street with existing
residential homes that have an on-site domestic well, the properties may
elect to continue use of their on-site well in lieu of connecting to the town
system. In the event that the properties do connect to the town system,
either at the time of original line construction or at some later date, the
on-site well shall be properly sealed and abandoned. In accordance with ADWR
and ADEQ standards, the abandonment shall be inspected, confirmed and
documented by the Utility Department.



   (D)   The number, location, manner of construction and sizes of all
service connections shall be subject to the approval of the Director.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.076  BUILDINGS TO HAVE SEPARATE SERVICE CONNECTIONS; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Every separate building supplied with town water and/or sewer
service must have its own separate connection with the town mains, except 2
or more buildings located on the same lot or on contiguous lots under single
ownership, or property known as a court, apartment house, trailer court or
other similar developments covering more than 1 lot may be, upon written
permission granted by the Director, supplied through a single metered
connection with the town main as long as single ownership continues. Upon
change from such single ownership, a new separate connection shall be
immediately made for the building or premises having the indirect connection.



   (B)   (1)   In case there is no water main on any street on which
the premises abut, and the consumer first in order of service from the main
guarantees in writing the payment of water charges for all parcels of
property so served, the Director may permit the connection to be installed,
upon payment of applicable buy-in fees, or remain until a water and/or sewer
main is laid in the abutting street.



      (2)   The Utility Department shall give 30 days notice in
writing to all consumers served through the service before enforcing this
section by cutting off water.



   (C)   The Utility Department shall have the right, at its sole
discretion, to install a single service pipe of sufficient size from the main
to the back of curb to supply not more than 2 separate properties connecting
to separate meters. The size of the service pipe shall be determined by the
Public Works Director and the Building Official.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.077  UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS WITH WATER MAINS.



   No person shall connect any pipe, tube or other instrument with any
main, service pipe, conduit or flume for the purpose of taking and conducting
water belonging to the town, without a permit or authorized service
connection from the Utility Department. Violators shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.078  SERVICE CONNECTIONS ON EXISTING MAINS.



   Where all or part of a new subdivision is served by existing town water
mains, only authorized personnel of the Utility Department shall make taps
for service connections, unless specifically authorized in writing by the
Director.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.079  DEVELOPER TO INSTALL SERVICE CONNECTIONS ON NEW MAINS IN NEW
SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   In all new subdivisions or other developments where there are
no existing town water mains, developers are required to have their
contractors install all 3/4 and/or 1-inch service connections simultaneously
with the installation of the subdivider’s water mains. Services of 1-1/2
inches and/or 2-inches may also be installed by the developer’s contractor
if so approved by the Director.



   (B)   Services larger than 2 inches shall have a resilient seat
shutoff valve with a valve box.



   (C)   In all new subdivisions or other developments where the
developer’s contractor installs the service connections and meter sets,
application must be made to the town Utility Department, as otherwise
provided in this code, for installation of water meters.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.080  CONNECTION OF EXISTING SERVICE TO NEW MAIN.



   Where a new main has been laid in any street, the owners of premises on
the street who are being supplied through temporary services, and have paid
the regular buy-in and service installation charges, shall be connected to
the new main by the Utility Department without further charge.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.081  CHANGES TO EXISTING SERVICE CONNECTION.



   When new buildings are to be erected on the site of old ones and it is
desired to increase the size of, to change the location of the old service
connection, or where a service connection to any premise is abandoned or no
longer used, the Department may immediately reclaim and disconnect the
connection at the main, after which, should a service connection be required
to the premises, a new service shall be placed only upon the owner making
application and paying for a new service in the regular manner as described
elsewhere in this chapter.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)




METERS




§ 51.095  SERVICES TO BE METERED.



   (A)   Whenever a service shall be installed, connecting any property
or water using equipment with the water supply of the town, the water will be
supplied to the property or equipment through meter only, except as provided
in § 51.260 for sprinkler type fire prevention systems.



   (B)   A separate water meter is required for new services
established after the date of this chapter for the following:



      (1)   Landscaped watering (irrigation) as defined in § 50.01
of all landscaped areas greater than 10,000 square feet; or



      (2)   All water features, as defined in § 50.02, having a
maximum daily water consumptive use of 500 gallons per day.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.096  LOCATION OF METERS.



   All meters of the Utility Department shall be located on the back of
the sidewalk side of the curb line, if such exists, or at the property line
if the curbs do not exist in accordance with standard construction details as
approved by the Public Works Director.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.097  COST OF CHANGING SIZE OF METER OF SERVICE.



   In case a larger or smaller meter or service is applied for, other than
the 1 already in service, the applicant shall pay for the installation of the
new service in accordance with the schedule of charges as established by the
Director, subject to the approval of the Town Manager. The original tap shall
be killed and the applicant given a refund for the old meter removed by the
Department, in accordance with a refund schedule approved by the Director.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.098  REMOVAL OF METERS.



   Meters, when installed to service any property, shall be removed only
by an authorized employee of the Utility Department or upon order of the
Director. For the violation of this provision the water shall be turned off
and a charge equal to the costs incurred by the town for restoring the meter
to its authorized and designated location must be paid before the water is
again turned on. In case the meter has been removed by a plumber or other
contractor, his or her plumber’s business license may be revoked and not
again issued until the charge has been paid.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.099  REPLACEMENT OF METERS.



   The Utility Department may replace any meter at such time as it may see
fit and shall be the judge of the size and type of any water meter installed.
In the event there is an excessive rate of flow through an installed meter
the town may require the owner, at his or her expense, to install a meter of
adequate size.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.100  MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR; CONSUMER TO PAY FOR DAMAGES.



   The Utility Department shall maintain and repair all meters when
rendered unserviceable through normal use and shall renew them if necessary.
Where replacements, repairs or adjustments of any meter are determined
necessary by the act, neglect or carelessness of the owner or occupant of any
premises, and this shall include any damage to meters due to hot water,
breaking meter seals, tampering with working parts of the meter and the like,
any expense caused to the Utility Department thereby shall be charged against
and collected from the owner of the premises or person supplied. The
Department may refuse to furnish water through the service until all charges
are paid in full.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.101  TESTING METER ACCURACY.



   Any consumer may have the accuracy of his or her meter examined and
tested by the Utility Department upon receipt by the town of the established
fee for such work.  The Utility Department will examine and test the meter,
and, if found to be inaccurate in excess of 2% of water passing through it,
such meter shall be removed and replaced at the town’s expense.  The
consumer may be present when the test is performed.  If the meter is found
to be inaccurate in excess of 2% of water passing through it, the billing for
the current period will be adjusted in the manner deemed appropriate by the
Director, and the testing fee will be refunded to the consumer.  If the
meter is found to be accurate, the town will retain the testing fee.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)




BACKFLOW PREVENTION




§ 51.115  DECLARATION OF POLICY; AUTHORIZATION.



   It is determined that danger to the public health, safety and welfare
resulting from contamination or pollution of the public potable water supply
system requires that measures be adopted to protect that system by
authorizing town officials to:



   (A)   Protect the public potable water supply from the possibility
of contamination or pollution by preventing the backflow of contaminants or
pollutants into the public water supply system;



   (B)   Promote the awareness and elimination of cross connections,
actual or potential, of a customer’s internal potable water system with the
public potable water supply system;



   (C)   Provide for a continuing program of backflow prevention
control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public
potable water supply system;



   (D)   Provide for the monitoring and enforcement of a continuing
program of backflow prevention which will prevent the contamination or
pollution of the public potable water supply; and



   (E)   Comply with the State requirements, contained in A.A.C. Title
18, Chapter 4, Article 232 (R18-4-232) entitled “Operation: Backflow
Prevention” that was promulgated by ADEQ with an effective date of August
8, 1991, and is incorporated herein by reference (hereinafter referred to as
State Rule R-18-4-232). One copy shall be on file with the Town Clerk, the
Building Department and the Public Works Department



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.116  CROSS CONNECTIONS FROM OR TO SOURCE OF WATER SUPPLY OTHER THAN
THAT OF TOWN.



   It shall be unlawful for any customer to cause a connection to be made
or to allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever between the town water
supply and any other source of supply without the approval of the Director.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.117  RESPONSIBILITY FOR BACKFLOW PREVENTION CONTROL.



   (A)   Public Works Director. It shall be the responsibility of the
Public Works Director to protect the public water supply by applying the
remedies and enforcement provisions set forth in § 51.120.



   (B)   Building Department. It shall be the responsibility of the
town Building Official, as head of the Building Department, to enforce
certain provisions of this chapter as follows:



      (1)   The Building Official shall administer and enforce all
applicable cross connection control provisions of the town of Chino Valley
Plumbing Code, and amendments, including issuance of permits for all required
backflow prevention assemblies.



      (2)   The Building Official shall determine, in conjunction
with the Utility Department, whether a facility is a listed facility or
activity in § 51.118 and therefore requires backflow protection. This
responsibility includes inspection as necessary of all existing facilities to
be connected to the town water services.



      (3)   The Building Official shall, as a condition of issuance
of any building permit, require installation of appropriate backflow
prevention as required by § 51.118 and the town’s Plumbing Code.



      (4)   The Building Official and Public Works Director shall
determine the type and location of all backflow prevention assemblies in
accordance with this chapter and all other codes and ordinances of the town.



      (5)   The Utility Department shall keep accurate and adequate
records of each location of an approved backflow prevention assembly,
required tests and any subsequent maintenance or repair thereof.



   (C)   Customer. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to
prevent contaminants or pollutants from entering the customer’s building
potable water system and the public potable water system. The customer’s
responsibility starts at the point of service delivery from the public
potable water system and includes all water piping systems. The customer is
required to properly locate, install, test and maintain each backflow
assembly in good working condition and shall provide the necessary
inspections and tests to assure that the assembly is operating properly.
These responsibilities include, but are not limited to, the following:



      (1)   The customer shall obtain a permit from the Building
Department for the installation of any backflow prevention assembly, for the
modification or relocation of the assembly, or for the modification of any
plumbing system.



      (2)   The customer shall test all backflow prevention
assemblies at least once a year, except that the Building Official or the
Public Works Director may require more frequent testing if warranted. As to
fire lines or fire sprinkler systems with backflow prevention assemblies, the
initial and annual tests shall be performed by a certified tester who is also
permitted by the Fire Marshal to test fire lines or fire sprinkler systems.
The initial and annual test shall include a full flow test. It is the
responsibility of the customer to test and submit all testing results to the
Utility Department. If the test reveals the assembly to be defective or in an
unsatisfactory operating condition, the customer shall perform all repairs or
replacement, to the satisfaction of the Public works Director, so that the
assembly is in satisfactory operating condition.



      (3)   If the Public Works Director, the Building Official or
the customer becomes aware during the interim period between annual tests
that an assembly is defective or in unsatisfactory operating condition, the
customer shall perform all repairs, replacement and testing, to the
satisfaction of the Director, so that the customer has an assembly in
satisfactory operating condition.



      (4)   Assembly testing shall be performed only by a certified
tester. Testing requirements shall be in accordance with the procedures
outlined in the Eighth Edition of the University of Southern California
Manual of Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USC-FCCCHR or the
Foundation) Los Angeles, CA, June 1988 (hereinafter “USC manual”, § 9.
The USC manual is incorporated herein by reference. One copy of the USC
manual shall be on file with the Town Clerk and the Building Department.



      (5)   The customer shall be responsible for submitting copies
of testing records pertaining to assemblies, on forms approved by the Utility
Department, by the date specified by the Utility Department. The customer
shall be required to retain all records for a minimum of 3 years from the
date that a copy of the record was provided to the Utility Department.



      (6)   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed by the
customer, at the customer’s expense, in compliance with the standards and
specifications adopted by the town.



      (7)   In the event the customer’s or the public water system
is contaminated or polluted due to a cross connection or other cause, and the
same comes to the knowledge of the customer, the Public Works Director and
the Yavapai County Health Department shall be promptly notified by the
customer so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the
contamination.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.118  BACKFLOW PREVENTION METHODS.



   Unless otherwise specifically designated by the Public Works Director:



   (A)   An approved backflow prevention shall be 1 of the following
types:



      (1)   Air gap. An unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the opening of any pipe or faucet supplying potable
water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of
the tank, plumbing fixture or other device. An approved air gap shall be at
least double the diameter of the supply pipe or faucet and in no case less
than 1 inch.



      (2)   Reduced pressure principle assembly (hereinafter
“RP”). An assembly containing 2 independently acting approved check
valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent
pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and at
the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include
properly located test cocks equipped with brass plugs and tightly closing
resilient seat shut-off valves at each end of the assembly.



      (3)   Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (hereinafter
“PVB”). An assembly containing an independently operating, loaded check
valve and an independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the
discharge side of the check valve. The assembly shall be equipped with
properly located test cocks equipped with brass plugs and tightly closing
resilient seat shut-off valves at each end of the assembly.



      (4)   Double check valve assembly (hereinafter “DC”). An
assembly containing 2 independently acting approved check valves including
properly located test cocks equipped with brass plugs and tightly closing
resilient seat shut-off valves at each end of the assembly.



   (B)   An approved backflow prevention method is required for the
activities or facilities listed in this paragraph that are connected to the
public water system. The backflow prevention method shall be in accordance
with that specified in § 7 of the USC Manual. The location shall be as close
as practical to the point of service delivery except that the customer may
request that the approved backflow prevention method be located internally
within the activity or facility. The customer must demonstrate that the
proposed location will adequately protect the public water supply as well as
satisfy the applicable requirements of this subchapter. For purposes of this
division, the listed facilities, equipment or conditions shall be as defined
in § 7 of the USC Manual, or if not listed, shall be defined in the town’s
zoning ordinance or Construction Code:



      (1)   Industrial facilities.



         (a)   Automotive plants (air gap or RP);



         (b)   Beverage bottling plants (air gap, RP or DC);



         (c)   Breweries (air gap or RP);



         (d)   Canneries, packing houses, reduction plants and
food processing plants (air gap or RP);



         (e)   Chemical plants - manufacturing, processing,
compounding or treatment (air gap or RP);



         (f)   Dairies and cold storage plants (air gap, RP or
DC);



         (g)   Film laboratories (air gap or RP);



         (h)   Laundry and dye works (air gap or RP);



         (i)   Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing and
fabricating plants (air gap, RP or DC);



         (j)   Oil and gas production, storage or transmission
properties (air gap or RP);



         (k)   Paper and paper products plants (air gap or RP);



         (l)   Plating plants (air gap or RP);



         (m)   Power plants (air gap or RP);



         (n)   Radioactive materials or substances - plants or
facilities handling (air gap or RP);



         (o)   Rubber plants - natural or synthetic (air gap or
RP);



         (p)   Sand and gravel plants (air gap or RP);



         (q)   Semiconductor manufacturing facilities (air gap or
RP); and



         (r)   Sewage and storm drain facilities, reclaimed water
(air gap or RP).



      (2)   Medical facilities.



         (a)   Research laboratories (air gap or RP);



         (b)   Hospitals, medical buildings, sanitariums,
morgues, mortuaries, autopsy facilities, nursing and convalescent homes and
clinics (air gap or RP); and



         (c)   Veterinary hospital, animal research, animal
grooming, animal boarding or animal impound (air gap or RP).



      (3)   Commercial and educational facilities.



         (a)   Buildings: any structure having a cross connection
in violation of the town Plumbing Code or water operated sewage pumping
facilities, auxiliary water supplies or other like sources of contamination
which would create a potential hazard to the public water system (air gap, RP
or DC);



         (b)   Carwash facilities (air gap or RP);



         (c)   Motion picture studios (air gap or RP);



         (d)   Multi-storied buildings having booster pumps or
above ground storage tanks (air gap, RP or DC);



         (e)   Multiple services - interconnected (air gap, RP or
DC);



         (f)   Mobile home parks (RP or DC); (Exception: Existing
mobile home parks unless a specific hazard is identified.)



         (g)   Recreational vehicle parks (RP or DC);



         (h)   Schools and colleges with laboratories (air gap or
RP); and



         (i)   Retail shopping centers and strip malls; retail
and industrial shell buildings (when one service supplies more than 1 tenant)
(RP).



      (4)   Portable or temporary services or equipment.



         (a)   Construction sites or construction water services
(air gap or RP);



         (b)   Mobile equipment utilizing public potable water
(i.e., water trucks, street sweepers, hydro-vacs and the like) (air gap or
RP); and



         (c)   Portable insecticide and herbicide spray tanks
(air gap or RP).



      (5)   Miscellaneous activities and equipment.



         (a)   Auxiliary water systems (air gap or RP);



         (b)   Chemically contaminated water systems (air gap or
RP);



         (c)   Fire systems:



            1.   Class 1 or 2: No backflow prevention assembly
required. Check valve assemblies required by the town’s Fire Code shall be
inspected, tested and maintained at least annually to verify the valves are
properly installed and functioning. Annual flow and valve confidence tests
shall be performed by a tester who is permitted by the Fire Marshall to test
or maintain fire lines or fire sprinkler systems. Test results, on forms
approved by the town, shall be provided to the Director and the Fire Marshal
within 30 days following the inspection. Any fire sprinkler system which
fails shall be repaired as required by the Fire Code.



            2.   Class 3, 4, 5 or 6 (RP)



         (d)   Industrial fluid systems; (Any industrial fluid
system interconnected with the public water supply and containing any fluid
or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated
or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health,
system, pollution or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water
supply (RP or DC).)



         (e)   Irrigation systems:



            1.   Systems using a chemical injection system
(RP);



            2.   Systems having elevated areas which are
higher than 6 inches below the PVB or multiple services (RP); and



            3.   Systems not subject to backpressure (PVB).



         (f)   Restricted, classified or other closed facilities
including civil works (air gap or RP); and



         (g)   Solar Heating systems - direct and auxiliary (RP).
Exception: Once through solar heating systems.



   (C)   The Building Official, in conjunction with the Public Works
Director, shall determine on a case-by-case basis backflow prevention
requirements for any facility or activity not listed in this section in order
to prevent contamination or pollution of the public potable water system.



   (D)   All assemblies shall be accessible for testing, inspection and
maintenance. A reduced pressure principle assembly or double check valve
assembly shall not be installed in a basement, meter box, pit or vault unless
adequate clearance and drainage is provided. A pressure vacuum breaker
assembly shall be installed above ground.



   (E)   Unless a cross connection problem is specifically identified,
or as otherwise provided in this ordinance, the requirements of this
ordinance do not apply to single family residences used solely for
residential purposes. Home occupation or home businesses shall be reviewed on
a case-by-case basis.



   (F)   Close as practical is the point nearest the service delivery
where the assembly can be installed. Where the assembly location may
interfere with obstacles such as driveways and sidewalks, then close as
practical is the nearest point after the obstacle but in no event beyond the
first tap.



   (G)   An air gap separation shall be located as close as practical
to the customer’s point of service delivery. All piping between the
customer’s connection and receiving tank shall be entirely visible unless
otherwise approved by the Building Official and the Public Works Director.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.119  APPEALS.



   An action or decision concerning the determination of the Building
Official or the Public Works Director may be appealed to the town’s Board
of Adjustment in accordance with the procedures set forth in other chapters
of the town code.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.120  REMEDIES.



   (A)   If a customer has committed 1 or more of the following acts in
division (D) below and has not taken the corrective action required by the
Building Official, the Public Works Director may elect to impose a civil
penalty not to exceed 1,000%/billing period on the charges for all water used
beginning from the date the corrective action was required and until the
corrective action has been completed by the customer.



   (B)   If a situation exists, which would otherwise result in
discontinuance of water service, and is not remedied within the time provided
in the notice of termination sent to the customer, the Public Works Director,
at his or her discretion, may install a backflow prevention assembly at the
customer’s point of service delivery and bill the customer for all costs,
including testing, together with applicable penalties.



   (C)   The Public Works Director, at his or her discretion, may
publish in the local newspaper, notice of customers who, at least once during
the preceding 12-month period, were in violation with any requirement of this
subchapter. The publication shall also summarize any enforcement and
corrective action taken.



   (D)   (1)   In addition to any other remedy available to the
Public Works Director hereunder to enforce this subchapter, the Building
Official may request the Public Works Director to terminate the water service
if the customer:



         (a)   Fails to locate, install, test or maintain a
required backflow prevention assembly;



         (b)   Removes or bypasses a required backflow prevention
assembly without the prior approval of the Building Official;



         (c)   Allows a cross connection to occur;



         (d)   Fails to timely submit records of tests and
repairs of a backflow prevention assembly;



         (e)   Fails to comply with the written policy on
backflow prevention and cross connection on file with the Town Clerk, the
Building Department and the Utility Department; or



         (f)   Fails to comply with any requirements imposed upon
the customer by State Rule R-18-4-232.



      (2)   Termination of water service shall be immediate and
without prior notice if the Public Works Director determines that the
customer’s water system may cause a health hazard to the public potable
water supply. Otherwise, the Public Works Director shall give 10 days’
written notice to the customer prior to termination of water service. Water
service may be restored when the condition forming the basis for the
termination has been remedied, to the satisfaction of the Public Works
Director. All costs, fees and expenses incurred, and all surcharges and
penalties relating to the termination and restoration of water service, shall
be paid prior to the water service being restored.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)




WASTEWATER COLLECTION, TREATMENT AND RECHARGE POLICY




§ 51.135  WASTEWATER COLLECTION REQUIRED; GENERALLY.



   (A)   New development.  All new developments, subdivided and
unsubdivided, containing 1 or more lots of less than 1 acre shall:



      (1)   At their own expense, construct a wastewater collection
system to deliver wastewater to the town's collection, treatment and recharge
(CTR) system and main wastewater treatment plant, as directed and approved by
the town. Sizing and alignment of the mains shall be in general conformance
with the approved town sewer system master plan or amendments thereto.



      (2)   Install collection lines and other required components
and connect each lot to the town's sewer collection system when system
collection lines are located within 400 feet of the property or where the
property is adjacent to public right-of-way or public easements containing an
existing serviceable town sewer main. Developments of certain size and impact
may be required to extend mains to the development, in which case the town,
at the discretion of the Town Council, may enter into a development
reimbursement agreement with the developer and require future developments
located within 400 feet of the line extension to pay a sewer buy-in fee to
connect to the line extension.



      (3)   If the new subdivision is not within 400 feet of the
town's nearest sewer main, installation of septic tanks or a package
treatment plant, as approved by the town pursuant to § 51.002 Private Sewer
Systems; Approval Required; Violation; Enforcement shall be required.



      (4)   Demonstrate adequate financial capability and assurance
to design and construct the CTR system components, septic systems, or private
sewer systems sufficient to serve the new development and other areas, as
approved by the town.



   (B)   Existing development.



      (1)   When a town sewer main is extended to within 400 feet of
a property served by an existing septic system or package treatment plant,
the property owner shall have the option to connect to the town's sewer
system.  The town, upon approval by the Town Council, may provide financial
incentives or assistance as permitted by law for property owners who connect
within 120 days of written notice by the town that the service is available,
or within such other reasonable time period as determined by the Town Council.



      (2)   If the town or Yavapai County Health Department
determines that a septic system or package treatment plant has failed and is
unrepairable or unreplaceable or presents a condition that is a menace to
health arising from improper sewage disposal on any property having access to
a town sewer main, the property owner shall connect the property to the town
main within 60 days after receiving written notification from the town or
county health department to do so.



      (3)   Existing septic tanks on the property or package
treatment plants shall only be abandoned in accordance with procedures
established by ADEQ, and as directed by the town.



   (C)   If the town determines that a property owner has received
notice that connection to the town's sewer system is required and the
property owner refuses to connect or does not have the financial ability
necessary to do so, the town may install the connection and necessary related
facilities to provide services to the property and to charge the property
owner the actual reasonable costs for labor and materials to complete the
connection. The town shall work with the property owner to establish a
reasonable repayment schedule based upon the property owner's financial
situation. If the property owner becomes delinquent, having not complied with
the repayment schedule, the town, upon providing written notice and an
opportunity for a hearing before the Town Manager, may file a lien against
the affected property for the amount of the unpaid charges.  In addition to
or in the alternative to filing a lien against the property, the town may
pursue any and all legal remedies to collect the debt.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 16-815, passed 3-22-2016)



§ 51.136  WASTEWATER COLLECTION; TREATMENT AND RECHARGE; SCHEDULE OF
CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   The town will develop a centralized Wastewater Treatment Plant
at Old Home Manor to serve the greater Chino Valley area.



   (B)   The town will design, build and operate the CTR system on its
own schedule. If a development requires additional effluent collection,
treatment and recharge capacity prior to the time such services or capacity
is available from the town, the development shall provide financial resources
sufficient to construct the additional capacity as requested, at their own
expense, at the town’s facilities only. The developments shall receive
reimbursement of financial resources provided according to the schedule as
per a development agreement approved by Council, and in accordance with
provisions of this chapter. Any proposed exceptions or deviations from this
policy shall be reviewed by the Public Works Director and specifically
approved by the Town Council. The approval, if granted, shall not negate
mandatory connection to the town system and payment of appropriate fees at a
future date, as required in other portions of this chapter.



   (C)   The town will develop a Wastewater Collection System Master
Plan to identify the general location and sizing of all central sewer system
mains and infrastructure required throughout certain designated areas of the
community and also a treatment and recharge system phasing plan.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.137  [RESERVED].



§ 51.138  CTR SYSTEM BUY-IN FEE.



   At the time of building permit application for a new residence or a new
commercial building, the permitee shall pay a CTR system buy-in fee as
adopted by Council Resolution in the fee schedule(s), which may be amended
from time to time. This fee shall include the cost of administration,
operation, maintenance and regulatory compliance of the town’s wastewater
collection, treatment and recharge facilities, including sludge disposal
costs and an amount for replacement costs of equipment and real property.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.139  [RESERVED].



§ 51.140  [RESERVED].



§ 51.141  [RESERVED].



§ 51.142  EFFLUENT; CONTROL AND OWNERSHIP.



   The town reaffirms its ownership and control of all effluent produced
within the town’s Regional 208 Planning Area.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)




CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SEWERS, PUMPING




§ 51.155  [RESERVED].



§ 51.156  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Utility Department.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.157  APPLICATION FOR SEWER TAP, SEWER DYE TEST.



   (A)   Applications for sewer taps shall be made in accordance with
the provisions hereof.



   (B)   A customer who has been connected to the public sewer system
and questions whether a sewer tap is in service may apply to the Utility
Department for a sewer dye test to be performed. The sewer dye test shall be
performed by the Utility Department when the customer has paid a fee to cover
the costs of the test. If the test shows that the sewer tap is not in
service, the fee shall be refunded to the customer. The fee shall be set by
Council resolution and may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.158  PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR TO APPROVE DESIGN, QUANTITY, LOCATION, SIZE
AND CONSTRUCTION OF SEWER SERVICES.



   (A)   The design, quantity, location, method of connection and size
of all sewer taps shall be subject to the approval of the Public Works
Director. The Utility Department will install all sewer taps less than 6
inches in diameter, except as provided elsewhere in this chapter. All sewer
taps 6 inches in diameter or larger shall be installed by a private
contractor in accordance with plans and standard details approved by the
Director. Review, buy-in and inspection fees shall be paid as set forth in
this chapter and other pertinent chapters of the town Code. Sewer taps shall
be connected to public sewers only, unless specifically authorized and
approved by the Director.



   (B)   Where property borders public rights-of-way or public
easements containing an existing serviceable town wastewater main, the
property, when developed, shall be connected to the town CTR system. Sewer
taps shall extend at right angles from the main to the property, unless
otherwise specifically authorized for unusual conditions, and shall be
installed in accordance with the most current edition of the YAG standard
specifications and details for public works construction, unless otherwise
modified and approved by the Town Engineer.



   (C)   Permits for sewer taps will not be granted, or may be revoked,
when the lateral sewer passes through property which at the time is, or may
become, the property of persons other than the owner of the property to be
served from the connection.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.159  SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR INSTALLING SEWER TAPS IN NEW SUBDIVISIONS
AND DEVELOPMENTS.



   In new subdivisions or developments where public sewer extensions are
authorized by the town and constructed at the developer’s expense, the town
may authorize the developer, or his or her agent, if he or she so desires, to
install sewer taps with wyes or tees and extend the lateral sewer to the
right-of- way line, or connect the lateral sewer to the building sewer, under
the following conditions:



   (A)   The design and construction of the public sewer, sewer taps
and connections of the lateral sewer to the sewer tap shall be under the
supervision of a registered civil engineer holding registration in the State
of Arizona, who shall submit “as-built” plans to the Public Works
Department bearing the engineer’s signed and dated registration seal. It
shall be the duty of the developer to require that all sewer taps serving
lots in the development, upon which no buildings are initially constructed,
to be effectively sealed until such time as buildings will be constructed on
the lots. The sealed connections shall be inspected and approved by the
Public Works Department before being backfilled and shall be designated and
accurately located on the as-built plans with stations from manholes. The
effective seal shall consist of a watertight cap placed on the cleanout
located at the right-of-way line.



   (B)   Before any building sewer construction is commenced, plumbing
permits must be obtained by the developer or his or her agent from the
Building Department.



   (C)   When the “as-built” plans are submitted, the Director will
make a record of the sewer taps.



   (D)   The town will collect the appropriate fee for initial plan
review, inspection and “as built” plan review as required by the Town
Code.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.160  INSTALLATION OF SEWER TAPS.



   The responsibility for installation of sewer taps may be assumed and
paid for by the contractor/developer whose work will be inspected by the
Utility Department. The contractor/developer will be responsible for the
excavation to and the uncovering of the town’s sanitary sewer main. All
excavation and trenching shall be in accordance with the latest regulation of
OSHA. The contractor shall notify the Utility and Roads Departments at least
48 hours in advance of the time required for the sewer tap installation.
Department employees will be prohibited from entering any excavation or
trench not meeting the safety requirement of any applicable town, state, or
federal regulations. Upon completion of the installation of the sewer tap and
approval by the Utility Department, the contractor/developer will be
responsible for backfilling the trench and restoring the road or ground
surface to its original condition, or as shown on the approved engineering
plans. All sealed connections shall be inspected and approved by the Utility
Department prior to being backfilled. The contractor/developer shall take
special precautions to ensure that the service lateral is not damaged, broken
or crushed during the backfilling operation.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.161  PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR CLEANING, REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT
OF BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The property owner shall be responsible for the cleaning,
unstopping, maintenance and repair of the building connection piping serving
the owner’s property from the home or building to the public sewer line
except for repair or replacement of damaged or broken piping in the public
right-of-way serving a single-family or duplex property.



   (B)   Where the correction of a stoppage requires the repair or
replacement of a damaged or broken section of the building connection piping
serving a single-family or duplex property and the damaged or broken section
is located within the public right-of-way, the town will be responsible for
the repair or replacement of the damaged or broken section in the public
right-of-way.



   (C)   Where the correction of a stoppage requires the repair or
replacement of a damaged or broken section of the building connection piping
serving other than a single family or a duplex property and the damaged or
broken section is located off property in a street, alley or easement, the
owner or his or her contractor shall obtain a permit from the town to do work
in the street, alley or easement prior to doing the work.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.162  SEWER SERVICE LINE REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT IN THE PUBLIC
RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   The single family or duplex property owner shall be
responsible for first ascertaining the approximate location of damaged or
broken section of piping serving the property. If the damaged or broken
section is in the public right-of-way, the property owner shall contact the
Utility Department. The Department will verify the location of the damaged or
broken section. If the damaged or broken section is verified to be in the
public right-of-way and is of sufficient nature to require repair, the
Department shall initiate appropriate repair or replacement measures. When
the broken section is on private property, it shall be the property owner’s
responsibility to repair the broken section.



   (B)   Disputes as to location, extent of damage or the method of
repair or replacement of the damaged or broken section shall be resolved at
the sole discretion of the Public Works Director.



   (C)   A special account shall be created to fund the repairs and
replacements with an annual allocation as approved by the Town Council with
the annual budget for each fiscal year. Requests for repairs or replacements
shall be handled on a first-in basis. When the total funding in the account
has been exhausted, all subsequent requests will be deferred until the Town
Council approves additional funding into the account.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.163  PUMPING CHARGES; BASIN BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   Where it is necessary for sewage to be pumped from a specific
geographic area to the treatment plant main lift station or main collector
lines due to topography, as opposed to gravity flow, additional service
charges may be assessed to cover the cost of pumping and maintenance of pump
stations.



   (B)   In the absence of an agreement or contract, this charge shall
be determined by the Public Works Director and shall be within the rate span
established by Council resolution, depending on the quantity and expenses
involved.



   (C)   These charges shall apply to all customers within the pump
station gravity boundary, as established by the Town Engineer. These charges
shall not apply to private ejector pumps.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)




USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS AND LIMITATIONS




§ 51.175  UNSANITARY DISPOSAL OF EXCREMENT PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or permit to be
deposited, in an unsanitary manner, upon public or private property within
the town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any human or
animal excrement or other objectionable wastes.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.176  TREATMENT OF POLLUTED WASTES REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or drainage
channel within the town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town,
any sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.177  GENERAL USER REQUIREMENTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any user to discharge or cause to be
discharged to any point of entry into the publicly owned sanitary sewer
system:



   (A)   Unless otherwise approved by the Director, any storm water,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, surface drainage, cooling water or
unpolluted process waters that may constitute inflow, as defined in §
50.01.  No rain spout, roof drain or other form of surface drainage and no
foundation drainage or sump pump shall be connected to, or discharge into,
any sanitary sewer;



   (B)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard to the
system or treatment plant. In no case shall pollutants be discharged with a
closed cup flash point less than 140°F (60°C), or pollutants which cause an
exceedence of 10% of the lower explosion limit (LEL) at any point within the
wastewater treatment plant for any single reading or more than 5% for any 2
consecutive readings;



   (C)   Solid or viscous pollutants, petroleum oil, non-biodegradable
cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause
interference with, pass through or that will cause obstruction in the flow in
sewers or other interference or damage with the CTR system or treatment plant
efficiency;



   (D)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic, radioactive,
poisonous or other substance in sufficient quantity to cause, or have the
potential to cause, injury or interference with any sewage treatment process,
cause effluent of the treatment plant to come out of ADEQ compliance, cause
corrosive structural damage or equipment degradation, constitute a hazard to
humans or create any hazard to the CTR system or in the receiving waters of
the sewage treatment plant or pollutants which result in the presence of
toxic gasses, vapors or fumes within the CTR system in a quantity that may
cause acute worker health and/or safety problems;



   (E)   Any waters with a pH less than 5.0 standard units (S.U.) or
greater than 10.0 S.U., except as provided herein;



   (F)   Any waters with a temperature greater than 110°F (43.3°C) or
heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant
resulting in interference, but in no event heat in such quantities that the
temperature at the headworks of the treatment plant exceeds 130°F (54.4°C);



   (G)   Any water or waste greater than the following parameters
(mg/l):



 



Total fats, oil, grease and the like
 
100.0


Dissolved sulfides
 
0.5


Cyanide (amenable to chlorination)
 
0.2


Total cyanide
 
2.0


Arsenic
 
0.01


Barium
 
10.0


Boron
 
10.0


Cadmium
 
0.1


Chromium IV
 
0.5


Copper
 
10.0


Lead
 
0.5


Manganese
 
0.5


Mercury
 
0.05


Selenium
 
0.1


Silver
 
0.5


Zinc
 
50.0


Fluoride
 
4.0




 



   (H)   Any water or waste that has in any way been diluted, as a
substitute for pretreatment, for the purpose of obtaining compliance with any
categorical standard or pretreatment requirement imposed by this chapter,
except where dilution is expressly authorized by any categorical standard.



   (I)   Any water or waste that could cause a violation of any
categorical standard, pretreatment or recharge requirement.



   (J)   Any water or waste that is transported from the point of
generation to the treatment plant by any septic tank pumper, (or) chemical
waste hauler, or similarly transported unless the transporter has first:



      (1)   Disclosed to the Director the origin, nature,
concentration and volume of all pollutants to be discharged; and



      (2)   Obtained written consent of the Director to discharge.



   (K)   Any water or waste which could cause interference or
pass-through with CTR system or component operations.



   (L)   Any discharge that exhibits a characteristic of a hazardous
waste, or contains a substance that is listed as a hazardous waste pursuant
to either A.A.C. R 18-8-261 or Title 40 C.F.R. part 261, whichever is
applicable, whether or not the discharge is otherwise subject to hazardous
waste regulations. This provision does not apply to domestic wastewater
unless part of a home occupation, or to discharges of hazardous wastes that
are authorized by the Director.



   (M)   Any water or waste exceeding the limits for the following
substances that are expressed in the total form except if otherwise stated:



 


Instantaneous Effluent Limitations





Benzene
 
130 ug/l


Chloroform
 
420 ug/l


Cyanide (amenable to chlorination)
 
200 ug/l


Methylene chloride
 
4,200 ug/l


Sulfides (dissolved)
 
0.5 mg/l


Tetrachloroethylene
 
530 ug/l


Trichloroethylene
 
700 ug/l




 



   (N)   Any of the following prohibited substances: BHC-alpha,
BHC-beta, BHC-gamma (Lindane), Chrysene, Heptachlor, Heptachlor epoxide,
Phenanthrene, polychlorinated biphenyl compounds.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.178  AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR TO ESTABLISH PROHIBITIONS AND EFFLUENT
LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   In addition to the prohibitions and effluent limitations
contained in this chapter, the Public Works Director shall have the authority
to establish limitations for individual users or class of users for various
specific substances, materials, waters or wastes that can be accepted into
the sewer system, as well as specify those substances, materials, waters or
wastes that are prohibited from entering the sewer system. All prohibitions
and effluent limitations so established shall be placed on file with the Town
Clerk and will become effective and enforceable on the thirty-first day after
the date of filing.



   (B)   All affected individual or class of users shall comply with
the prohibitions and effluent limitations established pursuant to this
section.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.179  PRELIMINARY TREATMENT;  REQUIRED APPROVAL; MAINTENANCE OF
FACILITIES.



   (A)   Where necessary, in the opinion of the Director, any user of
the sewage works shall provide, at his expense, the preliminary treatment as
may be necessary to reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to
within the maximum limits provided for in this chapter. Plans, specifications
and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary
treatment facilities shall be submitted for review and approval by the
Director. No construction of the facilities shall be commenced until the
Director’s approval is obtained in writing. The completed facilities shall
not be placed in service until they have been inspected for conformance to
the approved plans and the final construction approved by the Director. The
approval of the plans and inspection of construction shall not relieve the
owner from complying with, and achieving, discharge limitations set forth in
this chapter. The town will enforce federal pretreatment requirements as set
forth in Title 40 C.F.R. part 403.



   (B)   Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his or her expense. The owner shall keep
written records and documentation of all cleaning, repair, calibration and
maintenance required to demonstrate compliance with this section. Records
shall be kept at the facility for a minimum of 3 years and be made available
for inspection and review upon request.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.180  INTERCEPTORS; REQUIREMENTS; TYPE, CAPACITY, LOCATION;
CONSTRUCTION OF GREASE AND OIL INTERCEPTORS; MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Fats, oil, grease, lint or sand interceptors shall be provided
for laundries, restaurants, service stations, auto repair shops, carwashes
and other facilities when, in the opinion of the Director, they are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing fats, oils or grease in
excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful
ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units.



   (B)   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the Public Works Director and shall be located so as to be readily and easily
accessible for inspection, cleaning and maintenance.



   (C)   All interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials.
They shall be of substantial construction, designed to withstand anticipated
internal and external pressures, watertight and equipped with easily
removable covers. When bolted covers are required, they shall be gastight and
watertight. Grease and oil interceptors shall be capable of withstanding
abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.



   (D)   Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall
be maintained by the owner at his or her expense. The owner shall keep
written records and documentation of all cleaning, repair, calibration and
maintenance required to demonstrate compliance with this section. Records
shall be kept at the facility for a minimum of 3 years and be made available
for inspection and review upon request.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.181  CONTROL MANHOLES.



   When required by the Director, the owner of any property served by a
building sewer carrying potentially harmful or industrial wastes shall
install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, measurement and sampling of the wastes. The manhole, when
required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Director. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him
or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.182  DISCHARGES TO BE REPORTED.



   Every user of the town sewer system shall report to the Director
immediately any accident, negligent act or other occurrence that occasions a
discharge to the public sewer of any wastes or process waters that exceed the
permissible limits for the wastes established by this chapter or by the
Director.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.183  TESTS AND ANALYSES.



   All tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and waste shall
be determined in accordance with approved laboratory procedures.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)




INDUSTRIAL AND PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS




§ 51.195  GENERAL INDUSTRIAL USER REQUIREMENTS.



   All industrial users, as defined in this chapter, shall:



   (A)   Comply with the categorical standards, pretreatment
requirements, and all other requirements imposed by this chapter upon CTR
system users. Upon the effective date of any federal categorical pretreatment
standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if
more stringent than the effluent limitations imposed under this chapter shall
immediately supersede those limitations.



   (B)   Comply with the orders of the Director designed to implement
the categorical standards, pretreatment requirements and all other
requirements imposed by this chapter.



   (C)   Prior to the discharge of wastewater to the CTR system by any
user required to have a permit under this chapter, the user shall file a
written notice with the Director which identifies the:



      (1)   Name and address of the existing or prospective users;



      (2)   Business location(s) served, or to be served, by the CTR
facility;



      (3)   Nature, concentration and amounts of any substance
present at, or intended to be present at, such business location(s) which, if
discharged to the CTR system, could constitute an industrial discharge; and



      (4)   Nature and concentration of all pollutants currently
discharged to the CTR system from the business location(s).



   (D)   Carry out, and maintain an adequate record of, all
self-inspection and self-monitoring activities necessary for the user to know
at all times whether or not such user is introducing any industrial discharge
to the CTR system.



   (E)   Assist the Director to determine the exact nature,
concentration and volume of any pollutant intended for discharge to the CTR
system. Upon request by the Director, any user or industrial user shall
promptly:



      (1)   Allow the examination and copying of all relevant
records or documents stored, filed or available from other locations to the
user;



      (2)   Allow the inspection of all business locations served by
the CTR system, including all pretreatment equipment, methods and activities
utilized by the user at the locations;



      (3)   Install and maintain, at the user’s expense,
convenient and adequate monitoring and/or sampling point(s) with appropriate,
calibrated equipment approved by the Director for monitoring and/or sampling
purposes;



      (4)   Allow the taking and removal of samples from any
wastewater discharged, or intended for discharge, to the CTR system; and



      (5)   Provide the Director with any other information
including, but not limited to, chemical analyses of wastewater, architectural
or engineering design data, drawings and the like, which are reasonably
needed by the Director for the purpose of determining the user’s compliance
with the requirements of this chapter.



   (F)   Not cause an industrial discharge without having first
obtained a permit required by this chapter. The industrial user shall comply
with all requirements and conditions of said permit. Once a permit is issued,
no industrial user shall:



      (1)   Make any new or increased industrial discharge, or
otherwise make any change in the nature of its industrial discharge(s), if
the change will cause any new or increased industrial discharge, without
first obtaining an amended permit.



      (2)   Fail to give written notice to the Utility Department of
not less than 90 days prior to any facility expansion, production increase or
process modifications which results, or may result, in new or increased
discharges or a change in the nature of the discharge.



      (3)   Fail to give advance written notice to the Utility
Department of any planned changes in the permitted facility or activity which
may result in noncompliance with permit requirements.



   (G)   Comply with the demand of the Director to immediately halt any
actual or threatened discharge to the CTR system when the Director has given
notice that the actual or threatened discharge:



      (1)   Presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of any person or to the environment; or



      (2)   Will cause interference or pass-through with the CTR
system operations, efficiency or effluent discharge quality.



   (H)   Immediately give notice to the Director of any discharge,
including an accidental discharge, which is in violation of any categorical
standard, pretreatment requirement or permit condition imposed by this
chapter. The notice shall also describe the:



      (1)   Location of the discharge;



      (2)   Known or estimated nature, concentration and volume of
the discharged pollutant(s);



      (3)   Type of assistance desired from the town;



      (4)   Corrective action(s) undertaken, being undertaken and/or
to be undertaken by the user. Any user causing the discharge shall also
initiate all appropriate corrective action(s) required by the Director which
are needed to:



         (a)   Prevent any further injury to human health or
safety, or to the environment, the CTR system and/or any other property;



         (b)   Promptly repair all or part of any injury or
damage caused by the discharge; and



         (c)   Ensure that such a discharge does not occur again.



   (I)   Pay all fees charged by the town for the wastewater
collection, treatment and recharge services provided by the CTR system
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. The service fees will apply
equally to all CTR system users and will be determined by each user’s
proportionate share of the CTR operating and maintenance costs. In turn, the
proportionate share will be based on such factors as the strength, volume and
rate of flow of wastewater discharged to the CTR system by each user.



   (J)   Reimburse the town for all extraordinary expenses reasonably
incurred by the town in insuring such CTR system user’s compliance with the
applicable requirements of this chapter. An extraordinary expense is any cost
not otherwise reimbursed from the normal collection of sewer fees. Therefore,
extraordinary expenses include, but are not limited to, the costs associated
with:



      (1)   Issuing permits;



      (2)   Conducting inspection, surveillance and monitoring
activities;



      (3)   Obtaining laboratory analyses of waste samples;



      (4)   Taking enforcement actions against users not in
compliance with the requirements of any permit issued and/or of this chapter;



      (5)   Carrying out any measure needed for the protection of
human health or safety, the environment, the CTR system or any other property
in order to correct or mitigate any harm or degradation of existing quality
caused by the violation of any categorical standard or pretreatment
requirement.



   (K)   Be financially responsible for all injury, damage and/or loss
suffered by any person as a result of any industrial discharge by the user
which violates any categorical standard, pretreatment requirement or permit
condition enforced pursuant to this chapter. In particular, the user shall be
liable for the:



      (1)   Personal injury suffered by any person as a result of
the discharge;



      (2)   Costs reasonably incurred by any person in correcting,
or otherwise mitigating, any adverse environmental impact which resulted from
the discharge; and



      (3)   Economic loss and property damage suffered by any person
as a result of the discharge.



   (L)   Fully comply with this subpart if the results of the user’s
self-monitoring wastewater analysis indicates a violation has occurred:



      (1)   Inform the Director of the violation within 24 hours of
becoming aware of the violation; and



      (2)   Repeat the wastewater sampling and pollutant analysis
and submit in writing the results of the repeat analysis within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation, unless the Director requires it sooner.



   (M)   In addition to the above requirements, the user shall also:



      (1)   Notify the Director, the EPA Regional Wastewater
Management Division Director and state hazardous waste authorities in writing
of any discharge into the CTR system of a substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under Title 40 C.F.R. part 261. Such
notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in
Title 40 C.F.R. part 261, EPA hazardous waste number and type of discharge
(continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user discharges more than 100
kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the CTR system, the
notification shall also contain the following information to the extent the
information is known and readily available to the industrial user: an
estimation of the mass and concentration of the constituents in the waste
stream discharged during that calendar month and an estimation of the mass of
constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the
following 12 months. All notifications must take place within 180 days of the
effective date of this chapter. Industrial users who commence discharging
after the effective date of this chapter shall provide the notification no
later than 180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic
hazardous waste. Any notification under this division need be submitted only
once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
discharges must be submitted under Title 40 C.F.R. § 404.12(j). The
notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already
reported under the self-monitoring requirements of Title 40 C.F.R. §
403.12(b), (d) and (e).



      (2)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division
(M)(1) above during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes
as specified in Title 40 C.F.R. § 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more
than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of
any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in Title 40 C.F.R. §§
261.30(d) and 261.33(c) requires a 1-time notification. Subsequent months
during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any
hazardous waste do require additional notification.



      (3)   In the case of new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify
the Director of the discharge of the substance within 90 days of the
effective date of the regulations.



      (4)   In the case of any notification made under this
paragraph, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place
to reduce the volume and toxicity of wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practicable and that it has selected the method
of treatment, storage and/or disposal currently available which minimizes the
present and future threat to human health and the environment.



   (N)   Sign all permit applications using the appropriate signatory:



      (1)   For a corporation; by a corporate officer of (or) other
persons performing a similar policy or decision-making function for the
corporation;



      (2)   For a partnership or sole proprietorship: By a general
partner or the proprietor, respectively; or



      (3)   For a government entity: By the administrator,
chairperson, director or principal executive responsible for operations at
the facility.



   (O)   Ensure that all applications, correspondence, reports and
self-monitoring reports are signed by a duly authorized representative of the
person described in division (N) above. Any change in signatures or positions
shall be submitted to the Director in writing within 30 days after the
change. A person is a duly authorized representative only if:



      (1)   The authorization is made by a person described in
division (N) above; and



      (2)   The authorization specified either an individual or a
position having the responsibility for the overall operation of the regulated
facility or activity, such as the position of plant manager, superintendent,
or position of equivalent responsibility. (A duly authorized representative
may thus be either a named individual or an individual occupying a named
position.)



   (P)   Any person signing a document under this subchapter shall make
the following certification:



“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to
the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware
that there are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.196  SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER REQUIREMENTS.



   In addition to all other requirements, each industrial user who
discharges an industrial discharge into the CTR system and is designated as a
significant industrial user (SIU) by the Director shall also:



   (A)   Obtain a Class A wastewater discharge permit from the
Director. Any application for a Class A permit or an amended Class A permit
shall contain the information specified in the application form or such other
information as may be requested by the Director. Any person intending to
commence any new industrial discharge(s), or any additional discharge(s) not
already allowed pursuant to an existing permit, shall apply for a new or
amended permit at least 90 days prior to initiating the discharge(s).



   (B)   Provide all of the pretreatment necessary to comply with the
categorical standards and pretreatment requirements imposed by this chapter.
In addition, there shall be no discharge of any water or waste exceeding
limits for the following substances that are expressed in the total form
except if otherwise indicated:



 


Daily Average Effluent Limitations





Arsenic
 
100 ug/l


Boron
 
5,600 ug/l


Cadminum
 
47 ug/l


Chromium VI
 
No limit


Chromium
 
1,400 ug/l


Copper
 
1700 ug/l


Cyanide
 
2,000 ug/l


Lead
 
500 ug/l


Mercury
 
4.6 ug/l


Nickle
 
5,000 ug/l


Oil & grease (TPH)
 
100 mg/l


Selenium
 
100 ug/l


Silver
 
500 ug/l


Sulfides
 
10.0 mg/l


Zinc
 
5,400 ug/l


NOTES TO TABLE:

mg/l= Milligrams per liter

ug/l= Micrograms per liter

1 mg/l = 1,000 ug/l




 



   (C)   Maintain a continuous discharge record which clearly indicates
the:



      (1)   Dates and times of all industrial discharges; and



      (2)   Nature, concentration(s) and volumes of all such
discharges.



   (D)   Provide the Director with all reports and notices which the
SIU is required to submit in accordance with the provisions of Title 40
C.F.R. part 403.12. In particular, each SIU shall meet the requirements of:



      (1)   Notices which must be filed within 180 days of the
adoption of any categorical standard, including a compliance schedule;



      (2)   Notices which must be filed within 90 days of any final
compliance date, or in the case of a new source, following the commencement
of the introduction of wastewater into the CTR facility;



      (3)   Reports which must be filed by the SIU in June and
December of each year unless required more frequently by the Director;



      (4)   Notices which must be immediately given after a slug
load release of any industrial discharge;



      (5)   Sampling and analyses of pollutants discharged to the
CTR facility, including any more frequent sampling and analyses performed
beyond what is required by the Director;



      (6)   The maintenance of records by the SIU.



   (E)   Comply with all reporting requirements and maintain records of
all information resulting from any monitoring activities as required hereby.



   (F)   Records required by divisions (D) and (E) above shall be
required to be retained for a minimum of 3 years from the date of monitoring
activity and shall be made available for inspection and copying. This period
of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation
between the SIU and the town. The records shall include for all samples:



      (1)   The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and
the name(s) of the person(s) taking the samples;



      (2)   The dates analyses were performed;



      (3)   Who performed the analyses;



      (4)   The analytical techniques/methods used; and



      (5)   The results of the analyses.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.197  SPECIAL DISCHARGES.



   (A)   In addition to all other requirements imposed by this chapter
upon industrial users, the following types of industrial users who are not
significant industrial users may be required to obtain a Class B wastewater
discharge permit if the Director determines the industrial discharge causes,
or has the reasonable potential to cause, harm or damage to the CTR system,
worker safety, public safety or the environment.



      (1)   Zero process discharge user;



      (2)   Users which discharge the equivalent strength of 25,000
gallons per day of domestic waste as measured by BOD and SS;



      (3)   Discharges of polluted groundwater; and



      (4)   Users discharging any of the substances identified in
§§ 51.177 and 51.196(B).



   (B)   The industrial user shall comply with all requirements and
conditions of a Class B wastewater discharge permit issued by the Director
under § 51.198.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.198  AUTHORITY OF THE DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Director is authorized to enforce CTR user compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   In carrying out this responsibility, the Director has
authority to:



      (1)   Issue or amend (as applicable) Class A and Class B
wastewater discharge permits within 60 days of receiving the application for
the permit or amended permit. Once issued, a permit:



         (a)   Will be for a period of time not to exceed 5
years. A permit may be terminated by revocation by the Director or upon
voluntary surrender of the permit by the permittee at an earlier date;



         (b)   Is non-transferable by the permittee;



         (c)   Will specifically identify all applicable
discharge prohibitions and limitations which the Director will enforce;



         (d)   May be amended as deemed appropriate by the
Director;



         (e)   May contain monitoring requirements;



         (f)   May contain reporting requirements;



         (g)   May contain requirements for installation and
maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;



         (h)   May contain required notifications;



         (i)   May contain requirements for a plan to control
slug discharges and spills. The plan shall contain at a minimum:



            1.   A description of discharge practices,
including non-routine batch discharges; and



            2.   A description of stored chemicals; and



            3.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from
accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control
of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including
solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.



         (j)   May require implementation of pollution and/or
waste minimization to reduce or eliminate the amount of pollutants discharged
to the CTR;



         (k)   May contain requirements to control or reduce the
concentrations of any of the substances identified in §§ 51.177 and
51.196(B) through the use of best management practices;



         (l)   May contain standard permit conditions; and



         (m)   May contain other conditions and requirements as
deemed reasonably necessary by the Director to prevent pass-through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, to protect against damage to the CTR facility and to
ensure user compliance with this chapter, state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.



      (2)   A permit may be revoked by the Director for good cause,
including, but not limited to:



         (a)   Failure to notify the Director of significant
changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;



         (b)   Failure to provide prior notification to the
Director of changed conditions pursuant to § 51.196(F);



         (c)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;



         (d)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;



         (e)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;



         (f)   Refusing to allow the Director timely access to
the facility premises and records;



         (g)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;



         (h)   Failure to pay fines and penalties;



         (i)   Failure to pay sewer charges;



         (j)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;



         (k)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the
permit application;



         (l)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer
of business ownership of a permitted facility; or



         (m)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or
requirement, or any terms of the permit or the requirement of this chapter.



      (3)   Incorporate the pertinent requirements of this chapter
into every town contract with any CTR user located within or without the
municipal jurisdiction of the town. The contracts may also provide for
liquidated damages and, if applicable, specific performance remedies for
breach of contract.



      (4)   Receive and analyze all self-monitoring reports and
notices submitted by industrial users.



      (5)   Randomly sample and analyze effluent from CTR users and
conduct those surveillance and inspection activities needed to identify,
independently of any information supplied by such users, occasional or
continuing non-compliance with any categorical standard or pretreatment
requirement.



      (6)   Investigate instances of non-compliance with any
categorical standard or pretreatment requirement when notice of any actual or
probable non-compliance has been received by the Director.



      (7)   Notify CTR facility users of non-compliance with
categorical standards or pretreatment requirements discovered by the
Director. The notices shall also contain a demand for any appropriate
corrective action, which is necessary to meet the applicable requirements of
this chapter. Any CTR user will be allowed opportunity to respond to an order
of the Director before any enforcement action against the user is initiated,
unless the discharge is an immediate threat to the public health, safety, and
welfare, in which case the Director may initiate enforcement action without
giving notice.



      (8)   Comply with the public participation requirements of
Title 40 C.F.R. part 25 and A.R.S. § 49-391 in connection with the town’s
enforcement of any pretreatment standards and requirements.



      (9)   Impose appropriate penalties for non-compliance with any
or all of the following:



         (a)   Suspension or revocation of any industrial user
permit for the failure of an industrial user to comply with the pertinent
requirements of the permit;



         (b)   Termination of CTR services;



         (c)   Restricting or otherwise limiting allowable
discharges;



         (d)   Requesting that the town Attorney commence
criminal and/or civil action against any user violating any requirement of
this chapter.



      (10)   The Director shall:



         (a)   Determine which actual or threatened discharge to
the CTR will cause interference with the CTR facility or will present (or may
present) an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health, safety or
welfare of any person and/or to the environment;



         (b)   Abate any actual or threatened discharge which
would violate any categorical standard or pretreatment requirement imposed by
this chapter. This may include plugging or disconnecting any sewer service
connection to the CTR facility;



         (c)   Correct or mitigate any injury to the environment,
the CTR facility or to any other property as a result of any discharge in
violation of a categorical standard or pretreatment requirement imposed by
this chapter.



      (11)   Annually publish public notice of all industrial users
who, at least once during the prior calendar year, were in significant
non-compliance (SNC). SNC is determined at any time during the year, except
that for chronic and TRC violations, SNC is determined at the beginning of
each quarter using the prior 6 months. Thus, chronic and TRC SNC is
determined 4 times during the year and the total evaluation period covers 15
months (i.e., beginning with the last quarter of the previous year through
the end of the current year). The notification shall also summarize any
enforcement actions taken against the users during the same 12-month period.



      (12)   Notify industrial users of applicable pretreatment
standards and any applicable requirements under §§ 204(b) and 405 of the
Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.. and subtitles C and D of
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.



      (13)   The Director shall maintain 1 copy of all federal
statutes, rules and regulations cited in this chapter in order to allow
regulated users adequate opportunity to review the applicable federal
requirements that are herein incorporated by reference.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.199  PERMIT APPEALS PROCESS.



   (A)   Any permit applicant or permittee (aggrieved party) may
petition the Director to reconsider the conditions and limitations of a
permit issued or amended under the authority of § 51.198(A)(1) by filing a
petition for review with the Director within 20 days of receipt of the permit.



   (B)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed
to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.



   (C)   In its petition, the aggrieved party must identify the permit
provisions objected to, specify in detail the reasons for objection, and
present the alternative, if any, it seeks to place in the permit.



   (D)   The provisions of the permit that are not objected to shall
not be stayed pending the appeal.



   (E)   If the Director fails to act within 30 days from receipt of
the petition, it shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider
the issued or amended permit, not to issue a permit, or not to amend a permit
shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial
review.



   (F)   The aggrieved party seeking judicial review of the final
permit decision may file a complaint with the Superior Court for Yavapai
County, Arizona.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.200  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections
shall be made available to the public or governmental agency without
restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the town that the release of the information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of the user. To claim this trade secret
protection, the user must specify at the time of submitting his or her
reports or information, that part he or she desires to protect. When
requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of the report
which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon
written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter,
the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, (or)
state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided,
however, that the portions of a report shall be available for use by the
town, the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)




ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE




§ 51.215  PERMITTEE PROVIDES PROTECTION.



   Each permittee shall provide protection from the accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.216  PERMITTEE SHALL NOTIFY TOWN OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.



   For counter-measures to be taken by the town to minimize damage to the
CTR system and/or receiving waters, the permittee shall notify the town
immediately upon accidentally discharging wastes in violation of this
chapter. This notification shall be followed by a written statement, within 3
days of the date of the discharge or the discovery thereof, describing the
nature and quantity of regulated wastes discharged, causes of the accidental
discharge, any action taken to mitigate the discharge and the measures being
taken to prevent a future occurrence. The notification will not relieve
permittee of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the CTR system, any
clean up, mitigation measures, or for any fines imposed on the town on
account thereof and/or for any enforcement action pursuant to this occurrence.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.217  PERMITTEE WILL NOTIFY EMPLOYEES.



   In order that officers, agents and employees of permittees will be
informed of the town’s requirements, permittees shall make available to
their employees copies of this chapter together with such other wastewater
information and notices which may be furnished by the town from time to time
for the purpose of improving and making more effective water pollution
control. A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on the
permittee’s bulletin board, or other prominent location, advising officers,
agents and employees who call in case of an accidental discharge in excess of
the limits authorized by the permit.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.218  PERMITTEE SHALL LABEL ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE POINTS.



   Any possible connection or entry point for a hazardous and/or
prohibited substance to the permittee’s plumbing or drainage system shall
be appropriately labeled to warn operating personnel against discharge of the
substances in violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)




HAULAGE OF NON-HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTES




§ 51.230  PROHIBITION ON WASTES FROM INDUSTRIAL SITES DISCHARGED TO CTR
SYSTEM.



   (A)   Haulers of non-hazardous liquid wastes (NHLW) removed from
residential and non-industrial discharge commercial customers are subject to
the terms and conditions for discharge as contained in this subchapter.



   (B)   The following NHLW wastes may be discharged into the CTR
system by waste haulers at the discharge point specified by the Director:



      (1)   Domestic septage from residences;



      (2)   Domestic septage from commercial facilities;



      (3)   Septage from self-service non-drycleaning laundries;



      (4)   Domestic septage from chemical toilets; and



      (5)   Wastewater from swimming pools.



   (C)   The Director, at his or her discretion, shall have the
authority to establish additional categories of NHLW that can be discharged
to the CTR system. Any additional category of NHLW shall be placed on file
with the Town Clerk and at each authorized discharge point.



   (D)   Aside from the above, any wastes removed by a hauler from
nonresidential, industrial or commercial customers are specifically
prohibited from being discharged to the CTR system. Discharge of the wastes
into the CTR system will constitute a violation and will subject the hauler
to the penalties provided for in this chapter.



   (E)   Discharge by the hauler of any permitted NHLW into any manhole
or cleanout, other than at the designated discharge point, will constitute a
violation and will subject the hauler to the penalties provided for in this
chapter.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.231  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Except as provided in § 51.232, any person transporting NHLW to the
CTR system shall first obtain from the Director a NHLW hauler discharge
permit prior to any discharge to the facility. The person shall pay an annual
permit fee as adopted by resolution if only 1 vehicle is used.  Each
additional vehicle shall be charged an annual permit fee. Fees shall be set
by Council resolution and may be amended from time to time. Discharge of NHLW
without a permit is prohibited. Any person violating this section shall be
liable for a permit fee as adopted by resolution for the first occurrence.
The permit fee for disposing of any NHLW into the facility without a waste
hauler permit a subsequent time shall be as adopted by resolution. This is in
addition to all other remedies available to the Director under this chapter.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.232  EXEMPTION.



   The Director has the authority to exempt NHLW haulers from the
permitting requirements of this subchapter if the Director determines that
other safeguards are in place to protect the CTR system, worker safety, the
public and the environment. Any exemptions made pursuant to this section
shall be filed with the Town Clerk.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.233  AUTHORITY OF THE DIRECTOR; PERMITTEE LIMITATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Director shall develop and administer a non-hazardous
liquid waste monitoring program. The scope of the program is to determine the
characteristics of the non-hazardous liquid waste and to discover illegal
loads and prevent their discharge to the CTR system.



   (B)   The Director shall establish a NHLW policy. A copy of the NHLW
policy shall be on file with the Town Clerk and at any designated discharge
point.



   (C)   The Director shall issue or amend (as applicable) a permit
within 60 days of receiving a permit application. In addition to other
conditions and requirements deemed appropriate by the Director, each permit
shall contain the following:



      (1)   Specify a time period not to exceed 5 years.



      (2)   Require the permittee to complete a waste tracking form
(manifest) for each load of NHLW prior to discharge to the CTR system. The
manifest forms shall be on forms provided by, or approved by, the Director.
The manifest shall contain information on the permittee and the source(s),
quality and quantity of the NHLW, as well as a certification statement,
signed by the permittee, to that effect.



      (3)   Specify the allowable categories of NHLW to be
discharged at the designated discharge point.



      (4)   Prior to discharge of hauled waste, the permittee shall
allow a town designated representative to sample the waste, if so required or
deemed necessary, to ensure compliance with discharge limits and
requirements. The permittee shall not be allowed to discharge the NHLW until
the initial analysis is complete. The Director reserves the right to refuse
permission to discharge any load that may not be treatable at the facility,
or will inhibit, interfere or otherwise be incompatible with the operation
and function of the CTR system.



      (5)   Require the permittee to carry liability insurance in
such amount and in such form as shall be determined by the Director. The
insurance shall, at a minimum, afford general liability coverage, including
contractual liability, in the amount of $1 million combined single limit.
Motor vehicle liability insurance shall be in the minimum amounts as outlined
in A.R.S. § 28-4033. Workers compensation insurance, if applicable, shall
comply with state requirements. Evidence of the insurance shall be provided
to the Director. The requirement shall not in any manner preclude the
permittee from obtaining such additional insurance coverage as may be
necessary for his or her own protection.



      (6)   Require the permittee (as “indemnitor”) to
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Town of Chino Valley (as indemnitee)
from and against any and all claims, losses, liability, costs or expenses
(including reasonable attorney’s fees) (herein collectively referred to as
“claims”) arising out of bodily injury of any person (including death) or
property damage to the extent that such claims are caused by the negligence,
misconduct or other fault of the indemnitor, its agents, employees or
contractors.



      (7)   Specify the discharge limitations and requirements as
deemed appropriate by the Director.



   (D)   The permittee is responsible for protecting the CTR system
from any contributing discharges which would inhibit, interfere or otherwise
be incompatible with the operation or maintenance of the collection system or
treatment plant including the use or disposal of municipal sludge or
effluent. The permittee shall comply with all requirements and conditions of
its permit.



   (E)   The permit is nontransferable by the permittee. In the event
of any change in control or ownership, the permittee shall notify the
Director. The new owner shall apply for a new permit and shall not be allowed
to discharge to the CTR system until a permit is issued and all other
requirements of this subchapter have been satisfied, or unless written
permission is otherwise provided by the Director.



   (F)   The Director is authorized to take appropriate enforcement
action against any person in noncompliance with this subchapter.  All
penalties assessed to the town of Chino Valley by federal and/or State
agencies as a result of a violation shall be recoverable from the violator. 
In addition to the enforcement available to the Director that is contained
herein, the Director may:



      (1)   Suspend for a period of up to 30 days the permit of any
hauler for the first violation of any provision of the permit or any
provision of this subchapter. Following the first period of suspension, the
waste hauler permit may be reinstated only after payment of the fee for
reinstatement, which shall be as adopted by resolution.



      (2)   Suspend for a period of up to 180 days the permit of any
hauler committing a subsequent violation of a provision of the permit or a
provision of this subchapter. Following the second period of suspension for a
subsequent violation, the permit may be reinstated only after payment of the
reinstatement fee, which shall be as adopted by resolution. In addition to
any reinstatement fee required to be paid under this section, the hauler
shall either pay or make arrangements acceptable to the Director to pay any
expenses the town incurs by reason of the violation.



      (3)   A suspension may be appealed by the permit holder to the
Town Council by submitting an appeal in writing, within 15 days of receiving
notice of the suspension, setting forth the specific grounds for the appeal.
The filing of any such appeal will not serve to stay the suspension or the
fees for reinstatement. A lesser fee for reinstatement may be charged by the
Town Council if it is found that the permit holder has taken substantial
action to prevent further violations.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.234  MIXING OF NON-HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTE.



   Septage of different categories shall not be mixed unless the load
contains only septic wastes from septic tanks and chemical toilets.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.235  HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTE.



   Regardless of origin, hazardous liquid waste (as defined in § 1004 of
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et
seq.) shall not be disposed of in any CTR system component, manhole, or
headworks. The discharge of hazardous wastes to the headworks or NHLW
discharge point by truck or other conveyance is prohibited.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.236  NON-HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTE FEES.



   (A)   Fees shall be charged for the discharge of non-hazardous
liquid wastes into the CTR system for treatment. The fees shall be set by the
Town Council by resolution and may have varying rates for classification and
point of origin.



   (B)   The Director shall review the fees yearly and shall make such
recommendations to Council for adjustment as he or she deems necessary. The
fees may be adjusted by Council resolution from time to time.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.237  CESSATION OF ACCEPTANCE OF NON-HAZARDOUS LIQUID WASTES.



   (A)   The Director may suspend or reduce the dumping of NHLW into
the CTR system for reasons that include, but are not limited to, temporary
repairs or maintenance to the facility, inability of the CTR system to
process either the volume or strength of the NHLW stream, hazardous
conditions to worker safety, the public and/or the environment due to
discharge of a hazardous liquid or malfunctioning of any component of the CTR
system.



   (B)   In addition to any other remedies in this chapter, the
Director may suspend or terminate the discharge permit for any hauler
violating provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.238  VIOLATION.



   The violation or failure to follow any condition or provisions of the
waste hauler permit or NHLW dumping policy or Director’s order authorized
herein shall be a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)




UTILITY FEES




§ 51.250  UTILITY SERVICE DEPOSITS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, a TOWN UTILITY CUSTOMER WITH
A GOOD PAYMENT RECORD will be defined as a customer who has not received more
than 1 delinquency letter in the last 12 months and has not had water service
discontinued for nonpayment during the previous 24-month period.



   (B)   Utility service deposits will be required of all persons
making application for utility service,except as provided in division (B)(1)
and (B)(2).



      (1)   Persons applying for utility service will be required to
pay a deposit for utility service, unless they have a good payment record as
a utility customer of the town, or can demonstrate a good payment record as a
utility customer of another utility (i.e., another municipality, state public
service, private water company, and the like) that is deemed by the Utilities
Division to be an acceptable utility provider for credit purposes.



      (2)   To demonstrate such good payment record, the applicant
shall provide a letter of credit from the prior utility provider, on the
utility company's letterhead, indicating a good payment record within the 24
months prior to application with the town.



      (3)   The non-refundable service fee of $25 is not considered
part of the deposit and will not be waived.



      (4)   The town shall retain all utility service deposits until
a 12-month good payment history is achieved.  No interest shall be paid on
deposited amounts. The deposit shall in no way affect the town's right to
discontinue service arising from nonpayment of bills as provided for in this
chapter.



      (5)   The Utilities Division, under the general concurrence of
the Finance Director, is hereby given the power of discretion for considering
special cases involving the requirement of utility deposits.



   (C)   The town will refund utility service deposits or portions
thereof if one of the following occurs:



      (1)   The town utility customer who paid a utility deposit has
been a town utility customer for at least 1 year following payment of the
deposit and has a good payment record. If after 1 year the town utility
customer has not maintained a good payment record, the deposit will not be
refunded until the town utility customer has achieved a good payment record
for at least 1 year.



      (2)   The town utility customer has provided written notice to
the town to discontinue service and the town has received payment in full for
utilities rendered, any water meter damage, or other damage to the town
system for which the utility customer may be liable under this chapter. The
town, at its option may apply the applicable deposit(s) to the utility
customer's final bill or send the  customer a check for the difference.



   (D)   The town utility customer shall notify the town prior to or at
the time the property to which service is provided becomes vacant. The town
utility customer shall be responsible for all utility usage or damage to the
town’s property until the town receives a vacancy notice. Thereafter, the
town utility customer shall no longer be responsible for payment of metered
water services but, because sewer service is a non-metered service, the town
utility customer shall be responsible for payment of sewer fees at the
applicable base rate until such time as the town receives notice that the
property is occupied by a new town utility customer, at which time the new
occupant shall be responsible for payment of the utility fees and charges.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 10-735, passed 9-9-2010; Am. Ord.
15-792, passed 1-13-2015)



§ 51.251  WATER SYSTEM NEW SERVICE BUY-IN FEE.



   (A)   There shall be a mandatory water system new service buy-in fee
for connections being served by any of the town’s water production and
distribution systems that are owned, operated, and maintained by the town.



   (B)   This charge shall be the customer’s equivalent share of the
town’s costs for necessary water system improvements, to be computed as
follows:



      (1)   Residential.  The water system new service buy-in fee
shall be set by Council resolution per dwelling unit for a residential
connection to the water system. Single-family residences, including
manufactured and mobile homes, privately owned condominiums, shall be
classified as residential connections.



      (2)   Commercial/industrial.



         (a)   The water system new service buy-in fee for
commercial/industrial connections shall be based on water meter size by
Council resolution. A commercial/industrial connection is hereby defined as
any connection other than residential including apartments, hotel/motels, RV
parks, senior mobile home parks, schools, churches and the like.



         (b)   Commercial/Industrial water system new service
buy-in fees are calculated as follows:  On July 1 of each year, commencing
in 2003, the amount of the buy-in fee to be paid to the town pursuant to this
section shall be increased by the percentage change in the annual average of
the Engineering News Record (ENR) Index between the prior 2 calendar years.
The Finance Director shall make the required calculation by April 1 of each
year, and the amount of the hookup fees for the next 12 month period
beginning July 1 of that year, as calculated by the Finance Director and
reviewed by the Town Manager, shall then be fixed by the Finance Director
based upon such calculation, without the necessity of further action by the
Town Council. In no event shall the amount of the buy-in fees be reduced
based upon a change in the ENR Index. No later than 30 days after the buy-in
fees are adjusted each year as provided in this section, the Town Clerk shall
cause to be published a public notice setting forth the amount of the
adjusted buy-in fees. The notice shall be published one time in a newspaper
of general circulation in the town, provided, however, that the failure of
the Town Clerk to cause the notice to be published shall not affect the
validity of the adjustment to the buy-in fees as made by the Finance Director
pursuant to this section. In the event the ENR Index information for the
prior calendar years is unavailable by April 1, the buy-in fees as previously
fixed for the prior fiscal year (July 1 to June 30) shall continue in effect
until such time as the ENR Index for the prior years is available and the
Finance Director makes the required calculation. Charges and/or fees imposed
under this section shall be due and payable in full when construction permits
for units are issued.



      (3)   No transferability of fees.  All fees paid pursuant to
this section shall apply to the real property upon which the fee is initially
calculated. Connection fees are not transferable between properties.
Structures moved from 1 location to another location must pay new connection
fees for the new location, with a credit to be given for any connection fees
previously paid for that location.



      (4)   Waiver of fees.  The Public Works Director, with the
approval of Town Manager, is hereby authorized to waive the provisions of
division (B)(3) above regarding transfer of connection fees between
properties in the event that the Public Works Director determines that
compliance with the division would result in a gross inequity in a particular
situation.



      (5)   Service connections.  Service connection to the town
water system shall only be provided pursuant to an application or agreement
with the property owner or applicant and the town. No such application or
agreement will be finalized unless the town finds that:



         (a)   The project or development is consistent with,
conforms to, furthers the implementation of, and is not contrary to the
adopted water use policy.



         (b)   The project or development is consistent with,
conforms to, furthers the implementation of, and is not contrary to the
adopted general plan.



         (c)   The project or development is consistent with,
conforms to, furthers the implementation of, and is not contrary to any
applicable adopted plan, including, but not limited to, specific area plans,
circulation plans, capital improvement plans, or other growth planning or
growth management plans.



         (d)   The application is in accord with the duly adopted
town water budget.



         (e)   In determining compliance with the foregoing, the
Town Council shall consider the overall intent and goals of the applicable
plan or policy.



         (f)   That notwithstanding the foregoing, a variance or
exception may be granted by the Town Council, where failure to do so would
result in a gross inequity, as solely determined by the Town Council.



      (6)   Water service lines.  Water service lines shall be
installed by the consumers at their own expense. Temporary lines must be
buried 2 feet and backfilled 10 feet from the meter. All service lines shall
be installed at least 2 feet deep and not less than 2 feet from an open area
or vault.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.252  WATER SERVICE CONNECTION AND METER INSTALLATION CHARGES.



   The consumer or property owner at the time of making application shall
pay to the town water meter installation charges as set by Council resolution:



   (A)   All service connections installed by contractors shall be
according to town standards and specifications. The contractor shall install
meter boxes and meter sets specified by the town. Any required pressure
regulating valve shall be installed and tested by the contractor. The
pressure regulating valve shall be maintained by the customer.



   (B)   In the event a service connection must cross an Arizona
Department of Transportation highway right-of-way, the consumer or property
owner shall obtain the necessary permits directly from the Arizona Department
of Transportation to make the service connection, and the consumer or the
property owner shall obtain their own contractor to make the service
connection. The service connection shall include the meter set and box and
the service line from the meter box to the water main. The contractor will
install the water main tap and expose the water main. The meter shall be
installed in the box by the town. 



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.253  SEWER SYSTEM NEW SERVICE BUY-IN FEES.



   (A)   There shall be a mandatory sewer system new service buy-in fee
charged for new residential units or commercial/industrial connections being
served by any of the town’s wastewater collection, treatment and recharge
systems that are owned, operated and maintained by the town.



   (B)   This fee shall be the equivalent of the customer’s share of
the costs to the town for the construction of the wastewater treatment
facilities, the recharge facility, lift stations, and sewer mains and
interceptor lines. This fee shall be payable by the residential or
commercial/industrial customer or property owner prior to the issuance of a
new building permit or connection to the system for existing structures.



      (1)   Residential.  The sewer system new service buy-in fee
shall be set by Council resolution per residential dwelling unit for a
residential connection to the sewer system, subject to annual review and
revision by the Council. Single-family residences, including manufactured and
mobile homes, private condominiums, shall be classified as residential.



      (2)   Commercial/industrial.



         (a)   The sewer system new service buy-in fee for
commercial/industrial connections shall be based on an equivalent dwelling
unit (EDU) that utilizes a calculation comparing the facility total flow, BOD
and suspended solids, among other factors, to a standard single family
residential unit. A commercial/industrial connection is hereby defined as any
connection other than residential, including apartments, hotel/motels, RV
parks, senior mobile home parks, schools, churches and the like.



         (b)   Commercial/industrial sewer system new service
buy-in fees are calculated as follows:



 


Schedule of Equivalent Dwelling Units (EDU)




Class

 

User Category

 

EDU Rate Basis






1

 
Single family dwelling
 
Per residential unit



1

 
Commercial property
 
The greater of: Per 3,000SF or 250 GPD or fraction thereof not specifically
covered elsewhere herein



1

 
Apartments
 
Per residential unit



2

 
Bakeries, retail
 
Per location



1

 
Churches/religious
 
Per church/house of worship



1

 
Institution
 
Plus units for the following: School and/or daycare facilities therein



1

 
 
For every 30 persons or fraction thereof




 
Combination use
 
As provided in each category



0.5

 
Correctional and 24 hour health care facilities
 
For every bed



1

 
Clubs, societies, service organization, recreation centers, in-door tennis,
racquet ball clubs and the like
 
For every 4 employees, or fraction thereof, plus units for the following:



1

 
 
For each swimming pool facility



1

 
For each restaurant, diner, fountain or bar - for every 25 seats or fraction
thereof, for each banquet or catering facility for every 100 seats or
fraction thereof
 



1

 
Diners, taverns and restaurants, banquet/ catering facilities
 
For each restaurant, diner, fountain, or bar - for every 25 seats or fraction
thereof, and/or for each banquet or catering facility for every 100 seats or
fraction thereof



1

 
Hospitals
 
For every 2 beds or fraction thereof



0.33

 
Hotels and motels
 
Per room, plus units for the following



1

 
 
For each swimming pool



1

 
 
For each restaurant, diner, fountain or bar - for every 25 seats or fraction
thereof



1

 
 
For each banquet or catering facility, for every 100 seats or fraction thereof



0.5

 
 
For each washing machine regardless of capacity



1

 
Industrial plants, warehouses
 
The greater of per 12 employees or fraction thereof, or per 250 gpd of
wastewater discharged or fraction thereof, in addition to BOD or SS in excess
of 200 mg/l



0.5

 
Laundromats or self-service laundry
 
For each washing machine, regardless of capacity



1

 
Public buildings
 
Per 30 employees or fraction thereof



0.25

 
Rented rooms
 
Per room for rent



1

 
Schools (public or private) and day care facilities)
 
Per 30 students, faculty, staff, employees or fraction thereof



2

 
Service station, without carwash facility
 
Per location



3

 
Service station, with car wash; garages and car wash with or without service
stations, including self service
 
Per location



1

 
Single family dwelling with place of business
 
For the residential unit plus as business use category



1

 
Supermarkets
 
Per 5 employees or fraction thereof



1

 
Theaters/movie house
 
Per 100 seating capacity, car stalls or fraction thereof




 



      (3)   Annual adjustment.  An automatic annual adjustment
shall be made for sewer buy-in fees in accordance with the provisions and
methods detailed in § 51.251.



      (4)   No transferability of fees.  All fees paid pursuant to
this section shall apply to the real property upon which the initial fee was
calculated. Connection fees are not transferable between properties.
Structures moved from 1 location to another location must pay new connection
fees for the new location, with a credit to be given for any connection fees
previously paid for that location.



      (5)   Waiver of fees.  The Public Works Director, with the
approval of Town Manager, is hereby authorized to waive the provisions of
division (C) of this section regarding transfer of connection fees between
properties in the event that the Public Works Director determines that
compliance with said subsection would result in a gross inequity in a
particular situation.



   (C)   (1)   Owners of residential dwelling units or businesses in
existence as of the effective date of this chapter, or for which new building
permits have been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, shall
be exempt for the properties from the sewer system new service hookup fees as
per § 51.253. Also, owners who obtain a new building permit for a parcel not
scheduled per the town’s sewer master development plan for sewer service
within 120 days of issuance of the building permit shall be exempt for the
property from the sewer system new service hookup fees as per § 51.253. All
such owners shall, however, pay a 1-time sewer system existing service hookup
fee as set by Council resolution per residential dwelling unit or per
commercial/ industrial location. All other property owners shall pay sewer
system new service hookup fees as per § 51.253.



      (2)   An automatic annual adjustment for this hookup fee shall
be made in accordance with the requirements of § 51.251.



   (D)   (1)   The sewer system existing service hookup fee shall be
paid in lump sum, within 90 days of the date the owner is notified, in
writing, by the town that sewer service is available to the property, and
that such property is scheduled for sewer hookup service. The owner may elect
to make the payment pursuant to a time payment agreement consummated with the
town’s Finance Director. Time payments shall bear interest at a minimum
rate of 5% per annum, with final payment due within 120 months. If the sewer
system existing service connection fee or related time payments are unpaid
for more than 90 days, the property shall become subject to lien until fully
paid. Final payments shall become due and payable by the close of escrow for
any property sold prior to receipt of the final payment by the town.



      (2)   Owners of residential dwelling units within the Chino
Meadows subdivision for which a building permit has been issued prior to
December 13, 2007, the effective date of Ordinance No. 07-697, and after
August 21, 2004, shall pay the sewer system new service hookup fees as per
this section. All such owners may elect to make the payment pursuant to a
time payment agreement consummated with the town's Finance Director. Time
payments shall bear interest at a minimum rate of 5% per annum, with final
payment due within 120 months. If the sewer system new service connection fee
or related time payments are unpaid for more than 90 days, the property shall
become subject to lien until fully paid. Final payments shall become due and
payable by the close of escrow for any property sold prior to receipt of the
final payment by the town.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 07-697, passed 12-13-2007)



§ 51.254  DETERMINATION OF WASTEWATER QUALITY.



   (A)   The Director or his or her designee shall have the authority
to make whatever tests are necessary to carry out a planned sampling program
and to make whatever analyses are needed for all commercial and industrial
users. The BOD test shall be considered the standard test; however, COD or
TOC tests may be substituted in cases where it has been determined by the
Director that the BOD test is not representative of actual wastewater
loading. Wastewater characteristics shall be determined by the Department on
the basis of monitored wastewater discharged, a certified statement from the
user, or on the best available data as to the characteristics of the
discharges.



   (B)   Any change in the ongoing process(es) employed by a user
contributing commercial or industrial waste which results in a variation of
more than 25% in 1 or more of the effluent loading concentrations shall be
reported to the Department within 30 days of the change.



   (C)   If it is determined through testing that a significant
variation exists between the user’s certified data and the discharge
characteristics monitored by the Department, the City may adjust the sewer
use charge based on the monitored data from the original date of
certification, unless written communication has occurred notifying the
Department of changes in loading and giving specific dates of changes.



   (D)   Where sampling and gauging of specific users is not practical
for physical, economic, safety, or other reasons, the Director may designate
values for concentrations of the wastes discharged into the sewerage system
for all users in the same Standard Industrial Classification or
subclassification.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.255  OTHER USER CHARGE PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Biennial review. The Director will review, not less often than
every 2 years, the wastewater contribution of users and user classes, the
total costs of operation and maintenance of the treatment works, and its
approved user charge system. The Director shall at such time recommend a
revision in the sewer service charge and user classes to accomplish the
following:



      (1)   Maintain a reasonable proportionate distribution of
operation and maintenance costs among users and user classes;



      (2)   Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation
and maintenance costs necessary to the proper operation and maintenance
(including replacement) of the treatment works; and



      (3)   Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to
the costs of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the
next year and adjust the rate accordingly.



   (B)   Notification of users. Each user will be notified, at least
annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the user charge rate and
that portion of the total charges which are attributable to user charges.



   (C)   Inconsistent agreements. The user charge system set forth in
this chapter is applicable to all agreements or contracts between the town
and users including industrial users, other municipalities or federal
agencies or installations, and the terms of this chapter shall take
precedence over any such agreements or contracts which are inconsistent with
the requirements of this chapter.



   (D)   Wastewater treatment byproducts. All revenue from the sale of
treatment-related byproducts, except recharged effluent, shall be used to
offset the cost of operation and maintenance. User charges shall be
proportionally reduced for all users. Total annual revenues received from the
sale of a byproduct shall be credited to the treatment works O&M cost no
later than the fiscal year immediately following their receipt.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.256  OTHER SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.



   In addition to the user charges described herein, the rate schedules
shall be sufficient to cover the following costs:



   (A)   A portion of the annual debt service costs for retirement of
sanitary sewer bonds will be charged to all customers served directly by the
town’s wastewater collection system. The Public Works Director, in
conjunction with the Finance Director, shall make recommendations to the Town
Council at least once every 2 years as to how these costs shall be
proportioned among the users. Charges to recover these costs will be called
“other charges.”



   (B)   Adequate reserve funds to allow for reasonably expected
increases in the cost of providing services will be charged to all customers
served directly by the town’s wastewater collection system. The Directors
shall make recommendations to the Town Council as to the amount of reserve
funds necessary and as to how these funds shall be proportioned among the
users.



   (C)   The costs of billing and collection and performing industrial
waste services shall be charged to customers on an equitable basis. The
Directors shall make recommendations to the Town Council as to how these
costs shall be proportioned among the users.  Charges to recover these costs
will be called “billing and collection charges” and “industrial waste
charges” respectively.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.257  LOW INCOME CITIZEN’S RATE.



   The town may set a separate rate, by resolution, for sewer fees for
citizens with limited incomes based on the following procedures:



   (A)   Qualifications. Any single-family unit occupied by a person or
persons presenting satisfactory evidence of the head of the household having
an annual income not exceeding those income limits set by Town Council
resolution, shall be charged an amount set by Council resolution per month
for sewer use, based on the costs of serving this class. Applications shall
be obtained from the Finance Department and must be submitted annually.



   (B)   Applications.



      (1)   Applications for reduced sewer user service charges
shall be on forms supplied by the Finance Department, filed with or mailed to
the Department. All information required to be given on the form shall be
supplied and verified by the applicant. Reduced sewer user service charges
shall be granted to qualifying applicants who file their applications prior
to the certification of user charges to the property tax accounts. All
qualifying  citizens must submit new applications annually during the months
of May and June in order for eligibility to be continued through the next
fiscal year from July 1 through the following June 30. A change of address of
a qualifying  citizen terminates the special rate, but a new application by
the qualifying  citizen at his or her new address may be made and, when
approved, the reduced rate shall be allowed.



      (2)   Any unit of government or administrative agency thereof
maintaining on a regular basis data covering the qualifications required by
the town for reduced sewer user service charge for citizens  pertaining to
tenants of its property, is permitted to apply for reduced sewer user service
charges on behalf of its tenants meeting the requirements, and to set forth
the qualifications of those tenants without separate verifications.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.258  RESIDENTIAL WATER RATES.



   (A)   Effective July 15, 2003, a monthly water charge shall be
assessed against all residential consumers having a service connection with
the town water mains. The water consumption shall be measured by meter.



   (B)   In addition to a monthly minimum fixed charge, a rate will be
applied to the actual consumption as measured:



      (1)   Water furnished to residential consumers in incorporated
municipalities other than the Town of Chino Valley shall be charged at the
same rate as water furnished residential consumers with the Town of Chino
Valley (inside Town of Chino Valley limits rates) plus a surcharge equal to
30% of the inside Town of Chino Valley limits rates. The surcharge shall also
apply to the monthly minimum fixed charge.



      (2)   Water furnished to residential consumers in all areas
other than incorporated municipalities shall be charged at the same rate as
water furnished residential consumers within the Town of Chino Valley (inside
Town of Chino Valley limits rates) plus a surcharge equal to 30% of the
inside town of Chino Valley limits rates. The surcharge shall also apply to
the monthly minimum fixed charge.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.259  COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL WATER RATES.



   (A)   Effective July 15, 2003, a monthly water charge shall be
assessed against all commercial and industrial consumers having a service
connection with the town water mains. The water consumption shall be measured
by meter.



   (B)   In addition to a monthly minimum fixed charge, a rate will be
applied to the actual consumption as measured:



      (1)   Water furnished to commercial and industrial consumers
in incorporated municipalities other than the Town of Chino Valley shall be
charged at the same rate as water furnished commercial and industrial
consumers within the town limits plus a surcharge equal to 30% of the inside
town limits rates. The surcharge shall also apply to the monthly minimum
fixed charge.



      (2)   Water furnished to commercial and industrial consumers
in all areas other than incorporated municipalities shall be charged at the
same rate as water furnished commercial and industrial consumers within the
Town of Chino Valley (inside Town of Chino Valley limits rates) plus a
surcharge equal to 30% of the inside Town of Chino Valley limits rates. The
surcharge shall also apply to the monthly minimum fixed charge.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.260  RATES FOR PRIVATE FIRE CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   When fire service connections are required by applicable town
code or state law provisions they shall include a detector check of a type to
be approved by the town. The indicating meter to be used with the check shall
be furnished by the town.



   (B)   If unmetered water available in this division is used for
other than fire protection purposes, the quantity so used shall be estimated
and the same shall be charged according to applicable rates.  If such use is
continued for more than 20 days a recording meter will be installed at the
consumer’s expense and water furnished thereafter will be charged for in
accordance with applicable rates.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.261  FEES AND ASSESSMENTS DUE.



   (A)   All fees and assessments are due and payable on the date
billed.  Water service may be discontinued for the nonpayment of any of the
fees, penalties or assessments set forth in this chapter. Late charges of
1.5% per month of the unpaid balance due will be imposed on bills not paid
within 22 days after the billing date.



   (B)   Because sewer service is an un-metered service, all monthly
fees shall apply and accrue whether or not service is utilized.



   (C)   The Public Works Director, with approval of the Town Manager,
shall be authorized to waive all, or any portion of the deposit fees, water
and sewer monthly fees, late fees and any other miscellaneous fees. The
waiver of any fees must be consistent with federal and state law.  In the
event that an outstanding balance is owed from a previous account holder, the
waiver of any fees shall apply only to a new account holder.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004; Am. Ord. 15-792, passed 1-13-2015)




ENFORCEMENT




§ 51.275  INTERFERENCE WITH OR OBSTRUCTING FACILITIES.



   Any person who in any manner willfully defaces, illegally uses,
obstructs or interferes with the operation of any well, pump, storage tank,
hydrant, valve, pipe, construction trench, or any other water works facility,
or any cleanout, manhole, pipe, pump station, treatment plant, recharge
facility, construction trench or any other wastewater works facility, or
anyone who shall pollute the potable water supply or recharge water supply of
the town, or violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, or a felony if the total value of the damage and expense is
sufficient to reach such threshold. Any expense caused to the town for the
repair, replacement or cleanup of damaged, stolen or misused water and
wastewater works facilities shall be charged against and collected from the
person or persons who caused the expense. The violation of any provision of
this chapter, or failure to pay for damages to town facilities, shall be
sufficient cause for the Director to discontinue town water and/or wastewater
service to any property owned or used by the person or persons.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.276  AUTHORITY OF UTILITY DEPARTMENT TO TURN OFF WATER AND/OR SEWER
SERVICE.



   For any violation of this chapter, or for any nonpayment of water
and/or sewer charges for either domestic, commercial, sprinkling or other
purposes, the Utility Department has the right to turn off such service
without further notice. After it has been turned off from any service pipe on
account of nonpayment or violation of the chapter, the service shall not be
turned on until all back charges are paid, together with the payment of all
fees, and the applicable deposit paid, if required.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.277  RULES AND REGULATIONS TO BE ENFORCED, EXCEPTION.



   The rules and regulations of this chapter are made for the benefit of
the consumers of water and wastewater dischargers in the town and for the
protection of the water supply system, wastewater system, recharge system or
the town and the environment. Their enforcement shall in no case be willfully
ignored by any town official, employee or agent. When a strict enforcement of
any rule could work a gross injustice on a consumer of water or discharger of
wastewater, the Public Works Director may, in his or her discretion and with
the agreement of the Town Manager, order a suspension of the rule as to that
particular case.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.278  CRIMINAL PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, except for such violations as may exceed felony damage
thresholds and any such violation shall constitute a separate offense on each
successive day the violation continues.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.279  CIVIL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision §§ 51.175et seq.,
51.215et seq. and/or 51.230et seq. shall be civilly liable to the town for a
sum as adopted by resolution per day for each violation. For continuing
violations, each day may constitute a separate offense. In seeking the
assessment of a civil penalty, the following criteria contained in A.R.S. §
49-391(C) shall be considered:



      (1)   The seriousness of the violation;



      (2)   The economic benefit, if any, resulting from the
violation;



      (3)   Any history of such, or other, violations;



      (4)   Any good faith efforts to comply with the applicable
requirements;



      (5)   The economic impact of the penalty on the violator;
and/or



      (6)   Such other factors as justice may require.



   (B)   In addition to the civil penalty imposed herein, the person
shall be liable for any civil penalty imposed on the town by other regulatory
agencies as a result of the violation.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.280  REMEDIES.



   (A)   In addition to any civil and/or criminal penalty which may be
imposed for violations of this chapter, a user shall be liable for all actual
costs which may be assessed by the Director on a user of the town’s sewage
works who discharges wastes containing non-permissible quantities of
prohibited substances into the public sewer system or contaminates the
town’s potable water supply, storage and discharge system. The Director is
authorized to assess charges based on the extra costs incurred by the town in
surveillance, sampling and testing, for additional operating and maintenance
expenses, including overhead charges, and for any other action required to
identify, handle, process or supplement normal activities due to the
unauthorized discharge of wastes or system contamination.



   (B)   The Director shall have the authority to discontinue water
and/or sewer service to a user for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Failure to pay a charge assessed by the Director for
unauthorized discharges or water system contamination;



      (2)   Failure to correct an unauthorized discharge as required
by the Director;



      (3)   Discharging any unauthorized substances, materials,
water or waste as prohibited by this chapter or the Director;



      (4)   Failure to correct any cross connection, source of
contamination or potential source of contamination with the potable water
supply; and



      (5)   For violation of any provision of this chapter.



   (C)   Before discontinuing water or sewer service as provided
herein, the Director shall give written notice to the user of the
discontinuance and an opportunity to appear before the Director on any
disputed matter relative to the discontinuance of water and/or sewer service,
except that if a discharge or source of contamination is a threat to the
public health, safety, and welfare, the discontinuance of water and/or sewer
service shall be accomplished by physically cutting and blocking the sewer
connection and/or removing or locking the water meter in the off position.
The actual cost for disconnecting and/or reconnecting the affected utility
service shall be paid by the affected user to Utility Department.



   (D)   Upon notice of the final determination by the Director of an
assessment owed, the user shall tender the fee and/or charges within 10 days
ordered by the Director.



   (E)   Any unauthorized discharge or other threat to the public water
supply not corrected, or assessment not tendered, is hereby declared to be,
and is, a public nuisance which may be abated by order of a court of
competent jurisdiction and its continued operation is unlawful. The remedy
provided herein shall be in addition to any other remedy authorized by this
chapter.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 51.281  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The effective date of this chapter shall be from and after August 7,
2004.



(Ord. 04-578, passed 7-22-2004)



LIEN ENFORCEMENT



§ 51.290  LIEN ENFORCEMENT FOR UNPAID UTILITY USER FEES.



   (A)   The Town Clerk or Public Works Director may assess and file a
lien on real property for the nonpayment of utility user fees for services
provided to the property if the payment of the fees is delinquent for more
than 90 days.



   (B)   Before filing the lien, the Town Clerk or Public Works
Director shall provide written notice to the owner of the property. The
notice shall be given at least 30 days before filing the lien, and shall
include an opportunity for a hearing before an official, to be designated by
the Town Council for such purposes. Subject to division (C) below, the notice
shall be either served personally on or mailed to the property owner, at the
last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested, or to the
address to which the tax bill for the property was last mailed, as shown in
the county records.



   (C)   If the owner does not reside on the property, the notice shall
be sent to the address to which the tax bill for the property was last
mailed, as shown in the county records.



   (D)   If served by mail, notice shall be deemed to be complete on
the date on which the notice is deposited in the United States mail.



   (E)   The notice shall inform the property owner that:



      (1)   He or she has the opportunity for a hearing regarding
the delinquency before a designated town official;



      (2)   If a timely objection is not filed, the unpaid
delinquency shall be deemed due and owing, and failure to pay shall result in
the town pursuing all available means of collection as authorized by the town
code;



      (3)   If a hearing is requested and it is determined as result
of the hearing that the unpaid delinquency is due and owing, failure to pay
shall result in the town pursuing all available means of collection as
authorized by the town code.



   (F)   In the event the property owner requests a hearing, such
request must be received not later than 15 days from the date of the notice.
The request for hearing must include copies of all documents that support the
owner's position, including any documents showing that there is no
delinquency or that the amount claimed delinquent by the town is in error. A
hearing shall be scheduled and held not later than 30 days following a
request for a hearing by a property owner. The property owner shall be
notified in writing of the time and date of the hearing.



   (G)   The hearing shall be held by a hearing officer who shall be a
non-town employee retained by the town, or a town employee who has no
involvement with the Utilities Division or the Finance Department. The
hearing officer shall have the authority prescribed to public officers
pursuant to  A.R.S. § 12-2212, as may be amended from time to time.



   (H)   The hearing may be continued 1 time by the hearing officer
upon the written request of either party for good cause.



   (I)   The hearing shall be held during regular town business hours.



   (J)   The hearing shall be recorded by an electronic recording
device.



   (K)   The property owner and the town shall each be given an
opportunity to present their respective cases. The town shall present its
case first. Presentation by either party may include:



      (1)   Sworn testimony;



      (2)   Submission of evidence;



      (3)   Presentation of witnesses; and



      (4)   Cross examination.



      The Arizona Rules of Evidence shall not apply, and the hearing
officer may permit the admission of any evidence deemed relevant to the
issues at hand.



   (L)   The hearing officer shall render a decision within 15 days of
the close of the hearing, which decision shall be binding and final on all
parties. The record of the hearing and the decision by the hearing officer
shall be filed with the Town Clerk. The hearing officer's order shall be
mailed to the property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, and
notice of the order shall be deemed to be complete upon the date on which the
notice is deposited in the United States mail.



   (M)   The hearing officer may find the following:



      (1)   The property owner does not owe the delinquent amount
and the notice of delinquency shall be canceled;



      (2)   The property owner does owe the delinquent amount as
noticed by the town, and order that the amount be paid within 20 days of the
date the decision is rendered; or



      (3)   A different (lesser) amount than that which was noticed
by the town is owed and delinquent, and order that amount be paid within 20
days of the date the decision is rendered.



   (N)   In the event no hearing is requested by the property owner, or
in the event payment is not made on a delinquent amount as determined by a
hearing officer after a hearing, the town shall place a lien on the property
in accordance with this section.



   (O)   The unpaid utility user fees are a lien on the property from
the date of the recording of the lien in the office of the County Recorder
until all fees are paid in full. The lien is subject and inferior to the lien
for general taxes, and to all prior recorded mortgages and encumbrances of
record. A sale of the property to satisfy a lien obtained under this section
shall be made following a judgment of foreclosure and order of sale. The town
may bring an action to enforce the lien in the Yavapai County Superior Court
at any time after the recording of the lien, but failure to enforce the lien
by a foreclosure lawsuit shall not affect the validity of the lien. The
recorded unpaid utility user fees lien shall be prima facie evidence of the
truth of all matters recited in the recording, and of the regularity of all
proceedings before the recording.



   (P)   Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, any
lien placed on a property pursuant to this section shall be enforceable
pursuant to and in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-511.02.



(Ord. 10-741, passed 10-28-2010)



CHAPTER 52:  REMOVAL OF RUBBISH, TRASH AND THE LIKE, AND CULVERT MAINTENANCE



Section




General Provisions




   52.01   Unattended containers



   52.02   Water and earthen material flow



   52.03   Culverts or other drainage infrastructure; installation and
maintenance




Removal of Rubbish, Trash and the Like; Dilapidated Structures




   52.15   Notice to remove



   52.16   Service of notice



   52.17   Appeal to Town Council



   52.18   Removal by town



   52.19   Lien for removal



   52.20   Placement of debris




Garbage and Trash Removal; Methods




   52.40   Hauling refuse



   52.41   Vehicles and receptacles to be spill proof



   52.42   Spilled refuse



   52.43   Dumping refuse




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 52.01  UNATTENDED CONTAINERS.



   No person shall place, display or maintain any unattended container for
soliciting deposit of recyclable materials or donated items in any exterior
location within the town limits, except in conformance with all of the
following provisions:



   (A)   Unattended containers may be located only within the parking
lot of private property lawfully zoned, developed and used for commercial or
industrial purposes or at schools, churches or charitable organizations which
have similar parking facilities.



   (B)   Unattended containers may be located only with the permission
of the property owner, his or her agent or the person in possession of the
property, and the container owner’s name and current telephone number shall
be displayed thereon in a conspicuous location.



   (C)   The owner of such unattended container and the property owner
shall jointly or severally maintain all exterior areas within 25 feet of the
container free from litter.



(2001 Code, Art. 9-5)



§ 52.02  WATER AND EARTHEN MATERIAL FLOW.



   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or
cause the escape or flow of water or earthen material onto public streets or
adjacent properties in such a manner as to cause flooding or to endanger or
impede vehicular traffic or pedestrian traffic. EARTHEN MATERIAL shall
include, but shall not be limited to, soil, silt, clay, sand, gravel, rock,
dirt, mud, organic material, or a combination thereof.



(Ord. 12-758, passed 6-12-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.03  CULVERTS OR OTHER DRAINAGE INFRASTRUCTURE; INSTALLATION AND
MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Any person with valid access to a public street, pursuant to
the Unified Development Ordinance of the town, that contains a bar ditch,
roadside ditch, or similar drainage improvement (“drainage ditch") may be
required by the Public Works Department, upon 60 days notice, to install a
culvert or other drainage structure in or beneath a driveway or similar
access path (“culvert”).



   (B)   Any person that uses an access way or driveway from property
owned or controlled by them, which contains a culvert, is responsible for
maintaining such culvert and shall maintain the same in a reasonable
condition. The town, through its Public Works Department, may provide written
notice to such person, who shall have 30 days from the date of the notice to
correct the deficiencies and maintenance of the culvert.



   (C)   The town shall not be responsible for the installation,
maintenance or replacement of a culvert.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person to install or to maintain a
culvert in such a manner that traps water or earthen material in any drainage
ditch, or that otherwise impedes positive drainage along or away from the
public street.



   (E)   Notice provided by this section shall be in writing and mailed
by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the property owner and party
controlling the property.



(Ord. 12-758, passed 6-12-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99




REMOVAL OF RUBBISH, TRASH AND THE LIKE; DILAPIDATED STRUCTURES




§ 52.15  NOTICE TO REMOVE.



   To compel the removal of rubbish, trash, weeds, filth, debris and
dilapidated structures through the provisions of this section and of §§
52.16 through 52.20, if a person owning and/or controlling any property
fails, neglects or refuses to remove or properly dispose of rubbish, trash,
weeds, filth, debris and dilapidated structures located on property owned
and/or controlled by the person, both the owner of the property and the
person who is in control of the property shall be given written notice by the
Clerk to remove all rubbish, trash, weeds, filth, debris and dilapidated
structures from the property within 30 days from the date the notice was
received by the owner and/or person in control of the property, and prior to
the date of compliance on the notice. The notice shall be received not less
than 30 days before the date set thereon for compliance and shall contain an
estimate of the cost of removal by the town, a statement that unless the
person owning and/or controlling the property complies therewith within 30
days from the date the written notice is received that the town will, at the
expense of both the person owning and the person controlling the property,
perform the necessary work at a cost not to exceed the estimate given in the
notice, plus a 5% assessment to cover further inspections, and that the owner
and/or the controller of the property may appeal in writing to the Clerk
within 30 days from the date the notice is received by him or her and prior
to the date of compliance.



(2001 Code, § 9-4-1)



§ 52.16  SERVICE OF NOTICE.



   Notice shall be personally served on the owner or person controlling
the property, by a police officer of the town in the manner provided in Rule
4(d) of the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, or mailed to the owner or
person controlling the property at his or her last known address by certified
or registered mail, or the address to which the tax bill for the property was
last mailed. If the owner does not reside on the property, a duplicate notice
shall also be sent to him or her by certified or registered mail at his or
her last known address.



(2001 Code, § 9-4-2)



§ 52.17  APPEAL TO TOWN COUNCIL.



   Prior to the date set for compliance on the notice, the owner or person
controlling the property may appeal in writing to the Town Council from the
demand of the notice. The Town Council shall hear and determine the same and
the decision of the Town Council shall be final. The Town Council may either
affirm or reverse the decision or modify the scope of the work as required in
the notice.



(2001 Code, § 9-4-3)



§ 52.18  REMOVAL BY TOWN.



   When any such person to whom notice, as aforesaid, has been given, and
on or before the date of compliance on the notice, or within such further
time as may have been granted by the Council on appeal, fails, neglects or
refuses to move from such property any or all rubbish, trash, weeds, filth,
debris and dilapidated structures, the Clerk is authorized and directed to
cause same to be removed and disposed of at the expense of the owner or
person controlling the property. Upon completion of the work, the Clerk shall
prepare a verified statement of account of the actual cost of the removal or
abatement, the date the work was completed, and the street address and the
legal description of the property on which the work was done, including 5%
for additional inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith,
and shall serve a duplicate copy of the verified statement upon the person
owning or controlling the property in the manner prescribed in § 52.16. The
owner or person controlling the property shall have 30 days from the date of
service upon him or her to appeal in writing to the Council from the amount
of the assessment as contained in the verified statement. If an appeal is not
filed with the Clerk within the 30-day period, then the amount of the
assessment as determined by the Manager shall become final and binding. If an
appeal is taken, the Council shall, at its next regular meeting, hear and
determine the appeal and may affirm the amount of the assessment, modify the
amount thereof, or determine that no assessment at all shall be made. The
decision of the Council shall be final and binding on all persons.



(2001 Code, § 9-4-4)



§ 52.19  LIEN FOR REMOVAL.



   If no appeal is taken from the amount of the assessment, or if an
appeal is taken and the Council has affirmed or modified the amount of the
assessment, the original assessment or the assessment as so modified shall be
recorded in the office of the County Recorder and, from the date of its
recording, shall be a lien on the lot or tract of land until paid. The liens
shall be prior and superior to all other liens, obligations, mortgages or
other encumbrances except liens for general taxes. A sale of the property to
satisfy a lien obtained under the provisions of this section shall be made
upon judgment of foreclosure or order of sale. The town shall have the right
to bring an action to enforce the lien in the superior court at any time
after the recording of the assessment, but failure to enforce the lien by the
action shall not affect its validity. The recorded assessment shall be prima
facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited therein and of the
regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording thereof. A prior
assessment for the purposes provided in this section shall not be a bar to a
subsequent assessment or assessments for such purposes, and any number of
liens on the same lot or tract of land may be enforced in the same action.



(2001 Code, § 9-4-5)



§ 52.20  PLACEMENT OF DEBRIS.



   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place any
rubbish, trash, filth or debris upon any private or public property not owned
or under the control of the person, firm or corporation and, in addition to
any fine which may be imposed for a violation of any provision of this
section, shall be liable for all costs which may be assessed pursuant to this
subchapter for the removal of the rubbish, trash, filth or debris.



(2001 Code, § 9-4-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99




GARBAGE AND TRASH REMOVAL; METHODS




§ 52.40  HAULING REFUSE.



   It is unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled any refuse
on or along any public street, avenue or alley in the town in violation of
any of the provisions in this subchapter.



(2001 Code, § 9-1-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.41  VEHICLES AND RECEPTACLES TO BE SPILL PROOF.



   It is unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled on or along
any public street in the town any garbage, unless the garbage is contained in
strong, watertight vehicles or vehicles with watertight receptacles,
constructed to prevent any such garbage from falling, leaking or spilling.



(2001 Code, § 9-1-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.42  SPILLED REFUSE.



   Any person hauling any refuse along the streets of the town shall
immediately replace in the conveyance used for the hauling any refuse which
may fall upon any street.



(2001 Code, § 9-1-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Littering from trucks, see § 91.06



   Littering provisions, see §§ 91.01 through 91.15



§ 52.43  DUMPING REFUSE.



   It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any refuse
upon any public or private property within the town except as specifically
permitted in this chapter.



(2001 Code, § 9-1-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         71.   TRAFFIC RULES





         72.   PARKING RULES




CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Duty of Police Department



   70.02   Records of traffic violations



   70.03   Police Department to investigate accidents



   70.04   Traffic accident studies



   70.05   Traffic accident reports



§ 70.01  DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department, under the
direction of the Police Chief, to investigate all reported crimes, to provide
for the enforcement of the street traffic regulations of the town and all of
the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the town, to make
arrests for traffic violations, to investigate criminal activity and
accidents and to assist in developing ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and to carry out all duties specially imposed by this title.



   (B)   Any peace officer of the town may stop and detain a person as
is reasonably necessary to investigate an actual or suspected violation of
this title and to serve a copy of a complaint for any alleged civil or
criminal violation of this title.



(2001 Code, § 12-1-1)



§ 70.02  RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The Police Department, under the direction of the Police
Chief, shall keep a record of all violations of laws of the town or of state
laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the
final disposition of all such alleged offenses.  The record shall be
maintained according to the Arizona Records Management Program, A.R.S. §
41-1345.



   (B)   All forms for records of violations and notices shall be
serially numbered.  For each month and year, a written record shall be kept
available to the public.



   (C)   All records and reports shall be public records in accordance
with federal and state laws.



(2001 Code, § 12-1-2)



§ 70.03  POLICE DEPARTMENT TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS.



   It shall be the duty of the Police Department, under the direction of
the Police Chief, to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and assist
in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or
contributing to the accidents.



(2001 Code, § 12-1-3)



§ 70.04  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.



   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the
Public Works Department shall conduct studies of the accidents and determine
remedial measures.



(2001 Code, § 12-1-4)



§ 70.05  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   (A)   The Police Department, under the direction of the Police
Chief, shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. 
Accident reports shall be maintained within the Department’s computerized
records management system.



   (B)   The Police Department, under the direction of the Police
Chief, shall receive and properly file all accident reports made to it under
state law or under any law of the town.



(2001 Code, § 12-1-5)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section



   71.01   Directing traffic



   71.02   Obedience to traffic regulations



   71.03   Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted



   71.04   Traffic control devices



   71.05   Authority to designate crosswalks, establish safety zones
and mark traffic lanes



   71.06   Authority; obedience; turning markers and restricted turn
signs



   71.07   Limitations on turning around



   71.08   One-way streets and alleys



   71.09   Traffic at intersections



   71.10   Drivers to obey signs



   71.11   Processions



   71.12   Speed limits



   71.13   Motorized vehicles prohibited on The Peavine Trails



   71.14   Use of mobile communication devices and texting while
operating a motor vehicle



 



   71.99   Penalty



§ 71.01  DIRECTING TRAFFIC.



   (A)   The Police Chief is hereby authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand or signal.



   (B)   Firefighters, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or
assist the Police Chief in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.



(2001 Code, § 12-2-1)



§ 71.02  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   It is unlawful, except as otherwise provided in this code, for any
person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this
chapter or willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Police Chief.



(2001 Code, § 12-2-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.03  USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.



   No person upon roller skates, skateboards, or riding any coaster, toy
vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk, and, when crossing, the person shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
pedestrians.



(2001 Code, § 12-2-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.04  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   The Public Works Department, with input from the Police Chief
and approval of the Council, shall place and maintain traffic control
devices, signs and signals when and as required under the traffic regulations
of the town to make effective the provisions of the regulations, and may
place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he or she may
deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic laws of the town or
under state law or to guide or warn traffic.



   (B)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any
official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with
the traffic regulations of the town unless otherwise directed by the Police
Chief, subject to the exceptions granted in this chapter or by state law.



(2001 Code, § 12-2-4)



§ 71.05  AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS, ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES AND MARK
TRAFFIC LANES.



   The Public Works Department, with input from the Police Chief, is
hereby authorized on approval by the Council:



   (A)   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or
lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in
his or her opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the
roadway, and at such other places as he or she may deem necessary;



   (B)   To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at
such places as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of
pedestrians; and



   (C)   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavement at such places as
he or she may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic laws of the town.



(2001 Code, § 12-2-5)



§ 71.06  AUTHORITY; OBEDIENCE; TURNING MARKERS AND RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.



   (A)   (1)   The Public Works Department with input from the 
Police Chief and approval by the Council is authorized to place markers,
buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to
be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the course to be
traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.



      (2)   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications
are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions
of the indications.



(2001 Code, § 12-2-6)



   (B)   (1)   The Public Works Department with input from the
Police Chief is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which
drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn and shall place
proper signs at such intersections.  The making of the turns may be
prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in
which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or such signs
may be removed when such turns are permitted.



      (2)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no
right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey
the directions of any such sign.



(2001 Code, § 12-2-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.07  LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.



   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district nor shall a
driver upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless the movement can be
made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.



(2001 Code, § 12-2-8)



§ 71.08  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   The Council shall by resolution designate any streets or
alleys which are to be limited to 1-way traffic.



   (B)   When any resolution of the Council designates any one-way
street or alley, the Public Works Department with input from the Police Chief
shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation
shall be effective unless the signs are in place.  Signs indicating the
direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection
where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.



(2001 Code, § 12-2-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.09  TRAFFIC AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   The Council shall, by resolution, designate through streets
and intersections where stops are required and intersections where vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way.



   (B)   When any resolution of the Council shall designate any through
street or intersection where vehicles are to stop or yield the right-of-way,
the Public Works Department with input from the Police Chief shall erect and
maintain the appropriate signs at every location where a vehicle must stop or
yield the right-of-way.



(2001 Code, § 12-2-10)



§ 71.10  DRIVERS TO OBEY SIGNS.



   Whenever traffic signs are erected as provided in this chapter, every
driver of a vehicle shall obey the signs unless directed to proceed by a
police officer or a traffic control signal.  No driver shall drive upon or
through any private property, vacant lot or similar property to avoid
obedience to any regulation included in this chapter.



(2001 Code, § 12-2-11)



§ 71.11  PROCESSIONS.



   (A)   No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be
held without first securing a permit from the Police Chief, and all such
requests for permits shall state the time, place of formation, proposed line
of march, destination and such other regulations as a police officer may set
forth therein.



   (B)   A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles
shall be identified by such methods as may be determined and designated by
the Police Chief.



   (C)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion
and when the vehicles are conspicuously designated.  This provision shall
not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control
signals or a police officer.



   (D)   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as
near to the right hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the
vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.



(2001 Code, § 12-2-12)



§ 71.12  SPEED LIMITS.



   The Town Council may, by written resolution, alter the prima facie
speed limits within the town, as authorized by A.R.S. § 28-701 or other
applicable state statute, when, based upon an engineering and traffic
investigation pursuant to A.R.S. § 28-703 (“speed study”), it is
determined that the maximum speed permitted under state law is greater or
less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon any
part of a street or highway located within the town. A copy of the speed
study and speed limits so affected must be maintained in the files of the
Public Works Department. Maximum speed limits of all other streets within the
town that are not affected by Council resolution as a result of the speed
study will be as established by state statute.



(2001 Code, § 12-2-13)  (Am. Ord. 11-744, passed 3-22-2011)



§ 71.13  MOTORIZED VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON THE PEAVINE TRAILS.



   (A)   The portion of the railroad right-of-way called “The Peavine
Trails”, the north segment of the trail to be known as the “North Peavine
Trail” running from Perkinsville Road north to Road 4 North (excepting the
access roadway to the Old Home Manor) and the south segment of the trail to
be known as the “South Peavine Trail” running from the south side of
Perkinsville Road to Road 4 South, shall be utilized exclusively for
pedestrian, equestrian or non-motorized bicycle use.



   (B)   No person shall operate any bus, combination of vehicles, farm
tractor, golf cart, motor-driven cycle, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorized
skateboard, road tractor, semi-trailer, trailer, truck, truck tractor or
vehicle as defined in A.R.S. §§ 28-101 et seq. as the statute now exists or
as it is amended in the future, on any portion of the railroad right-of-way
designated as the “Peavine Trails” other than emergency or maintenance
vehicles.



   (C)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor.



(2001 Code, § 12-2-14)



§ 71.14  USE OF MOBILE COMMUNICATION DEVICES AND TEXTING WHILE OPERATING A
MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      HANDS-FREE USE. The use of a mobile communication device without
the use of either hand.



      MOBILE COMMUNICATION DEVICE. A wireless communication device that
is designed to engage in calls, and/or receive and transmit text, images,
and/or data.



      OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE. Being in actual physical control of a
motor vehicle on a highway or street and includes being temporarily stopped
because of traffic, a traffic control device or otherwise, but excludes
operating a motor vehicle when the vehicle has pulled over to the side of the
road or off a roadway and has stopped at a location in which the vehicle can
safely remain stationary.



   (B)   Prohibited use.  No person shall, except as otherwise
provided in this section, use a mobile communication device while operating a
motor vehicle upon a street or highway, unless that device is specifically
designed or configured to allow hands-free use and is used in that manner
while operating a motor vehicle.  A law enforcement officer may stop a motor
vehicle or motor driven cycle if the officer has reasonable suspicion to
believe a violation of this section is occurring.



   (C)   Exemptions.  This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   The use of a mobile communication device for the sole
purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an immediate
emergency situation, safety hazard or criminal activity:



         (a)   An emergency response operator;



         (b)   An ambulance company;



         (c)   Fire Department and rescue service personnel;



         (d)   Law enforcement personnel;



         (e)   A hospital; or



         (f)   A physician;’s office or health clinic.



      (2)   The activation, initiation or deactivation of hands-free
use while operating a motor vehicle.



      (3)   The use of a mobile communication device by law
enforcement, public safety personnel and persons operating authorized
emergency vehicles while performing official public safety duties.



      (4)   The use of a mobile communication device while driving
on private property.



      (5)   A person driving a school bus or transit vehicle that is
the subject to Arizona Revised Statutes or Untied State Department of
Transportation regulations.



   (D)   Affirmative defense.  It is an affirmative defense to a
violation of this section if the driver was not operating the vehicle in a
careless manner and was:



      (1)   A driver (a) using a two-way radio or a private Land
Mobile Radio System, within the meaning of Title 47 Code of Federal
Regulations Part 90, while in the performance and scope of work-related
duties and (b) who is operating fleet vehicles or who possess a commercial
vehicle license; or



      (2)   A driver holding a valid amateur radio operator license
issued by the Federal Communications Commission and using a half-duplex
two-way radio.



(Ord. 18-859, passed 11-13-2018)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   In addition to all other penalties authorized under the Chino Valley
Town Code, a person found to be in violation of § 71.14 is subject to a base
civil penalty of $125.  A person found to be in violation of § 71.14 and
involved in a motor vehicle accident is subject to a base civil penalty of
$250, in addition to any other penalties or assessments authorized by law.



(Ord. 18-859, passed 11-13-2018)



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING RULES



Section



   72.01   Method of parking



   72.02   Presumption in reference to illegal parking



   72.03   Parking, standing, stopping prohibitions



   72.04   Authority to erect signs and provide other markings to
indicate parking restrictions



   72.05   Removal of vehicles in violation of parking restrictions



   72.06   Abandoned vehicles



§ 72.01  METHOD OF PARKING.



   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a public street where
there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked such that the right
hand wheels of the vehicle are parallel to and within 18 inches of the right
hand curb.



   (B)   Upon recommendation of the Police Chief and approval by Town
Council, the following alternative methods of parking may be permitted:



      (1)   On the left hand side of a one-way street.  If
permitted, any vehicle parked along the left hand side of the street shall be
parked so that the left hand wheels are parallel to and within 18 inches of
the left hand curb.



      (2)   Parking at an angle to the curb.



(2001 Code, § 12-3-1)  (Am. Ord. 17-833, passed 9-12-2017)



§ 72.02  PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.



   In any prosecution charging a violation of this chapter, proof that the
particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of this
chapter, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was
the registered owner of the vehicle at the time of such parking, shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of
such vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point
where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred.



(Ord. 17-833, passed 9-12-2017)



§ 72.03  PARKING, STANDING, STOPPING PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop, stand, or
unload a vehicle in violation of any sign, curb marking, or other notice
erected on government owned property that indicates no parking, stopping,
standing, or unloading, or any combination thereof, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic.



   (B)   In addition to the restrictions on parking set forth in A.R.S.
§ 28-873, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park any
vehicle in any of the following manners or places:



      (1)   So as to leave available less than 20 feet of the width
of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.



      (2)   So as to block or obstruct any alleyway.



      (3)   Upon or in front of another person's private road or
driveway.



      (4)   On the side of the street adjacent to any school
property where marked for no parking, standing or stopping.



      (5)   On a sidewalk.



      (6)   Upon any area, parking lot, roadway, or portion thereof,
whether public or private property, designated by signs or curb painting as a
fire zone.



      (7)   Within an intersection.



      (8)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.



      (9)   On a crosswalk.



      (10)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.



      (11)   Within 30 feet on the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a
street.



      (12)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within
30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone.



      (13)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or railroad crossing
or within 8 feet 6 inches of the center of any railroad track, except while a
motor vehicle with a motive power attached is loading or unloading railroad
cars.



      (14)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within 75 feet of the entrance when properly posted.



      (15)   Alongside or opposite a street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.



      (16)   On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street.



      (17)   On a bridge or other elevated structure on a highway or
within a highway tunnel.



      (18)   In a parking space designated and marked for use by
persons with physical disabilities, unless the vehicle is transporting a
person who has been issued a valid placard or international symbol of access
special plates and either (1) the vehicle displays the valid permanent
disability or temporary disability removable windshield placard; or (2) the
vehicle displays international symbol of access special plates currently
registered to the vehicle, as provided in A.R.S. § 28-884.



   (C)   The stopping, standing, and parking restrictions provided in
this chapter do not apply to a police or peace officer or emergency vehicles
when such action is for the purpose of the performance of a law enforcement
duty or public safety emergency activity.



(Ord. 17-833, passed 9-12-2017)



§ 72.04  AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS AND PROVIDE OTHER MARKINGS TO INDICATE
PARKING RESTRICTIONS.



   The Public Works Department after consultation with the Police Chief,
may erect signs, paint curbs, and provide such other notice as may be
appropriate and expedient to indicate restrictions, limitations, and
prohibitions on the parking, standing, stopping, loading and unloading of
vehicles on streets within the town.



(2001 Code, § 12-3-4)  (Am. Ord. 17-833, passed 9-12-2017)



§ 72.05  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES IN VIOLATION OF PARKING RESTRICTIONS.



   Any vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of this chapter may
be moved by and under the direction of an officer and at the expense of the
owner into a place where parking is permitted.



(Ord. 17-833, passed 9-12-2017)



§ 72.06  ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   Any vehicle left unattended for more than 48 hours within the
right-of-way of a public street is declared to be an abandoned vehicle and
the police may remove the vehicle or cause it to be removed at the expense of
the owner of the vehicle.



(2001 Code, § 12-3-6)  (Am. Ord. 17-833, passed 9-12-2017)



Cross-reference:



   Abandoned vehicles, see Chapter 93



   Abandonment prohibited, see § 93.02



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   ANIMALS





         91.   HEALTH AND SANITATION





         92.   PARKS AND RECREATION; LIBRARY





         93.   ABANDONED VEHICLES




CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section



   90.01   Purpose



   90.02   Definitions



   90.03   Injury by vehicle



   90.04   Stray dogs



   90.05   Dogs at large; designation as aggressive dog



   90.06   Impoundment of dogs; destruction; emergency assistance



   90.07   Powers and duties of the animal control officer



   90.08   License fee for dogs; issuance of tags; records; penalties



   90.09   Anti-rabies vaccinations: vaccination and license standards



   90.10   Wearing license tags



   90.11   Handling of biting dogs; responsibility for reporting dog
bites



   90.12   Excessive barking; nuisance behavior



   90.13   Unlawful interference with officers



   90.14   Keeping of aggressive dogs



   90.15   Adequate exercise space for dogs



   90.16   Animal cruelty



 



   90.99   Violation; penalty



§ 90.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to aid and assist the town and its
appropriate staff in the enforcement of A.R.S. § 11-1002, Powers and Duties
of the State Veterinarian and the Arizona Department of Agriculture; A.R.S.
§ 11-1003, Power and Duties of the Department of Health Services; A.R.S. §
11-1010, Anti-rabies Vaccination; Vaccination and License Stations; A.R.S. §
11-1016, Removing Impounded Animals; A.R.S. § 11-1017, Unlawful Keeping of
Dogs; and A.R.S. § 11-1020, Dogs; Liability.



(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)



§ 90.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context requires otherwise.



   AGGRESSIVE DOG. Any dog that has bitten, attacked or molested a person,
domestic animal, fowl, poultry, pet and/or livestock and has been deemed as
such by a hearing officer or court of jurisdiction pursuant to § 90.05.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  A person who has the authority and is
responsible for enforcement of the provisions and regulations of this chapter.



   ANIMAL CONTROL SHELTER.  Any established location authorized by the
Chief of Police for the confinement, maintenance, safekeeping and control of
dogs that come into the custody of an animal control officer or police
officer in the performance of their duties.



   COLLAR.  A band, harness or suitable device worn around the neck or
body of a dog to which a license tag may be attached



   DOG.  A member of the canis familiaris, domesticated wolves and/or
offspring of a dog cross-bred with wild animals or domesticated wolves.



   DOG AT LARGE.  A dog that is not on the premises of the owner or
responsible person, and is not under the control of the owner or responsible
person. Any dog in a suitable enclosure or physically restrained by the owner
or responsible person shall not be considered to be at large.



   DOG OWNER.  Any person owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, having
an interest in, or having control or custody of a dog.



   DOG VIOLATION CITATION.  A document issued by an animal control
officer or police officer to a person who has violated a provision of this
chapter.



   ENCLOSURE.  A fence or structure suitable to prevent the escape of a
dog or the entry of young children.



   IMPOUND.  The act of taking or receiving any dog into the custody, of
an animal control officer or police officer, for the purpose of confining it
in the Chino Valley Animal Control Shelter in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.



   MICROCHIP.  To implant an animal with a microchip tag linked to a
national computer network for the purpose of identification.



   NEGLECT.  Failure to provide for the health and safety of a dog,
including but not limited to, failure to provide adequate food, water,
shelter, exercise or necessary veterinary care to a dog, or to adequately
confine a dog in a manner appropriate to its breed, age and condition.



   RESPONSIBLE PERSON.  An owner or other person who has the
responsibility for the possession, care, custody or control of a dog, and has
the authority and ability to act on behalf of, or in the interest of the
owner.



   RESTRAINT.  Confinement of a dog within the real property limits of
its owner, or secured by a leash or lead, or otherwise under control of a
responsible person, or confinement within a vehicle in a manner that prevents
escape.



   SEVERE INJURY.  Any physical injury that results in a broken bone,
puncture wound, or laceration, and that may or may not require sutures and/or
cosmetic surgery.



   SHELTER.  A structure capable of protecting a dog from present and
potential environmental hazards.



   STRAY DOG.  A dog that is at large and is not wearing a valid license
tag and/or microchip device.



   TAG.  Proof of a license that is worn by the licensed dog.



   UNDER CONTROL.  Physically restrained by a leash, rope, cord, chain or
other device and/or under the direct supervision and control of the owner or
responsible person.



   VACCINATION.  The administration of an anti-rabies vaccine to a dog by
a veterinarian.



   VETERINARY HOSPITAL.  Any establishment operated by a veterinarian
licensed to practice in the State of Arizona, which provides clinical
facilities and houses dogs and/or other domesticated animals for dental,
medical or surgical treatment. A veterinary hospital may have adjacent to it,
in conjunction with it or as an integral part of it, pens, stalls, cages or
kennels for quarantine, observation or boarding.



(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)



Editor’s note:



   The definition for "dog" provided in § 90.02 was revised in editing
the S-3 Supplement to reflect the correct Latin name.



§ 90.03  INJURY BY VEHICLE.



   Any person who accidentally or otherwise hits a dog with a vehicle
shall make a reasonable effort to contact the owner of the dog. In the event
the owner cannot be contacted, the operator of the vehicle shall at once
contact the Police Department or animal control officer to report the
incident.



(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)



§ 90.04  STRAY DOGS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep any lost or
stray dog within the town without notifying the animal control officer.



   (B)   When a dog that appears to be lost or stray is found, the
finder shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner and shall notify
the animal control officer or the Police Department as soon as possible.



(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)



§ 90.05  DOGS AT LARGE; DESIGNATION AS AGGRESSIVE DOG.



   (A)   It is unlawful for an owner or responsible person of a dog to
allow it to be at large within the town limits. The owner or responsible
person of a dog shall provide adequate fencing and/or enclosures to keep the
dog contained on his or her property. If a dog is off the owner or
responsible person’s property, the owner or responsible person shall
maintain direct supervision and control of the dog at all times.



   (B)   Any dog at large may be apprehended and impounded by an animal
control officer or police officer.



      (1)   Animal control officers may issue citation(s) for a dog
at large to the owner or responsible person of that dog.



      (2)   The procedure for the issuance of a notice to appear
shall be as provided for peace officers in A.R.S. § 13-3903, except the
animal control officer shall not make an arrest before issuing the notice.



      (3)   The issuance of citations pursuant to this chapter shall
be subject to the provisions of A.R.S. § 13-3899.



   (C)   The owner or responsible person of the dog shall be liable for
any injury to a person or damage to any property resulting from a dog at
large in violation of this section.



   (D)   A dog is not at large:



      (1)   If it is engaged in obedience training, accompanied by
and under the control of its owner or trainer.



      (2)   While it is being used for legitimate hunting purposes.



      (3)   While it is being exhibited in a sanctioned event.



      (4)   If while off the premises of the owner or responsible
person, it is under the owner's or responsible person's direct supervision
and control or by use of a leash or other tether device directly controlled
by the owner or responsible person.



      (5)   If it is being utilized as a service dog for a
handicapped person or a seeing-eye dog in assisting a legally blind person,
and sufficient control is exercised by the handler.



      (6)   If it is being used to control livestock.



      (7)   While it is being used to assist a police officer
engaged in law enforcement duties.



   (E)   A dog owner or responsible person shall control the dog in a
manner that prevents the dog from biting, attacking, molesting, or
interfering with a person, domestic animal, fowl, poultry, pet and/or
livestock or chasing vehicles.



   (F)   A person is not in violation of subsection (E) if:



      (1)   The dog is on the owners’ property and the biting,
attacking, molesting, or interfering occurs after provocation from the
person, domestic animal, fowl, poultry, pet or livestock that was bit,
attacked, molested or interfered with; or



      (2)   The dog is owned by a governmental agency and is in use
for military or police work; or



      (3)   The dog is a service dog and the incident occurred while
the dog was providing a service to the owner.



      (4)   The dog was engaged in the lawful act of hunting,
ranching, farming or other agricultural purpose.



   (G)   After a conviction of a violation of § 90.05(E) involving the
attacking and/or biting of a person, domestic animal, fowl, poultry, pet
and/or livestock, the prosecutor may request a hearing to establish probable
cause to have the dog classified by the court as an aggressive dog.



   (H)   If a dog is involved in two or more violations of § 90.05(E)
involving an attack and/or biting of a person, domestic animal, pet and/or
livestock off the owner’s property the dog shall, upon the second or
subsequent conviction, be deemed by the court to be an aggressive dog and the
dog shall be maintained in conformance with § 90.14.



   (I)   An owner whose dog is deemed to be an aggressive dog may
petition the court to de-classify the dog as aggressive. The petition shall
request a hearing at which the owner may present facts and circumstances to
the court supporting the request. While the request is pending and until the
hearing officer makes a determination that the dog is not an aggressive dog,
the dog shall be maintained in conformance with § 90.14.



(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.06  IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS; DESTRUCTION; EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE.



   (A)   Any stray dog shall be impounded. All impounded dogs shall be
given proper care and maintenance.



   (B)   Each impounded licensed or microchipped dog shall be kept and
maintained at the Animal Control Shelter for a minimum of ten days, unless
claimed by its owner or responsible person. An unlicensed dog shall be kept
and maintained at the Animal Control Shelter for a minimum of three days. Any
dog found without a tag or microchip device identifying its owner shall be
deemed not owned.



   (C)   An impounded licensed or unlicensed dog may be adopted upon
expiration of the impoundment period, provided the adopting person pays the
appropriate adoption fees and complies with licensing and vaccinating
provisions of this chapter. Adoption fees may be waived for recognized
nonprofit dog rescue groups. No dog shall be released for use in medical
research. Animal control officers may destroy impounded sick, or injured dogs
whenever the destruction is deemed by a licensed veterinarian to be necessary
to prevent the dog from suffering, or to prevent the spread of disease.



   (D)   Any licensed impounded dog may be reclaimed by its owner or
responsible person within ten days of its impoundment, provided the person
reclaiming the dog furnishes proof of the right to do so, proof of rabies
vaccination, pays all dog shelter fees, medical fees, service and license
fees as applicable. If the dog is not reclaimed within the impoundment
period, the animal control officer shall take possession of the dog and may
place the dog for adoption, or dispose of the dog in a humane manner as
prescribed by a licensed veterinarian.



   (E)   A dog showing signs or symptoms of rabies, may be destroyed by
a state licensed veterinarian or any other means deemed necessary to protect
the public health and safety.



   (F)   Upon surrender of a dog by its owner or responsible person to
the town for destruction, the town shall become the person responsible for
the dog. Prior to the surrender, the owner or responsible person shall pay
all associated fees to the town.



   (G)   Emergency assistance of animal. If a peace officer or animal
control officer observes an animal in imminent danger of death or inhumane
suffering, the peace officer or animal control officer may assist the animal
as needed.



(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.07  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.



   (A)   The animal control officer shall:



      (1)   Enforce the provisions of this chapter and the
regulations promulgated hereunder.



      (2)   Issue citations for violations of this chapter and the
regulations promulgated hereunder. The procedure for the issuance of notices
to appear shall be as provided for peace officers in A.R.S. § 13-3903,
except that the animal control officer shall not make an arrest before
issuing the notice.



   (B)   Citations issued for violations of this chapter shall comply
with the non-verification and certification requirements set forth in A.R.S.
§ 13-3899.



   (C)   The animal control officer is a member of the Police
Department and, where applicable, shall function in accordance with Police
Department policies and procedures.



(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)



§ 90.08  LICENSE FEE FOR DOGS; ISSUANCE OF TAGS; RECORDS; PENALTIES.



   (A)   The Town Council shall set an annual license fee, which shall
be paid for each dog three months of age or over that is kept, harbored or
maintained within the boundaries of the town for at least 30 days of the
calendar year. License fees shall be set at the discretion of the Council by
resolution. The licensing period shall not exceed the period of time for
revaccination as designated by the State Veterinarian.



   (B)   License fees shall be paid within 30 days of acquisition of
the dog and/or the dog becomes eligible for licensing. A penalty shall be
added to the license fee in the event that application is made subsequent to
the date on which the dog is required to be licensed under the provisions of
this chapter.



   (C)   Durable license tags shall be provided. Each dog licensed
under the terms of this chapter shall receive, at the time of licensing, such
a tag on which shall be inscribed the name of the town, the number of the
license and the year for which it is valid. The license tag shall be attached
to a collar or harness, which shall be worn by the dog at all times, except
when the dog is confined on the owner's property or due to medical condition
certified by a licensed veterinarian, in which case the owner shall provide
proof of the condition signed by a licensed veterinarian. Whenever a tag is
lost, a duplicate tag shall be issued upon application and payment of a fee
by the owner.



   (D)   License fees for dogs permanently incapable of procreation
shall be at a lower rate. An application for a license for a dog incapable of
procreation shall furnish adequate proof satisfactory to the animal control
officer that the dog has been surgically altered to be permanently incapable
of procreation.



   (E)   After written notification from the animal control officer,
the owner will have fifteen days to obtain a license for a dog required to be
licensed. It is a violation of this chapter to counterfeit or attempt to
counterfeit an official dog tag, or to remove a tag from any dog for the
purpose of willful and malicious mischief, or to place a dog tag upon a dog
unless the tag was issued for that particular dog.



   (F)   Impounding fees shall be established by resolution of the
Council in conformance with current state fees for the impounding and
maintenance of dogs of like species and circumstances.



(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)



§ 90.09  ANTI-RABIES VACCINATIONS: VACCINATION AND LICENSE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Before a license is issued for any dog, the owner must present
a rabies vaccination certificate signed by a veterinarian, stating the
owner's name and address and giving the dog's description, date of
vaccination, and type, manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine used,
and date revaccination is due. A duplicate of each rabies vaccination
certificate issued to a resident of Chino Valley shall be transmitted to the
animal control officer on or before the 10th day of the month following the
month during which the dog was vaccinated. No dog shall be licensed unless it
is vaccinated in accordance with the provisions and regulations of this
chapter.



   (B)   The owner of a dog three months of age or over, which, for
medical purposes, is unable to receive a rabies vaccination, may request a
waiver of the unaltered license fees. The owner may be granted this waiver
only after supplying a certified veterinarian recommendation from a licensed
veterinarian to the animal control officer.



   (C)   A dog vaccinated in any other state prior to entry into
Arizona may be licensed in Arizona provided that, at the time of licensing,
its owner presents a vaccination certificate, signed by a veterinarian
licensed to practice in the state or a veterinarian employed by a
governmental agency in that state. The vaccination certificate must state the
owner's name and address, and provide a description of the dog, its date of
vaccination, and the type, manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine used.



   (D)   The vaccination must be in conformity with the provisions and
regulations of this chapter.



(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.10  WEARING LICENSE TAGS.



   (A)   Any dog over the age of three months, that is off the
owner’s property, shall wear a collar or harness to which is attached a
valid license tag pursuant to § 90.08 above.



   (B)   Exceptions.



      (1)   If a dog is microchipped and the owner information on
file with the microchip company is current and includes a valid telephone
number, and the owner of the dog has in his possession proof of current
rabies vaccination the dog need not wear a license tag.



      (2)   Dogs used for the control of livestock, while being
trained for hunting or dog obedience training, or while being exhibited or
trained at a kennel club event, and dogs being transported to and from such
events, need not wear a collar or harness with a valid license attached,
provided they are properly vaccinated, licensed and controlled.



(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)



§ 90.11  HANDLING OF BITING DOGS; RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPORTING DOG BITES.



   (A)   A dog, whether licensed, unlicensed or unvaccinated, that
bites any person shall be confined and quarantined in an authorized animal
control shelter, with the owner or responsible person liable for all fees and
expenses. Upon the request of and at the expense of the owner or responsible
person, the dog may be quarantined at a veterinary hospital, or at a location
deemed appropriate by the animal control officer, for a period of not less
than ten days.



   (B)   Whenever a dog bites any person, the incident shall be
reported to the animal control officer or Police Department immediately by
any person having direct knowledge. The officer shall be responsible for
making reports of dog bites and other dog-related incidents and procedures,
including the disposal of dog remains and the transportation of dogs to be
scientifically examined.



   (C)   Any dog confined and quarantined pursuant to this chapter may
be destroyed prior to the termination of the minimum confinement period for
laboratory examination for rabies if:



      (1)   The dog shows clear clinical signs of rabies in
accordance with state law; and



      (2)   The owner or responsible person of the dog consents to
its destruction.



   (D)   Any dog found without a tag or microchip device identifying
its owner shall be deemed not owned.



   (E)   Dogs that expire or become ill during quarantine shall be
examined by medical authorities to scientifically determine causes for the
condition or death of the dog, and if a communicable disease is present. All
associated fees will be paid by the owner or responsible person.



   (F)   In any case, where the dog is determined to be diseased, the
owner or responsible person of the dog and the victim of the attack or bite
shall be immediately notified so medical treatment may be administered as
necessary. In cases where the victim is in or on a public place or lawfully
in or on a private place at the time of the attack or bite, all associated
reasonably necessary fees shall be paid by the owner or responsible person.



   (G)   The owner of any dog that has bitten a person shall deliver
the dog to the Chino Valley animal shelter at the request of the animal
control officer and/or police officer. If the owner refuses or does not bring
the dog to the Chino Valley animal shelter, and the dog is retrieved by the
Police Department or animal control officer, the owner shall pay the town a
biting dog retrieval fee, as established by the Town Council by separate
resolution. As an alternative to delivering the dog to the Chino Valley
animal shelter, the owner may timely take the dog to a licensed veterinarian
clinic where it shall remain for the quarantine period and, in which case,
the biting dog retrieval fee shall not apply.



(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)



§ 90.12  EXCESSIVE BARKING; NUISANCE BEHAVIOR.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a dog to:



      (1)   Cause a disturbance to the peace and enjoyment of any
reasonable person residing within the town limits by excessive barking or
other noise making including, but not limited to, howling, screeching,
yelping, or baying.



      (2)   Engage in nuisance behavior, including but not limited
to damaging, soiling, defiling, or defecating on private property other than
the owner’s or on public sidewalks, trails, or recreation areas, unless
such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner or
person responsible.



   (B)   Any person desiring to pursue civil or criminal charges
against any person for a violation of subsection (A) above, shall complete a
witness statement (provided by the animal control officer or other
representative of the Police Department) and assist in the prosecution.



(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)



§ 90.13  UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS.



   It is unlawful for any person to interfere with an animal control
officer or peace officer in the performance of his or her duties.



(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)



§ 90.14  KEEPING OF AGGRESSIVE DOGS.



   It is unlawful for an owner to have an aggressive dog within the town
limits without a certificate of registration issued under this section. This
section shall not apply to dogs used by law enforcement officials for police
work.



   (A)   An animal control officer shall issue a certificate of
registration to the owner of such dog if the owner presents to the animal
control officer sufficient evidence of:



      (1)   A proper enclosure for the aggressive dog to confine the
aggressive dog, and the posting of the premises with a clearly visible
warning sign that there is an aggressive dog on the property.The sign shall
include a warning symbol that informs children of the presence of an
aggressive dog.



      (2)   A surety bond issued by a surety insurer, in a form
acceptable to the Town Prosecutor, in a sum of no less than $100,000.



      (3)   A policy of liability insurance, such as homeowner's
insurance, issued by a qualified insurer, in the amount of at least $300,000,
insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the aggressive dog.



   (B)   It is unlawful for the owner of an aggressive dog to permit
the dog to be outside of the proper enclosure unless the dog is under control
of the owner or a responsible person and is restrained by a leash and muzzle.



   (C)   A dog shall not be declared to be aggressive if the bite or
attack was deemed accidental or with reasonable cause, or if the threat or
damage was sustained by a person who, at that time, was committing a willful
trespass or other criminal act upon the premises occupied by the owner of or
person responsible for the dog, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the
dog, or has in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused
or assaulted the dog, or committing or attempting to commit a crime.



   (D)   Any aggressive dog shall be immediately confiscated by an
animal control officer if:



      (1)   The dog is not validly registered as required by
subsection (A) above.



      (2)   The owner does not secure the required liability
insurance coverage.



      (3)   The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure.



      (4)   The dog is outside the dwelling of the owner, or outside
of the proper enclosure and not under control of the owner or responsible
person, in which case, the owner or responsible person shall be guilty of a
Class 1 misdemeanor.



      (5)   The dog was previously found to be an aggressive dog
under this chapter and attacks or bites a person or another domestic dog. In
this event, the owner or responsible person shall reasonably act to protect
the public or other dogs. In addition, the aggressive dog shall be placed in
quarantine for the proper length of time, and thereafter, upon order of the
court, shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.



      (6)   The dog aggressively attacks and causes severe injury or
death of any human, regardless of whether the dog has previously been
declared potentially dangerous, dangerous, or aggressive. In addition, the
dog shall immediately be placed in quarantine for the proper length of time,
and thereafter, upon order of the court, shall be destroyed in an expeditious
and humane manner. The owner or responsible person shall be guilty of a Class
1 misdemeanor.



   (E)   Notwithstanding the requirements set forth in divisions (A)(1)
through (A)(3) above, the town shall not be liable for the owner's failure to
secure and maintain a proper enclosure, a surety bond, or a policy of
liability insurance.



   (F)   For purposes of this section, “proper enclosure” shall
mean the secure confinement, either indoors or in a securely enclosed and
locked pen or structure with secure sides, top, and floor, designed to
prevent the dog from escaping and the entry of young children. The dog’s
head shall not be able to protrude out of the enclosure. The enclosure shall
protect the dog from the elements and allow for the provision of fresh food
and water and an exercise area in order to maintain the dog in good health.



(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.15  ADEQUATE EXERCISE SPACE FOR DOGS.



   (A)   Every enclosure for a dog shall be constructed in a manner to
minimize the risk of injury to the dog and shall encompass sufficient useable
space to keep the dog in good condition.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or responsible person of a
dog, whether present or not, to intentionally, knowingly or recklessly secure
a dog by means of a tie-out, including but not limited to, chains, leashes,
ropes, wire or cable attached to a swivel, pulley system or fixed point that
does either of the following:



      (1)   Prevents or results in denying the dog access to water
or shelter;



      (2)   Inflicts injury or death upon the dog; or



      (3)   Results in or facilitates injury or death to the dog.



(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)



§ 90.16  ANIMAL CRUELTY.



   (A)   A person commits cruelty to animals if the person does any of
the following:



      (1)   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly subjects any
animal under the person’s custody or control to cruel neglect or
abandonment.



      (2)   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly fails to provide
medical attention necessary to prevent protracted suffering to any animal
under the person’s custody or control.



      (3)   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly inflicts
unnecessary physical injury to any animal.



      (4)   Recklessly subjects any animal to cruel mistreatment.



      (5)   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly kills any animal
under the custody or control of another person without either legal privilege
or consent of the owner.



      (6)   Recklessly interferes with, kills or harms a working or
service animal without either legal privilege or consent of the owner.



      (7)   Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly leaves an animal
unattended and confined in a motor vehicle and physical injury to or death of
the animal is likely to result.



      (8)   Intentionally or knowingly subjects any dog under the
person’s custody or control to cruel neglect or abandonment which results
in serious physical injury to the animal.



      (9)   Intentionally or knowingly subjects any animal to cruel
mistreatment.



      (10)   Intentionally or knowingly interferes with, kills or
harms a working or service animal without either legal privilege or consent
of the owner.



      (11)   Intentionally or knowingly allows any dog that is under
the person’s custody or control to interfere with, kill or cause physical
injury to a service animal.



      (12)   Recklessly allows any dog that is under the person’s
custody or control to interfere with, kill or cause physical injury to a
service animal.



      (13)   Intentionally or knowingly obtains or exerts
unauthorized control over a service animal with the intent to deprive the
service animal handler of the service animal.



   (B)   It is a defense to subsection (A) of this section if:



      (1)   Any person exposes poison to be taken by a dog that has
killed or wounded livestock or poison to be taken by predatory animals on
premises owned, leased or controlled by the person for the purpose of
protecting the person or the person’s livestock or poultry, the treated
property is kept posted by the person who authorized or performed the
treatment until the poison has been removed and the poison is removed by the
person exposing the poison after the threat to the person or the person’s
livestock or poultry has ceased to exist. The posting required shall provide
adequate warning to persons who enter the property by the point or points of
normal entry. The warning notice that is posted shall be readable at a
distance of fifty feet, shall contain a poison statement and symbol, and
shall state the word “danger” or “warning”.



      (2)   Any person uses poison in and immediately around
buildings owned, leased or controlled by the person for the purpose of
controlling wild and domestic rodents as otherwise allowed by the laws of the
state, excluding any fur-bearing animals as defined in A.R.S. § 17-101.



   (C)   The section does not prohibit or restrict:



      (1)   The taking of wildlife or other activities permitted by
or pursuant to A.R.S. Title 17.



      (2)   Activities permitted by or pursuant to A.R.S. Title 3.



      (3)   Activities regulated by the Arizona Game and Fish
Department or the Arizona Department of Agriculture.



   (D)   A peace officer, animal control officer or animal control
deputy may use reasonable force to open a vehicle to rescue an animal if the
animal is left in the vehicle as prescribed in subsection (A)(7) of this
section.



(Ord. 17-834, passed 10-24-2017)



§ 90.99  VIOLATION; PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be guilty of a
Class 1 misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in § 10.99 of this Code.



   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any provisions of §§
90.03, 90.04, 90.08, 90.10, 90.12(B), 90.13 or 90.15 of this chapter shall be
guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500,
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or by any combination of
such fine and imprisonment.



   (C)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of §§ 90.05
or 90.12(A) that does not involve biting or attacking shall be guilty of a
civil offense punishable as set forth in § 10.99 of this Code and subject to
the habitual offender provisions set forth in § 10.99(D).



   (D)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of § 90.05
that involves biting or attacking shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor,
punishable as set forth in subsection (B) of this section.



   (E)   Any fine, fee or monetary restitution amount assessed for loss
of property due to the unlawful actions of a dog may be ordered by the court
at the time of sentencing if payment was not received prior to sentencing.



(Res. 12-999, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 12-760, passed 12-11-2012; Ord. 17-834,
passed 10-24-2017)



CHAPTER 91:  HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section




Litter; Nuisances




   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Public nuisances defined



   91.03   Litter in public places; construction debris



   91.04   Depositing litter in gutters



   91.05   Litter thrown from vehicles



   91.06   Littering from trucks



   91.07   Littering in parks



   91.08   Deposit of commercial handbills on public property



   91.09   Handbills; commercial and noncommercial



   91.10   Dropping litter from aircraft



   91.11   Deposit of litter on occupied private property



   91.12   Maintenance of litter-free premises



   91.13   Vacant lots



   91.14   Business establishments; receptacles



   91.15   Abatement of nuisances



 



   91.99   Penalty




LITTER; NUISANCES




§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIRCRAFT.  Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or
designed for navigation or for flight in the air, and includes, but is not
limited to, helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.



   ANIMAL.  Any and all types of animals, both domestic and wild, male
and female, singular and plural.



   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE.  A litter storage and collection
receptacle as required and authorized in this subchapter.



   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD.  The premises used for conducting business
by an automotive recycler.



   AUTOMOTIVE RECYCLER.  A person who is engaged in the business of
buying or acquiring a motor vehicle solely for the purpose of dismantling,
selling or otherwise disposing of the parts or accessories and who dismantles
6 or more vehicles in a calendar year.



   DEBRIS.  Junk, abandoned broken or neglected lumber, furniture,
furniture parts, stoves, sinks, cabinets, household fixtures, refrigerators,
car parts, equipment, or the remains of something of little or no apparent
economic value.



   DILAPIDATED STRUCTURE.  Any unsightly and dangerous structure as
defined by the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997
Edition, § 102, or any old, abandoned, or partially destroyed structure, or
any structure commenced and abandoned.



   FILTH.  Any accumulation of garbage, junk or litter, any condition
which constitutes a breeding place for flies, rodents, mosquitoes and other
insects which are capable of carrying and transmitting disease-causing
organisms to any person or persons, any spoiled or contaminated food or drink
intended for human consumption, or all sewage, human excreta, wastewater,
garbage or other organic wastes deposited, stored, discharged or exposed so
as to be a potential instrument or medium in the transmission of disease to
or between any person or persons.



   FOWL.  Any and all fowl, domesticated and wild, male and female,
singular and plural.



   GARBAGE.  Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes, resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   HANDBILL.  A written or printed notice displayed, handed out, or
posted, to inform those concerned of something to be done or some event.



   JUNK.



      (1)   Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries,
paper, trash, rubber debris or waste;



      (2)   Iron, steel and other old scrap ferrous or nonferrous
material; and



      (3)   Junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles or parts of
junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, except:



         (a)   A vehicle or part thereof which is completely
enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from
the street or other public or private property;



         (b)   A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or
parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business
of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, licensed automotive
recycler or licensed junkyard;



         (c)   A vehicle which is eligible for licensing with
personalized street rod vehicle plates or with license plates for vehicles of
historic value;



         (d)   A motor vehicle which is being repaired in
sections or rebuilt by an individual or corporation engaged in the business
of repairing or rebuilding automobiles in a zoning district which permits the
business to operate; and



         (e)   A motor vehicle which is being repaired, restored
or rebuilt by the owner of the vehicle at his or her private residence.



   JUNKYARD.  An establishment or place of business maintained, used or
operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling junk or for maintaining or
operating an automobile graveyard, including garbage dumps and sanitary
landfills.



   LITTER.  Garbage, refuse and rubbish and all other waste material
which, if thrown or deposited in a manner prohibited by this subchapter,
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare, and includes,
but is not limited to, paper and metal, such as containers or cans.



   MAJOR REPAIR.  The removal from any vehicle of a major portion
thereof, including, but not limited to, the differential, transmission, head,
engine block or oil pan.



   PARK.  A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other
public area in the town owned or used by the town and devoted to public
recreation.



   PRIVATE PREMISES.  Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and
includes but is not limited to any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch,
steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to the dwelling, house,
building or other structure.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or
other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.



   REFUSE.  All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles or parts thereof and solid market and
industrial wastes.



   RUBBISH.  Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and non-combustible wastes, including but not limited to, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, metal cans, yard clippings, leaves, metal, wood,
glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.



   STREET or ROAD.  The entire width between the boundary lines of every
publicly maintained way when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel, including the entire dedicated
public right-of-way, whether the right-of-way is paved or not.



   TRASH.  Any accumulation of refuse, rubbish, litter or garbage.



   VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, except for a device propelled
solely by human power.



(2001 Code, § 9-2-1)



§ 91.02  PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED.



   The following specific acts, omissions, conditions and things in or
upon any private lot, building, structure or premises, or in or upon any
public right-of-way, street, avenue, alley, park, parkway or other public or
private place in the town are hereby declared to be public nuisances, to wit:



   (A)   Privies, vaults, cesspools, sumps, pits or like places, which
are not securely protected from insects or rodents, or which are foul or
malodorous, or which are not securely closed and protected or, if necessary,
illuminated so as to prevent persons or objects from falling therein;



   (B)   Filthy, littered or trash-covered exterior areas, including
all buildings and structures thereon and areas adjacent thereto;



   (C)   Animal manure which is kept or handled in violation of any
ordinance of the town or any ordinance, code, regulation or statute of
Yavapai County or the State of Arizona;



   (D)   Poison oak, poison ivy, or any noxious or toxic weeds or
uncultivated plants (whether growing or otherwise), weeds, tall grass,
uncultivated shrubs or growth higher than 18 inches or which present a fire
hazard;



   (E)   Accumulations of bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of
scrap iron, wire metal articles, broken stone or cement, broken crockery,
broken glass, broken plaster and all other trash and abandoned material,
unless the same be kept in covered bins or metal receptacles approved by this
code or any town ordinance;



   (F)   Any accumulation of trash which creates a health or fire
hazard;



   (G)   Any dangerous building on unoccupied property, billboard or
other structure, or any old abandoned or partially destroyed building or
structure, or any building or structure commenced and abandoned;



   (H)   All places unlawfully used or maintained as junk yards or
dumping grounds, or for the wrecking, disassembling, repair, or rebuilding of
automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind, or for the storing
or leaving of worn out, wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors,
or machinery of any kind or of any of the parts thereof, or for the storing
or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or
by other persons, which places are kept or maintained so as to interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment or the quality of life or property by and of
others; provided, however, that nothing contained in this division shall be
deemed to prohibit any automobile wrecking yard or other junk yard where the
same is otherwise permitted by the town zoning ordinance and amendments
thereto, which is operated in conformity therewith;



   (I)   Any putrid unsound or unwholesome bones, meat, hides, skins,
or the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish or fowl, butcher’s
trimmings and offal, or any waste vegetable or animal matter in any quantity,
garbage, human excreta, sewage or other offensive substances accumulated on
private or public property; provided, however, nothing herein contained shall
prevent the temporary retention of waste in receptacles in the manner
provided by a county health officer, this code or town ordinance;



   (J)   The erection, continuance or use of any building, room or
other place in the town for the exercise of any trade, employment or
manufacture which, by noxious exhalations, including, but not limited to,
smoke, soot, dust, fumes or other gases, offensive odors or other annoyances,
which is discomforting or offensive or detrimental to the health of
individuals or of the public, except for normal exhalation or smoke produced
by normal heating devices;



   (K)   Causing, allowing or permitting any artificial illumination of
the intensity as to interfere substantially and unnecessarily with the use
and enjoyment of public or private property by any considerable number of
people, or with the lawful use of any school, public place or public street,
or with any governmental or public function of the town, or as to constitute
a hazard or threat to the public health, safety and welfare of the people of
the town; provided, this division shall not apply where the person
responsible for the artificial illumination is authorized by the Town
Manager, any school within the town, this code or any town ordinance;



   (L)   No outside burning is allowed unless permitted in writing by
the Chino Valley Fire District prior to any such burning;



   (M)   Any unguarded or abandoned excavation, pit, well or hole
dangerous, injurious or harmful to life or property;



   (N)   To leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building
or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling
or other structure under the control of any person and in a place accessible
to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or
other container which has an airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking
device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing the
door or lid, snap lock or other locking device from the icebox, refrigerator
or container;



   (O)   Committing any act, omitting the performance of a duty, or
suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act,
omission, condition or other thing either:



      (1)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to
obstruct or renders dangerous the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any stream, public park, parkway, square, sidewalk, street or
highway in the town and is no less a nuisance because the extent of the
annoyance or damage inflicted is unequal; and/or



      (2)   Obstructs the free use of property so as to essentially
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property by an entire
community or neighborhood or by a considerable number of persons.



(2001 Code, § 9-2-2)



§ 91.03  LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES; CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS.



   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place within the town except in public receptacles,
or in authorized private receptacles for collection.



   (B)   Construction debris shall be contained at all times upon the
premises.



(2001 Code, § 9-2-3)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  DEPOSITING LITTER IN GUTTERS.



   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other
public place within the town the accumulation of litter from any public or
private sidewalk or driveway or any building or lot. Persons owning or
occupying property or places of business shall keep the sidewalk and parkway
in front of their premise free of litter.



(2001 Code, § 9-2-4)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05  LITTER THROWN FROM VEHICLES.



   No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or
deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the town, or upon
private property.



(2001 Code, § 9-2-5)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.06  LITTERING FROM TRUCKS.



   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
town unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place.



(2001 Code, § 9-2-6)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.07  LITTERING IN PARKS.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the town
except in public receptacles and in such manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or upon any street or public place. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of.



(2001 Code, § 9-2-7)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.08  DEPOSIT OF COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or non-commercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
town, nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial
handbill in any public place, but nothing in this section shall be deemed to
prohibit any person from handing out or distributing on any sidewalk, street
or other place within the town, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
non-commercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.



(2001 Code, § 9-2-8)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.09  HANDBILLS; COMMERCIAL AND NON-COMMERCIAL.



   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or
non-commercial handbill in or upon any vehicle, but it is not unlawful on any
public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the
receiver thereof, a non-commercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who
is willing to accept it.



   (B)   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or
non-commercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are known, or
should be known, to the person to be temporarily or continuously uninhabited
or vacant.



   (C)   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
non-commercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone
thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words “No
Trespassing,” “No Peddlers or Agents,” “No Advertisement,” “No
Soliciting,” or any similar notice, indicating in anys manner that the
occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of
privacy disturbed, or to have any handbill left upon the premises.



   (D)   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
non-commercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited
unless the handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent the
handbill from being blown or drifted about the premises or sidewalks, streets
or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so
prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor
of newspapers as defined by this subchapter.



(2001 Code, § 9-2-9)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.10  DROPPING LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT.



   No person in any aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the
town any litter, handbill or any other object.



(2001 Code, § 9-2-10)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.11  DEPOSIT OF LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or unoccupied
private property within the town, whether owned by such person or not, except
that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.



(2001 Code, § 9-2-11)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.12  MAINTENANCE OF LITTER-FREE PREMISES.



   The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all
times maintain the premises free of litter; but this section shall not
prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection, or within any building when not in violation of any health, fire,
building or any other regulation, ordinance, order or statute.



(2001 Code, § 9-2-12)



§ 91.13  VACANT LOTS.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the town whether owned by such person or not.



(2001 Code, § 9-2-13)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.14  BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS; RECEPTACLES.



   No person occupying or employed in any business establishment shall
deposit any litter in any receptacle, unless such receptacle shall be
provided with a lid of sufficient weight to prevent the escape of any litter
from the receptacle.



(2001 Code, § 9-2-14)



§ 91.15  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.



   Any public nuisance committed under this subchapter may be abated in
any manner provided by law including the method set forth herein.



(2001 Code, § 9-2-16)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, whether as principal, owner, agent, tenant, employee or
otherwise who maintains a nuisance upon any property within the Town of Chino
Valley, who violates any provision of §§ 91.01et seq., or who fails to
comply with any provision of §§ 91.01et seq., shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in
§ 10.99. The conviction of any person hereunder shall not relieve the person
from the responsibility to correct the violation, nor prevent the
enforcement, correction or removal thereof in any manner authorized by law.
Every day that a nuisance is permitted to exist, or caused to continue to
exist under §§ 91.01et seq. shall be deemed a separate violation.



(2001 Code, § 9-2-17)



CHAPTER 92:  PARKS AND RECREATION; LIBRARY



Section




General Provisions




   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Compliance with rules and regulations



   92.03   Vandalism



   92.04   Fires



   92.05   Vehicles, speed limits and parking



   92.06   Rubbish and litter



   92.07   Pets



   92.08   Weapons



   92.09   Fireworks and explosives



   92.10   Advertising and commercial use



   92.11   Soliciting



   92.12   Noise and nuisance



   92.13   Alcoholic beverages




Park Operating Policy




   92.30   Hours



   92.31   Restricted areas



   92.32   Special events



   92.33   Use of facilities; payment



   92.34   Fees




Library Regulations




   92.45   Purpose



   92.46   Library Advisory Board



   92.47   Fines and charges



   92.48   General library rules



   92.49   Story hour rules



 



   92.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONCESSION.  A grant by the department for the use of land or property
for the specific purpose of providing services, facilities or improvements
for the public.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Town of Chino Valley.



   DIRECTOR.  The authorized official of the town.



   PARK OFFICER.  Any town law enforcement officer or deputy sheriff with
the authority and power of a peace officer.



   PERSON.  Any individual or individuals, corporations, firms,
co-partnerships, clubs and all associations or combinations thereof.



(2001 Code, § 11-1-1)



§ 92.02  COMPLIANCE WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   Permission to enter, occupy, use or otherwise utilize any facility or
roadway within the boundaries of any park or recreation area under control of
the town shall be conditioned upon compliance with all laws, rules,
regulations and orders of the town governing such areas, and any person
violating such laws, rules, regulations and orders will be required to leave
the park or recreation facility or any portion thereof.



(2001 Code, § 11-1-2)



§ 92.03  VANDALISM.



   No person shall disturb, deface, injure, destroy or remove any
building, sign, marker, facility or any other structure, tree, shrub or any
object of significance, nor shall any person leave any park structure or
facility in an unclean or unsanitary condition.



(2001 Code, § 11-1-3)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.04  FIRES.



   No person shall build, ignite or maintain any fire of any kind or
character, for any purpose whatsoever, in or upon property within the
boundaries of the parks and recreation areas except by the authority of the
Director or his or her agent.



(2001 Code, § 11-1-4)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.05  VEHICLES, SPEED LIMITS AND PARKING.



   (A)   Motorized vehicles, including motorcycles and off-road
vehicles, shall be operated only on roadways, except as otherwise provided
and posted in certain areas; and in all cases, the operator shall comply with
the Arizona Motor Vehicle Code, as provided under A.R.S. Title 28, while
within the boundaries of any town parks and recreation areas.  The Director
may further restrict and post certain areas within the parks and recreation
areas to protect life and property.



   (B)   Parking in any non-designated area or on the roadway is
prohibited unless posted for parking.  Vehicles parked in any unauthorized
parking zone or vehicles parking in such a manner as to pose a danger to
others may be removed at owner’s expense.



(2001 Code, § 11-1-5)



§ 92.06  RUBBISH AND LITTER.



   (A)   All garbage, rubbish, cans, bottles, broken glass and other
litter shall be disposed of in receptacles designated for such purposes, or
carried away when leaving an area.



   (B)   Using public park refuse containers to dispose of household or
commercial garbage brought as such from private property is prohibited.



(2001 Code, § 11-1-6)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Cross-reference:



   Littering provisions, see §§ 91.01 through 91.15



§ 92.07  PETS.



   (A)   Dogs, cats and other domestic pets shall be kept under
physical restraint or on a leash not longer than 6 feet in length while
within the boundaries of the parks and recreation areas.  In the interest of
public health and safety, the Director may designate certain areas as closed
to all pets.



   (B)   At no time will dogs or other pets, other than seeing eye
dogs, be allowed within the confines of public park buildings.



(2001 Code, § 11-1-7)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.08  WEAPONS.



   With the exception of legally constituted peace officers and security
officers employed by concessionaires and directly responsible to the
concessionaire while in the performance of their duties, no person shall
possess any firearm, air or gas operated weapon, or bow and arrow within the
boundaries of the parks and recreation areas with the mechanism loaded or in
such a condition that it is capable of immediately injuring or killing any
person or animal, or damaging or destroying any public or private property.



(2001 Code, § 11-1-8)



§ 92.09  FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES.



   (A)   No person shall possess fireworks, explosives or devices for
the use of any kind within the boundaries of the parks and recreation areas
except under special permit for fireworks display issued by the Director or
his or her agent.



   (B)   All municipal, county, state and federal ordinances, rules,
regulations and acts shall be complied with.



(2001 Code, § 11-1-9)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.10  ADVERTISING AND COMMERCIAL USE.



   (A)   No person shall post, place or erect any signs or distribute
any advertising material within the boundaries of the parks and recreation
areas for any purpose without a permit issued by the Director or his or her
agent.



   (B)   However, this regulation does not bar from entry into the
parks and recreation areas a commercially marked vehicle operated by a
visitor or person in service to the parks and recreation department,
concessionaire or other person responding to an emergency situation.



(2001 Code, § 11-1-10)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.11  SOLICITING.



   No person shall solicit funds or donations, sell or offer for sale any
food, goods, wares, merchandise or liquids or distribute circulars within the
boundaries of the parks and recreation areas except by written concession
granted by the Director or his or her agent.



(2001 Code, § 11-1-11)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.12  NOISE AND NUISANCE.



   No person shall cause or permit any loud noise or sound which creates a
nuisance or use or cause to be used an amplifier or loudspeaker system
without a special permit from the Director or his or her agent.



(2001 Code, § 11-1-12)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.13  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   No person shall sell, distribute or otherwise dispose of an alcoholic
beverage within the parks and recreation areas without the prior written
consent of the Director or his or her agent.



(2001 Code, § 11-1-13)  Penalty, see § 92.99




PARK OPERATING POLICY




§ 92.30  HOURS.



   The opening and closing time for park or recreational facilities or any
portion thereof, as established by the Director and posted at the established
entrances thereto, shall be complied with.



(2001 Code, § 11-2-1)



§ 92.31  RESTRICTED AREAS.



   The entry, use or occupancy in any restricted zone, which has been
posted or otherwise designated as being closed to entry, use or occupancy by
the Director or his or her staff, is prohibited.



(2001 Code, § 11-2-2)



§ 92.32  SPECIAL EVENTS.



   Sports events, pageants, reenactments, regattas, entertainments, public
assemblies, demonstrations and the like, characterized as public spectator
attractions, are prohibited unless given written permission or scheduled by
the Director or his or her agent.  The permits may be issued only after
finding that the issuance of such permit will not be inconsistent with the
purposes for which the area is established and maintained and will cause the
minimum possible interference with use of the area by the general public. 
The permit may contain such reasonable conditions and restrictions as to
duration and area occupied as are necessary for protection of the area and
public use thereof.



(2001 Code, § 11-2-3)



§ 92.33  USE OF FACILITIES; PAYMENT.



   No person shall use or occupy facilities within the park and
recreational boundaries for the use of which a fee has been lawfully
established and posted by the Department unless the fee has been paid.



(2001 Code, § 11-2-4)



§ 92.34  FEES.



   The Council may establish, by resolution, fees for the utilization of
all park and recreation facilities.



(2001 Code, § 11-2-5)




LIBRARY REGULATIONS




§ 92.45  PURPOSE.



   The town currently operates a library for the use and enjoyment of the
community and use of the Chino Valley Public Library is a privilege available
to all residents. The town encourages library patrons to comply with library
rules and regulations to assure that all citizens of Chino Valley have equal
access to the resources of the library.



(2001 Code, § 11-3-1)  (Am. Ord. 491, passed - -2002)



§ 92.46  LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD.



   (A)   Membership.  The Library Advisory Board of the Chino Valley
Public Library shall consist of 6 members appointed by the Council for
staggered terms of 5 years as permitted by A.R.S. § 9-414 and as established
by Res. 363.



   (B)   Meetings.



      (1)   The regular meeting of the Library Advisory Board shall
be held on the first Tuesday of each month, as required by statute, and at
such place and at such other times as the board from time to time may appoint.



      (2)   Special meetings may be called by the president or at
the request of 3 members at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting.



      (3)   All meetings of the Library Advisory Board shall be held
in accordance with the open meeting law, A.R.S. §§ 38-431 et seq.



      (4)   Robert's Rules of Order, last revised edition, shall
govern the parliamentary procedure of the board, generally following
procedures set for small boards and adhering to the provisions of the open
meetings act summary as issued by the Arizona Attorney General’s Office.



   (C)   Officers, committees and the like.



      (1)   Officers of the Board shall be chosen at the regular
July meeting of the Board and shall be as follows:  President,
Vice-President and Secretary.



      (2)   The officers shall be elected by ballot at the July
meeting for a term of 1 year.  Vacancies occurring during the year shall be
filled by ballot at the next regular meeting of the Board after the vacancy
occurs.



      (3)   The President shall preside at all meetings, appoint all
committees, authorize calls for any special meetings and generally perform
the duties of a presiding officer.



      (4)   The Vice-President shall preside in the absence of the
president.



      (5)   The Secretary shall keep, or cause to be kept, a true
and accurate record of all proceedings of the Board meetings.  The Secretary
shall provide copies of the minutes prior to the Board meeting to all Board
members, Library Director and the permanent public record at the town hall. 
Preparation of the minutes and agenda will occur in a timely manner as
prescribed in the applicable state statutes.



   (D)   Committees, liaisons, representatives and delegates.  The
Library Advisory Board may by majority vote appoint from time to time
individuals to serve on committees and to act as liaisons, representatives
and delegates of the Board with such powers and duties as authorized by the
Board. The appointed individuals shall make progress reports to the Library
Advisory Board, with a final report to be made at the end of a particular
assignment or project, at which time the appointment will cease.



   (E)   Quorum.



      (1)   A quorum for the transaction of Library Board business
shall consist of a simple majority of the Board, which is 3 out of 5 members.



      (2)   If a quorum is not present within 15 minutes of the
posted set time, the meeting shall be canceled.



   (F)   Order of business. The secretary, at the direction of the
President and with the consultation of the Library Director, shall prepare an
agenda for each meeting of the Library Board.  All posting of agendas shall
be in compliance with applicable state statutes.



   (G)   Minutes of the meeting.  The Secretary shall provide copies
of the minutes prior to the Board meeting to all Board members, the Library
Director and for the permanent public record at town hall.



   (H)   Amendment of by-laws.  The Library Advisory Board may, at any
regular meeting and by majority vote, recommend to the Town Council that
these by-laws be further amended by resolution of Council.



   (I)   Absenteeism.  Council shall remove from office any Board
member who misses 3 consecutive Board meetings or 5 board meetings in a
12-month period, unless the absences were excused by the president of the
Board.



   (J)   Resignations.



      (1)   Resignation of a Board member shall be submitted in
writing to the Mayor with a copy to the President of the Board stating the
effective date of the resignation.



      (2)   A Town Council appointed replacement to a vacated Board
position shall complete the term of the retired member.



(2001 Code, § 11-3-2)  (Am. Ord. 491, passed - -2002)



§ 92.47  FINES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   Library materials not returned within a period of time as
adopted by Council resolution shall accrue a fine as adopted by Council
resolution, per day per item up to a maximum amount as adopted by Council
resolution.



   (B)   Patrons may renew their library materials over the phone or on
the Chino Valley Public Library web site.  Renewal of library materials does
not exempt the patron from fines that have occurred prior to renewal.  There
are no renewals for items on hold for another library patron.  Library items
may be renewed up to a maximum number of times as adopted by Council
resolution.



   (D)   Interlibrary loan materials borrowed from Yavapai Library
Network libraries shall accrue fees reflective of the rules and regulations
of the lending library.



   (E)   Interlibrary loan materials borrowed from Yavapai Library
Network libraries shall accrue a service charge as set by resolution per item
if not picked up by the patron within 7 days of notice availability.



   (F)   Interlibrary loan materials borrowed from outside the Yavapai
Library Network shall accrue a service charge as adopted by resolution per
item if not picked up by the patron within a time period as adopted by
Council resolution.



   (G)   In addition to the above, the library shall collect any or all
fees that are applicable and these fees shall be in addition to the fines and
fees specified above.



(2001 Code, § 11-3-3)  (Am. Ord. 491, passed - -2002)



§ 92.48  GENERAL LIBRARY RULES.



   (A)   Patrons must have a valid Yavapai Library Network card to
check out library materials and to use the internet.  A parent or legal
guardian signature is required for all applicants under the age of 18.



   (B)   A current patron or prospective patron of the Chino Valley
Public Library who has a cumulative fine as adopted by resolution owing to
the Chino Valley Public Library or any library affiliates of the Yavapai
Library Network shall have borrowing privileges suspended or denied until the
patron has satisfied the delinquency or makes a satisfactory arrangement to
satisfy the delinquency.



   (C)   The names of Chino Valley Public Library patrons who are
reported for collection, turned over to the police, Town Prosecutor, County
Attorney or courts for criminal action, or who move from the area with
library materials without giving a forwarding address, shall be reported to
all member libraries in the Yavapai Library Network, of which the Chino
Valley Public Library is a member.



   (D)   Access to the internet is provided to library patrons on
public access computers free of charge.



      (1)   The internet is a global information network, which is
not regulated by any local, state, federal or international authority. Some
materials found on the internet may contain information that is
controversial, offensive, erroneous or illegal. The Chino Valley Public
Library disclaims any warranty of the accuracy, timeliness, authoritativeness
or usefulness of the materials, and shall have no liability for any direct,
indirect, or consequential damages related to the use of these materials.
Access to, or use of the internet by minors under the age of 18, is solely
the responsibility of the parent or legal guardian.



      (2)   (a)   Users must present a valid Yavapai Library
Network library card.



         (b)   All computer workstations are available for use on
a sign up basis.  Reservation times will be held for only 10 minutes.  The
reservation will be forfeited thereafter.



         (c)   Computer workstations are available for walk-ins
if there are no reservations at that time.



         (d)   Maximum use time of the public computer
workstations is 1 hour per day.



         (e)   The Chino Valley Public Library complies with the
Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA), A.R.S. § 34-502, regarding
computer access by minors.  All public computer workstations with internet
access are filtered to block pornography.  Even with filtering, the town
encourages parental guidance in the use of all library resources.  Parents
or legal guardians may block all internet availability for their child
through an adjustment of the child’s library card record.



         (f)   Material may be printed at a cost as adopted by
Council resolution.



         (g)   In accordance with U.S. law (U.S.C. Title 17),
users shall not reproduce or distribute copyrighted materials.



         (h)   Users are prohibited from accessing and displaying
explicit sexual material pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3507.



         (i)   Users are prohibited from exhibiting any material
picturing minors engaged in harmful conduct pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3508.



         (j)   Users are prohibited from furnishing obscene or
harmful items to minors pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3506.



         (k)   Users are prohibited from committing
telecommunications fraud pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3707.



         (l)   Users are prohibited from committing computer
fraud pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-2316.



         (m)   Users are prohibited from deleting or modifying
any computer workstation settings or controls.



         (n)   Patrons having library fines exceeding an amount
as set by Council resolution shall be denied use of library public computer
workstations.



      (3)   Failure of any library user to act in an ethical and
legal manner, or to adhere to the conditions of use set forth above, may
result in expulsion from the library, loss of library privileges, and/or
prosecution in a court of law. A library shall not allow disclosure of any
record or other information that identifies a user of library services.



(A.R.S. § 41-1354)



   (E)   The following actions are prohibited at the Chino Valley
Public Library:



      (1)   Disorderly conduct, fighting or challenging to fight or
using obscene or abusive acts and/or language likely to provoke violence or
which reasonably can be expected to disturb library patrons;



      (2)   Indecent exposure and/or not wearing shirt or shoes;



      (3)   Bringing bicycles, motorbikes, scooters, skateboards,
rollerblades, bedrolls, suitcases, blankets, shopping carts and similar
articles into the library;



      (4)   Smoking or other uses of tobacco products;



      (5)   Possessing or consuming alcohol or illegal drugs or
being under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs;



      (6)   Possessing firearms, guns or ammunition of any nature;



      (7)   Sleeping in the library, or eating or drinking in the
library other than in areas expressly reserved for such purpose;



      (8)   Leaving a child under 12 years of age unattended by a
responsible adult 18 years or older in any section of the library, (such as
by being out of eyesight or earshot or out of physical control of the adult),
including time that the adult is using the internet;



      (9)   Vandalism or defacing library materials or property,
whether the act occurs within or without the Chino Valley Public Library;



      (10)   Using audio or video equipment (such as radios, tape
players, cds, tvs or cell phones) in a manner which can reasonably be
expected to disturb other library patrons;



      (11)   Bringing animals or pets into the library except those
necessary to assist physically challenged individuals;



      (12)   Public use of library telephones and fax machine,
except in an emergency;



      (13)   Putting feet or legs on library furniture and/or
defacing library furniture;



      (14)   Selling and/or soliciting for money or other
consideration, any goods or services;



      (15)   Distributing or posting printed materials or materials
that have not been approved by the library staff. Only non-profit materials
may be posted;



      (16)   All other acts which can reasonably be expected to
disrupt or disturb library patrons and all violations of federal, state or
local laws.



(2001 code, § 11-3-4)  (Am. Ord. 491, passed - -2002)



§ 92.49  STORY HOUR RULES.



   (A)   The Library is happy to provide various story hours for the
enjoyment of the children in this community.



   (B)   In order to continue to provide story hours, certain rules
must be followed for the safety and enjoyment of the children enrolled in
story hour activities as well as others using the library during story hour
presentations.



      (1)   Children must be between the ages specified in the story
hour advertisements or informational sheets and brochures. Story hours are
offered for toddlers 18 months old through 2 years and pre-schoolers 3 to 6
years.



      (2)   Small children not in the story hour presentation must
be under the immediate supervision of a parent or guardian who is at least 18
years of age.



      (3)   Children who cry or are otherwise disruptive shall be
taken from the library environment. Loud or disruptive children infringe upon
the rights of others using the library facility who need a semi- quiet
environment for reading or study.



      (4)   Children cannot be permitted to crawl or run in the
library. The library environment does not present a place where the
above-mentioned activities can be tolerated. Small children shall remain in
strollers or within the guardian's arms for their protection as well as for
the protection of other library users and workers.



(2001 Code, § 11-3-5)  (Am. Ord. 491, passed - -2002)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Violations of these rules are civil in nature and can
result in the loss of library privileges, including borrowing privileges,
computer access and access to library buildings.



      (2)   Library staff members are authorized to suspend or
revoke library privileges for any violation of these rules. Appeals may be
made to the Library Director, whose decision is final. Enforcement discretion
shall be guided by the severity and frequency of the violation. Enforcement
decisions shall be made to advance the library purposes set forth in §§
92.45et seq.



      (3)   The penalties set forth in these rules are not
exclusive. Patrons violating these rules may also be subject to civil or
criminal sanctions under other ordinances of law.



(2001 Code, § 11-3-6)  (Am. Ord. 491, passed - -2002)



CHAPTER 93:  ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   93.01   Definition



   93.02   Abandonment prohibited



   93.03   Exception



   93.04   Removal by town



§ 93.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.  A vehicle, trailer or semitrailer that is of a
type subject to registration under A.R.S. §§ 28-2001 et seq., whether lost,
stolen, abandoned or otherwise unclaimed and that has been abandoned on a
highway, public property or elsewhere in this state, including private
property. Evidence that a vehicle was left unattended for a period of 48
hours within the right-of-way of any highway, road, street or any other
public thoroughfare or for a period of 72 hours on public or private property
or elsewhere in this state is prima facie evidence of abandonment.



(2001 Code, § 9-3-1)



§ 93.02  ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.



   A person shall not abandon a vehicle on any street or highway or on any
other public or private property.



(2001 Code, § 9-3-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.03  EXCEPTION.



   A motor vehicle eligible for licensing with personalized street rod
vehicle special plates or with license plates for vehicles of historic value
is not an abandoned vehicle and shall not be seized pursuant to this chapter
while the vehicle is stored or maintained on the vehicle owner’s private
property.



(2001 Code, § 9-3-3)



§ 93.04  REMOVAL BY TOWN.



   Any vehicle abandoned within the town may be seized according to state
law.  Removal of abandoned vehicles from private property is the
responsibility of the property owner.



(2001 Code, § 9-3-4)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS





         111.   PARK AND SWAP MEETS





         112.   TRANSIENT MERCHANTS; PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS





         113.   FESTIVALS





         114.   CABLE TELEVISION





         115.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES





         116.   REGULATION OF THE SALE OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING
PSEUDOEPHEDRINE




CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS



Section



   110.01   Purpose



   110.02   Definitions



   110.03   License required



   110.04   Exemptions



   110.05   Issuance of license



   110.06   Payment of business license fees



   110.07   Business license fees



   110.08   Exhibition of license required; display street address



   110.09   License not transferrable



   110.10   Enforcement



   110.11   Refusal to renew; revocation or suspension of license



 



   110.99   Penalty



§ 110.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Chino Valley business license is to regulate
business activity which occurs or is transacted within the Chino Valley town
limits in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of
the town and to generate revenue for the town.  In no case shall the
location of a permanent business be determinative of whether this chapter
shall apply.  All businesses of any kind, including businesses located
outside the town limits of Chino Valley, shall obtain a business license if
such person, firm, corporation or association engages in any business
activity within the Chino Valley town limits. Business activity which
involves rental of tangible personal property in Chino Valley, for example,
requires a business license.



(2001 Code, § 8-1-1)



§ 110.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUCTION.  A sale in which items are sold 1 by 1, each going to the
last and highest of a series of competing bidders.



   AUCTION HOUSE.  A structure in which a regularly scheduled auction is
held.



   BUSINESS ACTIVITY.  Any activity or act, personal or corporate,
engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or
advantage, either directly or indirectly, but not casual activities or sales.



   CALLING.  One’s occupation, profession or trade.



   CASUAL SALES.  One made by a person not engaged in an activity taxable
under the state sales tax statutes, provided that the seller does not make a
practice of making sales of such volume or frequency as to indicate that the
seller is a dealer.



   CONTRACTING.  Engaging in business as a contractor.



   DELIVERY.  Constitutes making deliveries either on a wholesale or
retail basis.



   FRATERNAL ORDER.  A society of members banded together for mutual
benefit or for work toward a common goal for the benefit of others.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  A vocation, trade or profession which is conducted
entirely within the home by a member or members of the family.  It should
not alter the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood nor
should it infringe on the rights of nearby residents to enjoy their property.



   HOTEL.  Any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home or
house, motel, rooming house, apartment house, trailer or lodging place,
wherein the owner and operator thereof, for compensation, furnishes lodging
to any transient, except foster homes, rest homes, sheltered care homes,
nursing homes or hospitals.



   LODGING and LODGING SPACE.  The use or possession, or the right to the
use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the
use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations
accompanying the use and possession of the room, including storage or parking
space for the property of a transient.



   MOBILE MERCHANT.  A business conducted from a structure that is not
permanently affixed to the ground, but is capable of being moved from 1
location to another. A MERCHANT must be committed to do business in the town
for at least 1 year, evidenced by presenting a copy of a lease(s) from a
landowner(s).



   NOTICE.  A written instrument served by the town as follows, with time
commencing from the date of mailing, serving, filing or recording:



      (1)   By registered or certified mail to the last known
residential or business address of the person to whom it is required to be
given;



      (2)   By personal service upon the person or the person’s
lawful representative;



      (3)   By filing or recording with a clerk of the Superior
Court or a county recorder;



      (4)   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation in
the community; or



      (5)   By serving upon a statutory agent of the person.



   PERSON.  An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, broker, the federal
government, this state or any political subdivision or agency of this
state.  A subsidiary corporation shall be considered a separate person from
its parent corporation for purposes of licensing.



   PROFESSION.  An occupation which requires advanced learning acquired
by a prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction or which
involves original or creative work depending primarily on invention,
imagination or talent, including, but not limited to, accountants,
architects, artists, attorneys, dentists, doctors, medical technicians,
nurses, engineers, surveyors, teachers and veterinarians.



   REAL PROPERTY RENTAL BUSINESS.  A person who has more than 2 apartment
units, houses, trailer spaces or other residential or lodging spaces
available for rent or lease is deemed to be in the real property rental
business and must comply with all business license requirements.  A person
who has 1 or more units of commercial rental property or 1 or more units of
commercial rental property plus 1 or more residential or lodging spaces for
rent or lease or available for rent or lease is deemed to be in the real
property rental business and must comply with all business license
requirements.



   RETAILER.  A person engaged in the business of making sales at retail.



(2001 Code, § 8-1-2)



§ 110.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent
or as a member of any firm or partnership or association or for any
corporation, to commence, practice, transact or carry on for profit or gain
any trade, calling, profession, occupation, game, amusement or other business
activity within the town limits without first having procured a license from
the town to do so and without complying with all regulations of the trade,
calling, profession, occupation, game, amusement or business as required by
law. No license shall be issued without proof by the applicant of the
compliance and verification by the Town Clerk that no violation of the
town’s zoning regulations will occur by such issuance.



   (B)   A separate license must be obtained for each branch
establishment or separate business location and for each trade, calling,
profession, occupation or business activity; provided, however, that when
more than 1 trade, calling, profession, occupation or business is carried on,
transacted or practiced by the same person, corporation or partnership at 1
fixed place of business, only 1 license shall be required and the charge for
the license shall be the highest charge applicable to any of the activities,
and all activities shall be listed on the license issued. When more than 1
trade, calling, profession, occupation or business is carried on, transacted
or practiced by the same person, corporation or partnership without any fixed
place of business, a separate license shall be required and a separate charge
shall be paid for each activity for which a license is required by this
chapter. Each license shall authorize only the conduct of the trade, calling,
profession, occupation or business activity described in the license and only
at the location or place of business indicated on the license.



   (C)   Any person that engages in any business activity without any
fixed place of business, whether a resident of the town or not, shall obtain
either a transient merchant license, pursuant to §§ 112.01et seq., or a
peddler’s license, pursuant to §§ 112.20et seq., whichever is applicable.



   (D)   Concerning real property rentals, when a person rents more
than 2 residential real property rentals or 1 or more units of commercial
rental property or 1 commercial rental property and 1 or more residential
rentals, a business license is required.



   (E)   A license shall be obtained for any business activity by a
person whose business is located outside of the Chino Valley corporate limits
when the business causes business activity within the town limits of Chino
Valley.



   (F)   A license obtained under this chapter is not evidence or proof
that the licensee has complied with the provisions of this chapter or other
provisions of the town code, nor shall the granting of a license limit the
prosecution by the town of any violations of the law.



   (G)   A mobile merchant shall be committed to do business from the
same location or locations, as specified on the business license for at least
1 year and must provide a copy of written lease(s) from a landowner(s).
Restroom and sanitation facilities must be guaranteed for the employees and
customers. All zoning codes, setback regulations, building and electrical
codes and fire codes must be followed. A mobile food merchant must also
follow all Health Department regulations and obtain any and all applicable
licenses and certificates.



(2001 Code, § 8-1-3)



§ 110.04  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The terms of this chapter do not apply to the acts of persons
selling personal property at wholesale to dealers nor to the acts of
merchants or their employees in delivering goods for resale or wholesale in
the regular course of business nor to business activity involving casual
sales, as defined herein and by A.A.C. R15-5-1812 as amended hereafter. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall apply to any sale required by statute
or by order of any court.



   (B)   The exemptions to the license requirements of this chapter
shall also include:



      (1)   Nonprofit educational institutions, fraternal orders,
service clubs and religious organizations;



      (2)   A permanent resident wishing to sell any form of
agricultural products produced or raised by the resident, including livestock;



      (3)   Fund raising projects of nonprofit and religious
organizations, not conducted on a regular basis;



      (4)   Persons under the age of 18 years engaged in part time
or seasonal employment while still attending school full time;



      (5)   Any business activity, such as utility services, which
has been granted a franchise by the town following vote of approval by the
citizens; and



      (6)   All exemptions granted pursuant to the Arizona Revised
Statutes.



(2001 Code, § 8-1-4)



§ 110.05  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   The procedure for the issuance of a business license shall be as
follows:



   (A)   Every person shall submit an application for a business
license to the Town Clerk at least 15 days prior to commencement of any
business activity within town limits for profit or gain.  The applicant
shall complete an application for business license on a form provided by the
Town Clerk. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide all
the information required.  Each partner of a partnership shall be separately
listed on the form.



   (B)   At such time as an applicant submits the application for
business license, duly sworn to by the applicant and deemed complete by the
Town Clerk, and the applicant has paid the required license fees and
processing fees as set forth in § 110.07 of this code, the Town Clerk shall
accept and date the application.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk upon receipt of a
properly completed application for a business license and verification of the
data contained thereon, to prepare and issue a license under this chapter for
every person, corporation or partnership required to pay a license fee
hereunder and to state in each license the amount charged for the same, the
period of time covered thereby, the name of the person, corporation or
partnership for whom issued and the trade, calling, profession, occupation or
business licensed and the location or place of business where the trade,
calling, profession, occupation or business is to be carried on, transacted
or practiced.



   (D)   In no case, shall any mistake made by the Town Clerk in
issuing any license or collecting the amount of fee for any license or the
amount actually due from any person required to pay for a license as provided
herein, prevent, prejudice or stop the town from collecting the correct
amount of fee or charge for any license or the amount actually due from any
person required to pay for a license as provided herein, or revoking any
license erroneously issued and refunding the fee collected.



   (E)   No greater or lesser amount of money shall be charged or
received by the Town Clerk for any license than is provided for in this
chapter, and no license shall be issued for any period of time other than as
provided herein.



   (F)   All charges for a license required by this chapter shall be
paid in advance and in lawful money of the United States of America at the
Office of the Clerk.



   (G)   The Town Clerk or designee shall be inspector of licenses and
may appoint, with approval of the Manager, the assistant inspectors as may be
required to enforce these regulations.



   (H)   Each assistant inspector of licenses, immediately upon the
facts coming to his or her knowledge, shall report to the Town Clerk the name
of any person, corporation or partnership carrying on, transacting or
practicing any trade, calling, profession or business within the town without
first having obtained a license as required by this chapter.



   (I)   The inspector of licenses and the assistant inspectors, each
in the discharge and performance of his or her duties, shall have and
exercise the following powers:



      (1)   To file a complaint for any violation of the provisions
of this chapter with the Town Magistrate; and



      (2)   To enter, free of charge and at any reasonable time, any
place of business for which a license is required by this chapter and to
demand exhibition of the license for the current period of time from any
person, corporation or partnership engaged in carrying on, transacting or
practicing any trade, calling, profession, occupation or business at the
place of business and, if the person, corporation or partnership shall fail
then and there to exhibit the license, the person, corporation or partnership
shall be liable to the penalties provided for violation of this chapter.



   (J)   When the charge for any license required hereunder shall
remain unpaid for 5 days from and after the due date, the charge shall be
delinquent and the Town Clerk, on the day upon which said charge becomes
delinquent, shall add thereto an amount equal to 100% of the charge as a
penalty and no receipt or license shall be issued thereafter by the Town
Clerk until the charge and penalty shall be paid in full.



   (K)   Each business license issued by the Town Clerk shall state the
following:  the term of the license; the name of the person, firm,
corporation, association, partnership or business entity for whom the license
is issued; the trade, calling, profession, occupation or business activity
being licensed and the location or place of business or permanent address
where said trade, calling, profession, occupation or business is carried on.



      (1)   Each business license shall be issued for a 12 month
term.



      (2)   The licensee shall submit a new application in the event
of any change to the information supplied on the original application and
shall pay any additional fees as required in § 110.06.



      (3)   A license may be renewed for additional 12 month terms,
pursuant to procedures established by the Town Clerk and in accordance with
all requirements of this chapter.



(2001 Code, § 8-1-5)



§ 110.06  PAYMENT OF BUSINESS LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   Payment of fees shall be made when due to the Town Clerk in
legal currency of the United States and at the rates set forth in § 110.07.



   (B)   An applicant for a license for a new business shall pay, in
addition to the general business license fee, a processing fee and, if
additional inspections are required, an inspection fee to be calculated as a
per hour charge.



      (1)   In the event no license is issued, the general business
license fee shall be returned to the applicant; however, the processing fee
and any inspection fees shall not be returned.



      (2)   In the event an incorrect fee is assessed, the Town
Clerk shall collect the proper fee and refund to the applicant any overage
collected.



      (3)   In the event that an inspection fee is charged, the Town
Clerk shall provide to the applicant an accounting of the fees incurred.



   (C)   In the event any information regarding a business license
changes, an additional processing fee shall be assessed.  If the location of
the business changes, additional processing and, if necessary, inspection
fees shall be assessed.



   (D)   License renewal fees provided for in this chapter shall be due
and payable on or before the last day of the month of the term of the current
license.



   (E)   If a license is issued erroneously, the license shall be
revoked and the general license fee shall be refunded to the applicant but
not the processing or inspection fees.



   (F)   There shall be no refunds once a business license has been
issued.



(2001 Code, § 8-1-6)



§ 110.07  BUSINESS LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   For initial business licenses, and for all renewals thereof,
all businesses, occupations, professions, trades or callings shall pay the
business license fees in amounts established by resolution of the Town
Council, and such business licenses fees shall be payable on an annual, daily
or other basis as established by resolution of the Town Council. 



   (B)   On July 1 of each year, commencing in 2005, the amount of the
business license fees to be paid to the town pursuant to this section shall
be increased by the percentage change in the annual average of the
engineering news record (ENR) index between the prior 2 calendar years. The
Finance Director shall make the required calculation by April 1 of each year,
and the amount of the business license fees for the next 12 month period
beginning July 1 of that year, as calculated by the Finance Director based
upon the calculation, without the necessity of further action by the Town
Council. In no event shall the amount of the business license fees be reduced
based upon a change in the ENR index. No later than 30 days after the
business license fees are adjusted each year as provided in this section, the
Town Council shall cause to be published a public notice setting forth the
amount of the adjusted business license fees. The notice shall be published 1
time in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, provided, however,
that the failure of the Town Clerk to cause the notice to be published shall
not affect the validity of the adjustment to business license fees as made by
the Finance Director pursuant to this section. In the event the ENR index
information for the prior calendar years is unavailable by April 1, the
business license fees as previously fixed for the prior fiscal year (July 1
to June 30) shall continue in effect until such time as the ENR index for the
prior years is available and the Finance Director makes the required
calculation.



(2001 Code, § 8-1-6)  (Am. Ord. 04-564, passed 2-12-2004)



§ 110.08  EXHIBITION OF LICENSE REQUIRED; DISPLAY STREET ADDRESS.



   (A)   Every licensee carrying on any business activity at a fixed
place of business shall keep the license posted and exhibited in a
conspicuous part of the place of business.  Every licensee, whether the
fixed place of business is within town limits or not, shall produce and
exhibit the license during normal business hours when requested to do so by
any police officer or by any town official authorized to issue or inspect
licenses.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit any copy or
facsimile of the original license issued under this chapter.



   (C)   Each licensee shall display near or above the front door of
the business location the correct street address in 5 inch or greater numbers
or letters so that the address shall be plainly visible and legible from the
middle of the street or highway in front of each business, including home
occupation businesses.



(2001 Code, § 8-1-8)



§ 110.09  LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   No license granted or issued under any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be in any manner assignable or transferable to any other person
other than is named on the license.



(2001 Code, § 8-1-9)



§ 110.10  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Chief of Police and the Code Enforcement Officer shall
have and shall exercise the power to file complaints against any person
violating the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall have and shall exercise the power to
cite and release or arrest all persons violating the provisions of this
chapter.



(2001 Code, § 8-1-10)



§ 110.11  REFUSAL TO RENEW; REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The Town Clerk shall refuse to issue a license to an applicant
or shall promptly revoke the existing license of any licensee who is in
violation of the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Town Clerk or designee shall deliver or mail by certified
mail to the applicant or licensee written notice of the denial of an
application or the revocation of an existing license.  The notice shall
state the reason for denial or revocation.  Notice shall be delivered or
mailed to the address of the applicant or licensee or the statutory agent as
shown on the current business license application.  Notice shall be deemed
served as of the date of mailing or delivery.  Notice of revocation shall be
given at least 30 days before the revocation is to take effect.



   (C)   An applicant has the right to request a hearing before the
Town Manager within 15 days of denial, revocation or non renewal of a
business license. Appeal of the Town Manager’s decision shall be to the
Town Council and shall be made by the aggrieved party within 30 days of the
decision of the Town Manager.



   (D)   If payment of the business license itself has been made by an
insufficient funds check, the license shall be immediately revoked with or
without notice to the person or entity holding the license.  The Town Clerk
shall thereafter determine the conditions under which a license can be issued
to the applicant.



   (E)   All buildings, structures and equipment used by an applicant
or licensee for any business activity shall comply with all applicable
federal, state, county, special district and town regulations, requirements
and codes.  Where an ongoing maintenance program is necessary to comply with
applicable federal, state, county, town and special district regulations,
requirements and codes, including but not limited to such things as fire
extinguishers, hood and vents over cooking devices, a routine inspection by
authorized fire, building, zoning, health and safety personnel may occur at
any time during normal business hours, to insure the equipment or structure
is kept in proper operating condition.  Any remodeling or modification of
the structure or property, expansion of facilities, alteration or
modification of devices of equipment herein, which was not approved by
authorized fire, building, zoning, health and safety personnel and which may
cause safety or code violations to exist is grounds for suspension or
revocation of any license issued pursuant to this chapter.  If the building,
structure or equipment of a business licensed under this chapter is found to
be faulty, unsafe or inoperable, the town may suspend this license, and any
violation occurring after issuance of the business license must be
corrected.  Thereafter the premises must be reinspected and approved before
any reopening of the business shall occur.  Any person who continues to
engage in a business activity while the violations exist is subject to the
immediate revocation without prior notice of any license issued pursuant to
this chapter.  Business activity may be resumed only after the town has
provided notice in writing that the violation has been cured.



   (F)   Should a federal, state, county, special district official or
town official declare that an immediate or potential hazard to the public
exists which arises from or affects a licensed business activity, the Town
Clerk may immediately suspend the affected license and order the business
activity discontinued immediately.  The suspension shall continue as long as
the emergency situation is present or affects the business.



   (G)   A violation of the standards of conduct set forth in this
chapter which occurs after issuance of a business license may be grounds for
revocation or non renewal of a business license.



(2001 Code, § 8-1-11)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found operating a business in violation of this
chapter or who fails to renew a license issued under § 110.06 and who allows
the renewal to become delinquent, shall be assessed a fine equal to 100% of
the applicable license fee which the fine shall be added to the license fee.
If the fine is not paid within 30 days of the renewal date or required
application date, division (B) below shall apply.



   (B)   Any person found guilty of violation of any provisions of this
chapter, except as set forth in division (A) above, shall be guilty of a
Class 3 Misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate
offense.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, the required application date
shall be the date upon which a person receives notification from the Town
Clerk of a violation of this chapter.



(2001 Code, § 8-1-12)



CHAPTER 111:  PARK AND SWAP MEETS



Section



   111.01   Compliance generally



   111.02   Definitions



   111.03   License requirements



   111.04   Arizona State sales tax



§ 111.01  COMPLIANCE GENERALLY.



   Park and swap operations shall comply with all provisions of this
chapter unless otherwise stated hereafter.



(2001 Code, § 8-2-1)



§ 111.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARK AND SWAP LOT.  A building, structure, enclosure, lot or other
area into which persons are admitted to display, exchange, barter, buy, sell
or bargain for new and used merchandise, excluding those locations
permanently engaged in the business of making sales at retail.



   PARK AND SWAP MEET.  The activity carried on at the park and swap lot
and consists of the admitting of persons into a park and swap lot for the
purpose of displaying, exchanging, bartering, buying, selling or bargaining
for new and used merchandise.



   PARK AND SWAP MEET PARTICIPANT.  Any person other than an owner or
operator who brings goods, wares or merchandise, either new or secondhand, to
a park and swap meet for the purpose of displaying, exchanging, bartering,
buying, selling or bargaining these goods, wares or merchandise.



   PARK AND SWAP OWNER or PARK AND SWAP OPERATOR.  Any person who rents,
sells, donates or otherwise makes available to park and swap meet
participants any space within premises owned or controlled by the proprietor
for the purpose of a swap meet sale or who controls admission, directly or
through agents, of persons and merchandise into the park and swap lot.



(2001 Code, § 8-2-2)



§ 111.03  LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.



   It is unlawful for any owner or operator to operate a park and swap
operation within the limits of the town without first having obtained a
license as provided in this chapter.



   (A)   Park and swap operations shall comply with all zoning and
building code requirements.



   (B)   Park and swap operations shall be licensed only upon approval
by Council.



   (C)   Park and swap operations shall be licensed only upon a showing
that adequate sanitary facilities will be available during the hours of
operation of the swap meet.  A park and swap license may be revoked upon a
showing that the operator has failed to provide adequate sanitary facilities
to meet health and safety standards.



(2001 Code, § 8-2-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.04  ARIZONA STATE SALES TAX.



   Each park and swap licensee shall require that any park and swap
participant, as a condition of admittance, provide proof of a current Arizona
State sales tax license unless exempt by law.



(2001 Code, § 8-2-4)



CHAPTER 112:  TRANSIENT MERCHANTS; PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section




Transient Merchants




   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   License requirements



   112.03   Prohibited practices



   112.04   Loud noises and speaking devices



   112.05   Suspension or revocation of license



   112.06   Appeal



   112.07   Reapplication




Peddlers and Solicitors




   112.20   Scope; definitions



   112.21   License required



   112.22   Exemptions



   112.23   Application



   112.24   Investigation and insurance



   112.25   Fees



   112.26   Bond



   112.27   Exhibition of license



   112.28   Signs to be observed



   112.29   Enforcement



   112.30   Records



   112.31   Suspension or revocation of license



   112.32   Appeal



   112.33   Reapplication




TRANSIENT MERCHANTS




§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SPECIAL EVENTS LICENSE.  A license issued to a transient merchant to
allow for the business to set up a booth or display to sell a product or
service during a special event or festival, as regulated under Chapter 113 of
this code.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  Any person, either for personal gain or the gain
of another, who is engaged in any business activity not conducted from a
permanent place of business but is capable of moving the articles for sale
from 1 location to another and who does not intend to do business at the same
location for more than a few days. A TRANSIENT MERCHANT is distinguished from
a peddler who solicits door to door.



(2001 Code, § 8-3-1)



§ 112.02  LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any transient merchant to engage in any
business activity within the town without first obtaining a transient
merchant license as provided hereafter.



   (B)   All provisions of Chapter 110 of this code shall apply unless
otherwise stated hereafter.



      (1)   Any transient merchant intending to conduct a business
activity for no more than 3 days in any consecutive 30 day period shall be
issued a transient merchant license by the Town Clerk upon compliance with
all applicable provisions of Chapter 110 of this code, upon a showing of
permission from the landowner, if applicable, and upon proper payment of
daily fees for transient merchants as provided in § 110.07 of this code.



      (2)   Any transient merchant intending to conduct a business
activity for more than 3 days during any consecutive 30 day period shall be
issued a transient merchant license by the Town Clerk upon approval by
Council, upon compliance with all applicable provisions of Chapter 110 of
this code, upon a showing of permission from the landowner, if applicable,
and upon proper payment of the fee for transient merchant as provided in §
110.07 of this code.  Prior to renewal of a transient merchant license for
an additional period, the merchant shall obtain council approval and shall
otherwise comply with all other requirements.



      (3)   No transient merchant license shall be transferable or
assignable.



      (4)   A vendor wishing to set up a booth or display to sell a
product or service during a special event or festival shall first obtain a
license as per Chapter 113 of this code.



(2001 Code, § 8-3-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.03  PROHIBITED PRACTICES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any transient merchant to make exclusive
use of any location on any street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way for the
purpose of selling, delivering or exhibiting goods or merchandise.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any transient merchant to operate in a
congested area where the operation may impede or inconvenience the public use
of the street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way.



(2001 Code, § 8-3-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.04  LOUD NOISES AND SPEAKING DEVICES.



   No licensee, nor any person in his or her behalf, shall shout, cry out,
blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound amplifying device upon any of the
streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the town or upon private
premises where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to
be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or
other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods,
wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.



(2001 Code, § 8-3-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.05  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The Town Clerk shall refuse to issue a license to an applicant
or shall promptly revoke an existing license upon notice that the applicant
or licensee is in violation of the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The Town Clerk or designee shall deliver to the applicant or
licensee, by certified mail, written notice of the denial of an application
or the revocation of an existing license. The notice shall state the reason
for denial or revocation. Notice shall be delivered to the address listed on
the application or license. Notice shall be deemed served as of the date of
mailing.



(2001 Code, § 8-3-5)



§ 112.06  APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by an action of the Town Clerk pursuant to this
subchapter may appeal the decision of the Town Clerk by filing a written
complaint with the Town Manager within 15 days of the decision of the Town
Clerk.  The complaint shall contain a written statement setting forth fully
the grounds for the appeal of the Town Clerk’s decision.  The Town Manager
shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal. Notice of the hearing
shall be given to the appellant within 5 working days of the filing of the
complaint by certified mail sent to the last known address or by personal
service. The town manager shall hold the hearing within 15 working days of
receiving the complaint. The Town Manager shall make a final determination
within 10 working days of the hearing.  The determination by the Town
Manager shall be final.



(2001 Code, § 8-3-6)



§ 112.07  REAPPLICATION.



   No licensee whose license has been revoked or refused shall make
further application until at least 1 year has elapsed since the last previous
revocation.



(2001 Code, § 8-3-7)




PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS




§ 112.20  SCOPE; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   This subchapter is intended to apply to any person whether a
resident of the town or not, who goes from house to house, place to place or
street to street, soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for sale
of goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals for
future delivery or for services to be performed in the future.  All
provisions of Chapter 110 of this code shall apply unless otherwise stated.



   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      PEDDLER.  Any person, whether a resident of the town or not, who
goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street,
conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise or offering or exposing
the same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers.



      SOLICITOR.  Any person, whether a resident of the town or not,
who goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street,
soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares or
merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals or personal property of
any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be performed in
the future, whether or not the individual has, carries or exposes for sale a
sample of the subject of such order or whether or not he or she is collecting
advance payments on the orders.  The definition includes any person who, for
himself or herself or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any
building, motor vehicle, trailer, structure, tent, railroad box car, boat,
hotel or motel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or other place within the
town for the primary purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for
future delivery.



(2001 Code, § 8-4-1)



§ 112.21  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to engage in any
business activity within the town without first obtaining a license therefor
in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   (1)   It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to make
exclusive use of any location on any street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way
for the purpose of selling, delivering or exhibiting goods or merchandise.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to operate
in a congested area where such operation may impede or inconvenience the
public use of the street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way.



      (3)   No licensee nor any person in the licensee’s behalf
shall shout, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound amplifying
device upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the
town or upon private premises where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or
produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets,
avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting
attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which the licensee proposes to
sell.



      (4)   It is unlawful for any person to exhibit any copy or
facsimile of the original license issued under this subchapter.



      (5)   It is unlawful for any licensee or agent of licensee to
conduct any business activity except during the daylight hours.



(2001 Code, § 8-4-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.22  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The terms of this subchapter do not include the acts of
merchants or their employees in delivering goods in the regular course of
business, nor to any salesperson who has obtained prior permission to enter
upon an individual’s property for the purpose of making a sale.  Nothing
contained in this chapter prohibits any sale required by statute or by order
of any court or to prevent any person conducting a bona fide auction sale
pursuant to the law.



   (B)   The exemptions to the license requirements of this subchapter
also include:



      (1)   Nonprofit educational institutions, fraternal and
service clubs and religious organizations;



      (2)   Nonprofit private clubs whose basic membership fees
cover the cost of the use of facilities;



      (3)   A permanent resident wishing to sell any form of
agricultural products including livestock produced or raised by himself or
herself;



      (4)   Fund raising projects of nonprofit and religious
organizations, not conducted on a regular basis;



      (5)   Persons under the age of 18 years engaged in part time
or seasonal employment while still attending school full time; and



      (6)   All exemptions granted pursuant to the Arizona Revised
Statutes and all future amendments, if any.



(2001 Code, § 8-4-3)



§ 112.23  APPLICATION.



   Applicants for a license under this subchapter shall file with the Town
Clerk a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the Town
Clerk which shall give the following information:



   (A)   Name, physical description and social security number of
applicant and each helper;



   (B)   Complete permanent home and local address of the applicant and
the local address from which proposed sales will be made;



   (C)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the
goods to be sold or services to be preformed;



   (D)   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together
with credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship (no post
office box will be accepted), the amount of time business has been in
operation and the town and phone number the business is located in for
verification;



   (E)   The length of time for which the right to do business is
desired;



   (F)   The source of supply of the goods or products proposed to be
sold or orders taken for the sale thereof, where the goods or products are
located at the time the application is filed and the proposed method of
delivery;



   (G)   Two copies of a recent photograph of each applicant and each
agent of the applicant, which picture shall be approximately 1-1/2" x 1-1/2"
and shall clearly show the head of the individual; (One photograph shall be
attached to the applicant’s application form and the other shall be
attached to the person’s identification badge.)



   (H)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant or any of
applicant’s agents has been convicted of any violation of any federal,
state, county, municipal law or regulation, other than traffic violations,
the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed;



   (I)   The most recent cities or towns, not to exceed 3, where
applicant carried on business immediately preceding the date of application
and the address from which the business was conducted in those municipalities;



   (J)   At the time of filing the application, a fee as adopted by
resolution per day shall be paid to the Town Clerk by the applicant and an
additional fee as adopted by resolution per day for each agent to cover the
cost of processing the application;  (The applicant shall also pay a deposit
fee as adopted by resolution which deposit shall be refunded to the applicant
once all identification badges are returned to the Town Clerk.)



   (K)   Description of vehicles, including license plate numbers to be
used in business; and



   (L)   The Town Clerk shall take a thumb print of each applicant and
agent of the applicant.



(2001 Code, § 8-4-4)



§ 112.24  INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of each application, the Town Clerk shall
immediately forward the application to the Police Department for
investigation of the applicant as is deemed necessary for the protection of
the public and as set forth in § 110.05 of this code.



   (B)   If, as a result of the investigation, the applicant’s
character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory to go from
house to house, the Town Clerk shall reject the application and shall state
the reasons for the rejection.  The Town Clerk shall notify the applicant
that the application has been rejected.



   (C)   If, as a result of the investigation, the character and
business responsibility of the applicant is found to be satisfactory, the
Town Clerk shall approve the application and issue the license.  The license
shall contain the signature of the issuing authority and shall show the name,
address and photograph of the licensee, the class of the license issued and
the kind of goods to be sold or services to be rendered thereunder, the
amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the same
shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying
description of any vehicle used in the licensed business.  A separate
license shall be issued for each agent of the applicant authorized by the
Town Clerk and shall contain the information described for the licensee.



   (D)   Each peddler or solicitor and each agent of the peddler or
solicitor shall be issued an individual identification badge once the
applicant is approved for a license.  No identification badge shall be used
at any time by any person other than the one to whom it is issued.  Each
identification badge shall state the name of the peddler or solicitor or the
agent of the licensee, the person’s physical characteristics and address,
the goods to be sold, a description of the vehicle used by the person, the
issue and expiration date of the permitted activity and a photograph of the
person as submitted pursuant to § 112.23(G) of this chapter.  The Town
Clerk shall keep a record of all identification badges issued.



(2001 Code, § 8-4-5)



§ 112.25  FEES.



   (A)   Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall pay
fees as adopted by resolution.



   (B)   In addition, each applicant shall pay a deposit fee as adopted
by resolution to ensure return by licensee and licensee’s agents of all
identification cards at the conclusion of the permitted sales period.  Upon
submittal of all identification cards issued to licensee and licensee’s
agents, the Town Clerk shall refund the deposit.



(2001 Code, § 8-4-6)



§ 112.26  BOND.



   Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall obtain a 1 year
peddler’s permit bond.  The Town Clerk shall request a copy of the bond
before a business license is issued.



(2001 Code, § 8-4-7)



§ 112.27  EXHIBITION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each licensee shall be required to exhibit the original
certificate of license at the request of a police officer or town official.



   (B)   Exhibition of a copy or facsimile of the original shall not be
considered compliance with this section.



   (C)   Each licensee and each licensee’s agent shall wear at all
times during any sales activity the identification badge issued by the Town
Clerk in the individual’s name.



(2001 Code, § 8-4-8)



§ 112.28  SIGNS TO BE OBSERVED.



   It is unlawful for any person to go on the premises of another for the
purpose of soliciting, peddling, hawking or canvassing, selling or vending of
goods, wares, merchandise, newspapers, magazines or services where such
premises are posted with a sign or other notice stating “No Peddlers”,
“No Solicitors” or otherwise giving notice to the public that peddlers,
solicitors or salespersons are not desired.



(2001 Code, § 8-4-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.29  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Chief of Police and the Code Enforcement Officer shall
have and shall exercise the power to file complaints against any person
violating the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall have and shall exercise the power to
cite and release or arrest all persons violating the provisions of this
subchapter.



(2001 Code, § 8-4-10)



§ 112.30  RECORDS.



   The Chief of Police shall report to the Town Clerk all complaints,
citations and convictions for violations of this subchapter, and the Town
Clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and shall keep a record
of all complaints, citations and convictions of violations.



(2001 Code, § 8-4-11)



§ 112.31  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The Town Clerk shall refuse to issue a license to an applicant
or shall promptly revoke an existing license upon notice that the applicant
or licensee is in violation of the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The Town Clerk or designee shall deliver to the applicant or
licensee, by certified mail, written notice of the denial of an application
or the revocation of an existing license. The notice shall state the reason
for denial or revocation. Notice shall be delivered to the address listed on
the application or license. Notice shall be deemed served as of the date of
mailing.



   (C)   Within 24 hours of receipt of notice of revocation, the
licensee shall turn in to the Town Clerk all identification badges issued to
the licensee and to any agent of the licensee.  Upon compliance by the
licensee with the above requirement, the Town Clerk shall refund the deposit
fee to the licensee.



   (D)   The provisions of division (B) above shall not apply to
transactions solely between merchants licensed under this subchapter or
between merchants who would be required by this subchapter to secure licenses
if their establishments were located within the town.



(2001 Code, § 8-4-12)



§ 112.32  APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by an action of the Town Clerk pursuant to this
subchapter may appeal the decision of the Town Clerk by filing a written
complaint with the Town Manager within 15 days of the decision of the Town
Clerk. The complaint shall contain a written statement setting forth fully
the grounds for the appeal of the Town Clerk’s decision.  The Town Manager
shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal.  Notice of the
hearing shall be given to the appellant within 5 working days of the filing
of the complaint by certified mail sent to the last known address or by
personal service.  The Town Manager shall hold the hearing within 15 working
days of receiving the complaint.  The Town Manager shall make a final
determination within 10 working days of the hearing.  The determination by
the Town Manager shall be final.



(2001 Code, § 8-4-13)



§ 112.33  REAPPLICATION.



   No licensee whose license has been revoked or refused shall make
further application until at least 1 year has elapsed since the last previous
revocation.



(2001 Code, § 8-4-14)



CHAPTER 113:  FESTIVALS



Section



   113.01   Purpose; definition



   113.02   License required



   113.03   Written application



   113.04   Filing fee and deposit



   113.05   Transmittal of application; hearing; issuance of license



   113.06   Grounds for denial of license; notice of denial



   113.07   License fee



   113.08   Revocation of license



   113.09   Conditions



   113.10   Waiver



   113.11   Violations; remedies



§ 113.01  PURPOSE; DEFINITION.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to aid and assist the town and
its appropriate officers in enforcing the applicable provisions of A.R.S.
Title 9 and Title 36.  It is adopted pursuant to the authority of these
provisions and A.R.S. § 9-240, as amended.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      FESTIVAL.  Music festivals and other activities calculated to
attract large crowds, and includes any other activity, whether in the nature
of a festival, celebration, fiesta, rally, dance, carnival, circus, revival
meeting or similar activities, if the activity is designed, intended or
reasonably calculated to attract 100 or more people at the same time and at
the same place, whether the places be indoors or outdoors.  This definition
is not intended to include gatherings of whatever magnitude, duration or
frequency if the gatherings are to be conducted both:



         (a)   At a place where permanently installed sanitation
facilities available to the public at the intended location of the gathering
are of adequate capacity for the number of persons for which the event is
designed or intended; and



         (b)   Within a use district where the gatherings are
within the legally established and authorized uses.



(2001 Code, § 8-5-1)



§ 113.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Any person wishing to operate, maintain or conduct a festival within
the town must first obtain a license to do so.  No license shall be issued,
however, until all conditions required pursuant to this chapter have been met
and fulfilled.  The maximum number of people permitted at any 1 event will
be set by the Parks and Recreation Director after the site where the event
will take place is established and inspected.



(2001 Code, § 8-5-2)



§ 113.03  WRITTEN APPLICATION.



   (A)   Written application to the Parks and Recreation Director
should be submitted at least 60 days before the first day of the proposed
festival.



   (B)   Any person desiring to operate a festival shall file a written
application, consisting of an original and 5 copies, with the Parks and
Recreation Director, which shall contain the following facts and information:



      (1)   The name, age, residence and mailing address of the
person making the application; (If the application is made by a partnership,
the names and addresses of the partners must appear.  Where the applicant is
a corporation, the application must be signed by the president and secretary
thereof, and must contain the addresses of the corporate officers, and a
certified copy of the articles of incorporation shall be submitted with the
application.)



      (2)   The address or legal description and present zoning of
the place or premises where the proposed event is to be conducted, operated
or carried on;  (Additionally, the applicant must submit proof of ownership
of the place where the event is to be conducted or a statement signed by the
owner of the premises indicating his or her consent that the site may be used
for the proposed event.)



      (3)   The number of days for which the license is sought;  (A
license authorizes the conduct of a festival for the number of days
contemplated for the festival, not to exceed the number of days authorized by
the owner of the premises, and in no event for more than 10 days, and must
thereafter be renewed.)



      (4)   An estimate of the number of customers, spectators,
participants and other persons intended, calculated or expected to attend the
event for each day it is conducted; and



      (5)   A map or sketch showing the location of the property in
relation to surrounding properties, the area to be used, the access to the
property and the location of any proposed facilities, parking areas,
campgrounds and the like.



(2001 Code, § 8-5-3)



§ 113.04  FILING FEE AND DEPOSIT.



   The Parks and Recreation Director shall collect from the applicant a
filing fee as adopted by resolution which shall be nonrefundable, and a
deposit as adopted by reference to cover expenses relating to investigation
or other service, the unused portion of which shall be refunded.



(2001 Code, § 8-5-4)



§ 113.05  TRANSMITTAL OF APPLICATION; HEARING; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of the application, the Parks and Recreation
Director shall file the original application with planning and zoning for
processing, and distribute 1 copy thereof to the Chief of Police, the Chino
Valley Fire District, and the Town Attorney.  These officers and department
heads shall thereupon cause an investigation of the application insofar as
their respective offices are concerned.



   (B)   The Parks and Recreation Director shall, based upon the
application and reports of the interested officers and departments, grant the
application, deny the application, or set conditions which must be met before
a license may be granted.



   (C)   Where conditions are imposed pursuant to § 113.09 of this
chapter, the Parks and Recreation Director shall notify the applicant and
thereafter must certify that all conditions have been met before a license
may be issued.  The Parks and Recreation Director may require written notice
from all departments charged with responsibility under § 113.09 of this
chapter that conditions have been met before issuing the certificate.



   (D)   When the Parks and Recreation Director certifies that
conditions have been met, the Parks and Recreation Director shall thereupon
issue a license specifying the name and address of the licensee and the
number of days operation is authorized.  The licensee shall keep the license
posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises at which the event is
conducted.



(2001 Code, § 8-5-5)



§ 113.06  GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE; NOTICE OF DENIAL.



   (A)   After reviewing the application material, the Parks and
Recreation Director may deny issuance of a license if it finds any of the
following:



      (1)   That the applicant has failed to meet the conditions
imposed pursuant to this subchapter;



      (2)   That the proposed event is intended to be conducted in a
manner or location not meeting the health, zoning, fire or safety standards
established by rules or regulations of the town, the laws of the State of
Arizona or rules and regulations adopted by any of its agencies;



      (3)   That the applicant has knowingly made any false,
misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for
license or in any other document required pursuant to this subchapter;



      (4)   That the applicant, his or her employee, agent or any
person associated with applicant as partner, director, officer, stockholder,
associate or manager, has been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction, by final judgment of an offense:



         (a)   Involving the presentation, exhibition or
performance of an obscene production, motion picture or play or of selling
obscene matter;



         (b)   Involving lewd conduct;



         (c)   Involving the use of force and violence upon the
person of another;



         (d)   Involving misconduct with children; or



         (e)   An offense against the provisions of Arizona law
respecting narcotics and dangerous drugs, or of any equivalent offense under
the law of any other state which if committed in Arizona would have been a
violation of the Arizona statutory provisions.



   (B)   Where the application is denied, the Parks and Recreation
Director shall mail to the applicant written notice of denial within 14 days
of the action, which notice shall include a statement of the reasons the
application was denied.



(2001 Code, § 8-5-6)



§ 113.07  LICENSE FEE.



   The license fee for operating a festival shall be as adopted by
resolution.  The fee shall be paid in cash prior to the issuance of the
license.



(2001 Code, § 8-5-7)



§ 113.08  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power to revoke any
license, or to revoke and reinstate any license upon suitable conditions,
when either of the following causes exists:



   (A)   The festival violates any law or regulation established by the
town, the laws of the State of Arizona or the rules and regulations adopted
by any of its agencies; and/or



   (B)   The licensee allows the festival to be conducted in a
disorderly manner or knowingly allows to remain upon the premises any
delinquent or dependent juvenile or any person regardless of age who is or
who appears to be under the influence of intoxicating liquor, or any narcotic
or dangerous drug, as those terms are defined or used in the Arizona Revised
Statutes.



(2001 Code, § 8-5-8)



§ 113.09  CONDITIONS.



   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Director shall establish conditions
which must be met prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter,
except that the Parks and Recreation Director may take a matter under
advisement before determining which conditions shall be imposed.  Where the
Parks and Recreation Director takes a matter under advisement and a final
decision is subsequently made, written notice of any conditions imposed as
prerequisite to the issuance of a license must be mailed to the applicant.



   (B)   The conditions which may be imposed by the  Parks and
Recreation Director are as follows:



      (1)   Police protection.  Every licensee may, at his or her
own expense, be required to employ a number of off-duty police officers,
private patrolers, or guards as recommended by the Chief of Police.  The
private patrolers or guards shall be approved by the Chief of Police and
shall be responsible for the preservation of order and protection of property
in and around the place of the festival.  The patrolers shall be required to
be licensed to the extent that licensing may from time to time be required
under state law.  They must be in attendance, wearing uniforms, at all times
the event is in operation. Where the Chief of Police authorizes the
employment of off duty peace officers to meet the requirements of this
chapter, the peace officers shall be under the direction and control of the
Chief of Police.  The Chief of Police must be satisfied that the requisite
number of private patrolers or guards will be provided at all times of
operation before a license is issued. If a private patrol agency is to be
used, the applicant must submit a written agreement between the applicant and
the licensed private patrol agency.



      (2)   Water facilities.  Every licensee shall provide an
ample supply of water for drinking and sanitation purposes on the premises
where the festival is to be conducted.  Quality and quantity of water and
location of facilities must be approved by the county’s Health Department
prior to the issuance of a license.  All water shall meet the standards of
the state’s Department of Health Services and shall be provided, stored and
dispensed by methods approved by that Department.



      (3)   Food concessions.  In the case of any festival proposed
to be held in areas located a substantial distance from markets, restaurants
or like eating establishments, applicant shall be required to demonstrate
that food will be available at the premises for each day of operation to
adequately feed the number of persons expected to be in attendance. 
Concessionaires must be licensed pursuant to local regulation and state
laws.  Quality and quantity of food and location of concessions must be
approved by the county’s Health Department prior to the issuance of any
license.



      (4)   Sanitation facilities.



         (a)   Every licensee shall provide and maintain adequate
toilet facilities pursuant to procedures established by the County Health
Department before any license may be issued.



         (b)   Every licensee shall be required to furnish and
maintain adequate trash cans pursuant to procedures established by the County
Health Department before any license may be issued.



      (5)   Medical facilities.  Where a proposed festival is
planned for a site which is located a substantial distance from existing
medical treatment facilities, the applicant may be required to provide
emergency medical treatment facilities on the premises.  The location of the
facilities, number and qualifications of medical and paramedical persons
needed to staff the facilities and the quantity of medical supplies, drugs,
ambulances and other equipment that must be on the site, must be approved by
the county’s Health Department prior to the issuance of any license under
this chapter.  Medical personnel must be licensed pursuant to local
regulations and state laws.  The county’s Health Department shall
calculate the need for medical services, based on the number of persons
expected to attend the public amusement or festival, their expected age
group, the duration of events planned and the possibility of exposure to
inclement weather and outdoor elements.



      (6)   Parking areas.  Every licensee shall provide adequate
parking space for persons attending a festival by motor vehicle.  Applicants
may be called upon to provide separate space for the festival, separate from
or in addition to the premises where the festival is to be conducted. 
Individual parking areas shall be clearly marked and shall be designed in
accordance with minimum standards for safe traffic engineering, including
compliance with applicable fire code regulations.  Planning and zoning will
establish minimum parking for maximum capacity as per applicant’s
request.  The Chief of Police must approve an applicant’s “parking
plan” before a license shall be issued.



      (7)   Access and parking control.  Every licensee shall
provide adequate ingress and egress to the premises where the festival is to
be conducted, together with parking areas therefor.  Necessary roads,
driveways and entranceways shall exist to insure orderly flow of traffic into
the premises from a highway or road which is a part of the town's system of
highways or which is a highway maintained by the State of Arizona.  The
chief of police must approve the licensee’s plan for ingress and egress
before a license shall be issued.  Additionally, any applicant may be
required to show that traffic guards are under his or her employment to
insure orderly traffic movement and relieve traffic congestion in the
vicinity of the festival area.



      (8)   Hours of operation.  Every festival shall close and
cease operation continuously between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of
each and every day.



      (9)   Illumination.  Every applicant for a license for a
festival to be conducted during hours of darkness, or planning to allow
persons who attend the festival to remain on the premises after dark, shall
provide electrical illumination to insure that those areas which are occupied
are lighted at all times. The Parks and Recreation Director must approve an
applicant’s lighting plan as a prerequisite to issuance of a license
hereunder.  A licensee shall be required to illuminate specific areas on the
premises in accordance with the following scale of lighting intensity:



 

Open areas reserved for spectators
 
5 to 10 foot candles


Stage area
 
75 to 100 foot candles


Parking and overnight areas
 
1 to 5 foot candles


Restroom and concession areas
 
20 to 50 foot candles



 



      (10)   Overnight camping facilities.  Every applicant
intending to allow persons who attend the festival to remain on the premises
overnight shall indicate in his or her application, or the license, if
issued, shall not include the permission.  Overnight camping shall be
allowed only in officially approved areas.



      (11)   Insurance.  At least 10 days prior to the scheduled
beginning of the festival, the licensee shall provide to the town a
certificate of insurance in an amount approved by the Parks and Recreation
Director, based on the risk level of the event, for comprehensive liability
with the licensee’s policy including coverage for bodily injury, property
damage, contractual liabilities, owned/non-owned or hired vehicles.  The
town shall be named as an additional insured on the policy.  Further, the
licensee’s policy shall state that the licensee’s insurance is primary
over any other insurance available to the town.



      (12)   Worker’s compensation.  The licensee shall provide
satisfactory evidence of worker’s compensation.



      (13)   Indemnification.  The licensee shall hold the town
harmless from and against any and all claims, judgments or attorney’s fees
arising out of the occurrence of any event related to the holding of the
festival, including any such claims that are based upon the negligence of the
town, it being the specific intent of the licensee to indemnify the town for
any loss arising out of the occurrence of any event related to the holding of
the festival, even if caused by the town’s own negligence.



(2001 Code, § 8-5-9)



§ 113.10  WAIVER.



   Any provision of this chapter may be waived for the benefit of a
licensee by the Town Manager or his or her designee.



(2001 Code, § 8-5-10)



§ 113.11  VIOLATIONS; REMEDIES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any licensee, employee, agent or person
associated with the licensee, to do any of the following:



      (1)   Operate, conduct or carry on a festival, as herein
defined, without first procuring a license to do so;



      (2)   Sell tickets to a festival without a license first
having been obtained;



      (3)   Operate, conduct or carry on any festival in such a
manner as to create a public or private nuisance;



      (4)   Exhibit, show or conduct within or in connection with a
festival any obscene, indecent, vulgar or lewd exhibition, show, play,
entertainment or exhibit;



      (5)   Allow any person on the premises of the festival to
cause or create a disturbance in, around or near any part of the festival, by
offensive or disorderly conduct;



      (6)   Knowingly allow any person to consume, sell or be in
possession of intoxicating liquor while at the festival except where such
consumption or possession is expressly authorized under the terms of the laws
of the State of Arizona or the rules and regulations adopted by any of its
agencies; and



      (7)   Knowingly allow any person at the festival to use, sell
or be in possession of any narcotic or dangerous drug.



   (B)   The town retains any and all civil and criminal remedies,
including the right to civil injunction for the prevention of any of the
aforesaid violations, and for the recovery of money damages therefor.



(2001 Code, § 8-5-11)



CHAPTER 114:  CABLE TELEVISION



Section



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   License required



   114.03   Failure to have license; violation



   114.04   Authorization to engage in business



   114.05   Limitations of license



   114.06   Acquisition of facilities by town upon termination



   114.07   Rights reserved to the town



   114.08   License application procedures



   114.09   License application fees



   114.10   Selection of licensee



   114.11   Term of license



   114.12   Grant of additional license and competing service



   114.13   Renewals



   114.14   Transfers of assignment



   114.15   Effect of award of license



   114.16   Payment of license fee



   114.17   Use of telephone company’s facilities



   114.18   Required services and facilities



   114.19   Subscriber services; rates



   114.20   Government access channel



   114.21   Educational access channels



   114.22   General provisions concerning access



   114.23   Time is of the essence



   114.24   Acceptance and effective date of license



   114.25   Permits, installations and service



   114.26   Cable system construction map and schedule



   114.27   Line extension



   114.28   Placement of transmission facilities



   114.29   Construction and technical standards



   114.30   Utility locating system



   114.31   Resident notification of construction activity required



   114.32   Location of property of license



   114.33   Emergency work



   114.34   Removal and abandonment of property of license



   114.35   Temporary removal of wire for building improvements



   114.36   Changes required by public improvements



   114.37   Methods and materials of street construction



   114.38   Failure to perform street work



   114.39   Telephone communications service



   114.40   Subscriber service standards



   114.41   Subscriber and town notification



   114.42   Billing practices; information and procedures



   114.43   Subscriber solicitation procedures



   114.44   Disconnection and termination of cable services



   114.45   Protection of subscriber privacy



   114.46   Reports



   114.47   Inspection of property and records



   114.48   Protection of town against liability



   114.49   Letter of credit



   114.50   Construction bonds



   114.51   Liquidated damages



   114.52   Administrative hearing



   114.53   Hearing by Council



   114.54   Revocation



   114.55   Continuity of service mandatory



   114.56   Failure of town to enforce a license; no waiver of terms
thereof



   114.57   License subject to other laws



   114.58   Miscellaneous provisions



   114.59   Force majeure



   114.60   Continued use of individual antennas



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CABLE ACT. Title VI of the federal Communications Act of 1934, as
amended.



   CABLE SERVICE. The transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming service and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of the video programming or other
programming service.



   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM OR CATV SYSTEM. Any facility consisting of a
set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception
and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes
video programing and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a
community.



   CHANNEL. A band of frequencies 6 megahertz wide in the electromagnetic
spectrum capable of carrying either 1 audiovisual television and a few
non-video signals or a large number of non-video signals.



   FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION OR FCC. The present federal agency of
that name as constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, being 47 U.S.C.
§§ 151 et seq., or any successor agency created by the United States
Congress.



   GROSS REVENUES. All cash, credits, property of any kind or nature, or
other consideration, less related bad debt not to exceed 1½ % annually, that
is received directly or indirectly by the licensee, its affiliates,
subsidiaries or parent or any person, firm or corporation in which licensee
has a financial interest or that has a financial interest in licensee and
that is derived from licensee's operation of its cable system to provide
cable service in the town. Gross revenues include all revenue from charges
for cable service to subscribers and all charges for installation, removal,
connection or reinstatement of equipment necessary for a subscriber to
receive cable service, and any other receipts from subscribers derived from
operating the cable system to provide cable service, including receipts from
forfeited deposits, sale or rental of equipment to provide cable service,
late charges, interest and sale of program guides. Gross revenues also
include all income licensee receives from the lease of its facilities located
in the public streets, roads and alleys, unless services that the lessee
provides over the leased facilities are subject to a transaction privilege
tax of the licensor. Gross revenues do not include revenues from commercial
advertising on the cable system, the use or lease of studio facilities of the
cable system, the use or lease of leased access channels or bandwidth, the
production of video programming by the licensee, the sale, exchange, use or
cablecast of any programming by licensee in the town, sales to licensee's
subscribers by programmers of home shopping services, reimbursements paid by
programmers for launch fees or marketing expense, license fees, taxes or
other fees or charges that licensee collects and pays to any governmental
authority, any increase in the value of any stock, security or asset, or any
dividends or other distributions made in respect of any stock or securities.



   LICENSE. That ordinance or resolution that contains the right,
authority or grant, given by the Council enabling a person to construct,
operate and maintain a cable television system.



   LICENSE AREA. The current area within the boundaries of the town of
Chino Valley, Arizona, and any future annexed area, unless the terms of a
license provide otherwise.



   LICENSE FEE. The fee required to be paid pursuant to § 114.16.



   LICENSEE. The person granted a cable television license for
construction, operation, maintenance, or reconstruction of a cable system
issued by the town.



   LICENSOR. The Town of Chino Valley.



   MAJOR STOCKHOLDER. A beneficial owner, directly or indirectly, of 10%
or more of the issued and outstanding voting stock of any corporation.



   OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE. Information that a licensee makes available
to all subscribers generally.



   PUBLIC STREET. The surface of and the space above and below any public
street, avenue, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, bridge, tunnel,
park, parkway, waterway, bulkhead, alley, right-of-way, and public utility
easement.



   REGULAR SUBSCRIBER SERVICE. That service regularly provided to all
subscribers. It includes all broadcast signal carriage and FCC-required
access channel carriage, including origination programming. It does not
include specialized programming for which a per program or per channel charge
is made.



   STANDARD DROP. A cable connection which requires no more than a
225-foot drop measured from the nearest reasonable point of connection to a
subscriber's home or place of business (point of demarcation) to the nearest
existing technically feasible point of connection to the cable system;
involves only 1 outlet and standard materials; and does not involve a wall
fish. If justified by the technology of the licensee, licensee and town may
agree to a different standard drop in the license. A Standard Drop shall
exclude custom installation work, including specific subscriber-requested
work that requires nonstandard inventory or cable routing requiring
construction methods exceeding reasonable underground or aerial work.



   SUBSCRIBER. Any person receiving regular subscriber service.



   VIDEO PROGRAMMING. Programming that is provided by, or generally
comparable to programming provided by, a broadcast television station.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   A non-exclusive license to construct, operate and maintain a cable
system within all or any portion of the town is required of any person
desiring to provide cable service in the town.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.03  FAILURE TO HAVE LICENSE; VIOLATION.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or to
carry on the business of distributing any television signals or radio signals
by means of a cable system to any person in the town unless a license
therefor has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
and unless the license is in full force and effect.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to construct, install or
maintain within any public street in the town, or within any other public
property of the town, or within any privately-owned area within the town
which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a
proposed public street on any preliminary subdivision map approved by the
town, any equipment or facilities for distributing



any television signals or radio signals through a cable system, unless a
license authorizing such use of the street, property, or area has first been
obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless the license
is in full force and effect.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized
connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or
otherwise, with any part of a licensed cable system within the town for the
purpose of enabling that person or others to receive any television signal,
radio signal, picture, program, sound, or any other signal transmitted on the
cable system, without the permission of a licensee.



   (D)   It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the
owner licensee, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires
or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals,
pictures, programs, sounds or any other signals transmitted on the cable
system.



   (E)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 6 months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day
that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein
described.



   (F)   In addition to the penalties set forth in division (E), any
person violating any part of this chapter shall be subject to and shall pay
any fees required in this chapter as though they were a licensee.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.04  AUTHORIZATION TO ENGAGE IN BUSINESS.



   Any license granted shall authorize the licensee to engage in the
business of operating and providing a cable system in the town, and for that
purpose to erect, install, solicit, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct,
maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any street,
such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes,
amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary
and appurtenant to the cable system; and in addition, so to use, operate, and
provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons,
firms or corporations, including but not limited to any public utility or
other licensee licensed or permitted to do business in the town.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits
and similar facilities shall be placed underground unless such facilities are
attached to existing utility or telephone poles and the poles are used
primarily for utility or telephone purpose.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.05  LIMITATIONS OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Any license granted under this chapter shall be non-exclusive
and nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Council from granting
identical or similar licenses to more than 1 person, within all or any
portion of the town.



   (B)   Any privilege claimed under any license by the licensee in any
street shall be subordinate to any lawful occupancy or use thereof by the
town and shall be subordinate to any prior easements, prior licenses to use
the rights-of-way, and any other private property rights that may be superior
to the license issued.



   (C)   Any right or power in, or duty imposed upon, any officer,
employee, department, or board of the town shall be subject to transfer by
the town to any other officer, employee, department, or board of the town.



   (D)   All licensees are subject to all existing or hereafter enacted
or established requirements of the town's rules, regulations and
specifications pursuant to the town's police powers and taxing authority.
Licensees shall comply with all applicable existing or hereafter enacted or
established state and federal laws and regulations. The town reserves the
power to amend any section of this chapter so as to require additional or
greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance or otherwise
pursuant to the town's lawful police powers or as provided in the license.



   (E)   Any license granted shall not relieve the licensee of any
obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any department of the town,
utility company, or from others lawfully maintaining poles in streets.



   (F)   Any license granted does not relieve licensee of compliance
town code provisions governing construction, work, or use of the streets and
rights-of-way. The town hereby reserves to the town the power to amend any
section of the Chino Valley Town Code related to construction in streets and
public rights-of-way pursuant to its police powers.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.06  ACQUISITION OF FACILITIES BY TOWN UPON TERMINATION.



   (A)   In accordance with Section 627 of the Cable Act, if a renewal
of a license held by a licensee is denied and the town acquires ownership of
the cable system, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at fair market
value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern
but with no value allocated to the license itself. If a license held by a
licensee is revoked for cause and the town acquires ownership of the cable
system or effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to another
person, such matters as the harm to the community resulting from the
licensee's breach of the license may be considered in determining the fair
market value.



   (B)   Upon the termination of a license and the rights granted
thereunder, whether by expiration or forfeiture, the Council may direct and
require the licensee as provided in § 114.34 Removal and Abandonment of
Property of Licensee to remove its wires, cables, fixtures and accessories
and appurtenances from the streets. If directed, the town shall make a claim
on the letter of credit as prescribed in § 114.50 Construction Bonds.
Removal by licensee of its wires, cable, fixtures and accessories and
appurtenances from the streets shall not be required where such wires,
cables, fixtures and accessories and appurtenances are in use for the
provision of services other than cable services as to which no license from
the town is required, or as to which any license that is required has been
obtained.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.07  RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE TOWN.



   (A)   The town reserves its rights to acquire the property of the
licensee, by purchase, at fair market value, which shall not include any
amount for the license itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted.
The town reserves the right to exercise its power of eminent domain under the
Arizona Constitution and laws of the state.



   (B)   Neither the granting of any license nor the enactment of any
provision in this chapter shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of
any governmental right or power of the town, now existing or hereafter
granted.



   (C)   The town's right to acquire the property of the licensee shall
not require the licensee to convey such property that is in use for the
provision of services other than cable services as to which no license from
the town is required, or as to which any license that is required had been
obtained. If the cable system is operated by the owner for both
telecommunications and cable services purposes, the town must have separate
authority outside of this chapter to acquire those facilities used for
telecommunications purposes.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.08  LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   This chapter itself grants no authority to operate a cable
television system to any person. The grants are only made by the adoption of
a separate resolution awarding a specific license to an applicant who has
complied with the provisions of this chapter and any other provisions of the
separate resolution.



   (B)   Each application for a license or renewal license to
construct, operate or maintain any cable system in the town shall be filed
with the Town Clerk in a form prescribed by the town. An application shall
require, but shall not be limited to, the following information:



      (1)   The name, business address and form of business of the
applicant;



      (2)   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of
the applicant, namely any other business entity owning or controlling the
applicant, in whole or in part, or owned in whole or in part by the
applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or
subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to cable systems owned
or controlled by the applicant, its parent and subsidiary and the areas
served thereby.



      (3)    A detailed and complete financial statement of the
applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the
fiscal year next preceding the date of the application hereunder, and a
letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending
institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the
Council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending
institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a
lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be
required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed cable system
in the town, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant,
certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net and
uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable system
in the town. The Town Manager may accept an alternative submittal that meets
the purpose and intent of this section.



      (4)   A statement identifying, by place and date, any other
cable system license(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary;
the status of said license(s) with respect to completion thereof;



      (5)   A service area boundary map of the area that the
applicant proposes to serve and a schedule for initiation of cable service
and a statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications of
rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as
to each of said classifications, including installation charges and cable
service charges;



      (6)   The applicant's proposal for providing access channels,
facilities and related considerations. Applicants are strongly encouraged to
investigate the needs and desires of potential users and to offer such
facilities as are technologically and economically feasible;



      (7)   A description of facilities for local programming, and
facilities to be offered to various community institutions;



      (8)   A schedule of proposed rates and charges to all classes
of subscribers for both installation and monthly service, and a copy of the
proposed service agreement between the applicant and its proposed subscribers;



      (9)   A copy of any contract which may exist between the
applicant and any public utility providing for the use of the utility's
property, such as poles, lines or conduits;



      (10)   A statement setting forth all agreements and
understandings, whether written, oral or implied, between the applicant and
any other person with respect to the proposed license or the proposed cable
television operation;



      (11)   An estimate of the cost of constructing the applicant's
proposed system, and a financial statement prepared in a form satisfactory to
the Council showing applicant's financial status and its financial ability to
meet these proposed costs;



      (12)   A sworn statement acknowledging the applicant's
familiarity with and eligibility under the provisions of this chapter and the
rules of the FCC and its intention to abide by the same;



      (13)   Other information that will assist the town in
determining whether the applicant has the financial, technical, and legal
qualifications to provide cable service in the town; and



      (14)   Any other details, statements, information or
references, pertinent to the subject matter of such application, which shall
be required or requested by the Town Council, or by any other provision of
law.



   (C)   Prior to the issuance of a license, the town shall hold a
public hearing, following reasonable notice to the public, at which every
applicant and its proposals shall be examined and the public and all
interested parties afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard. Reasonable
notice to the public shall include causing notice of the time and place of
the hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town
once a week for 2 consecutive weeks. The first publication shall be not less
than 14 days before the day of the hearing.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.09  LICENSE APPLICATION FEES.



   (A)   New license. Each applicant for a new license must submit an
application fee in the amount of $10,000. The fee shall be submitted in cash,
or by certified or cashier's check, wire transfer, or in any other manner
acceptable to the manager made payable to the town. The application fee is
refundable if a license is issued and shall be offset from the first license
fee payment(s) to the town. The application fee is non-refundable if an
application is denied.



   (B)   Renewal license. Each applicant for a renewal license shall
submit a renewal application fee of $5,000.00.  The fee shall be submitted
in cash, or by certified or cashier's check, wire transfer, or in any other
manner acceptable to the Town Manager made payable to the town. The renewal
application fee is refundable if a license is issued, and shall be offset
from the first license fee payment(s) to town. The renewal application fee is
non-refundable if an application is denied.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.10  SELECTION OF LICENSEE.



   (A)   Compliance with town requirements. A person submitting an
application for a new license to operate a cable system shall provide all
information set forth in § 114.08 License Application Procedures or
otherwise required by this chapter and all other information requested in the
town's request for applications. Each new license application shall be
responsive to the questions soliciting the information, and shall completely,
accurately and materially supply all of the information so solicited. Any
misrepresentation, failure, neglect or refusal to provide any of such
information may, at the option of the town, render an application invalid.
This requested information must be complete and verified as true by the
applicant.



   (B)   Property of town. All applications for new licenses received
by the town from an applicant shall become the sole property of the town.



   (C)   Referral to manager. Upon receipt of any application for
license, the Town Manager shall prepare or cause to be prepared a report,
including recommendations respecting such application, to be presented to the
Town Council at a public hearing on the application. The town will evaluate
all applications submitted within 180 days of receipt of the application.



   (D)   Investigations. The town may make such investigations as it
deems necessary to determine the ability of the applicant for a new license
to perform under the license, and the applicant shall furnish to the town all
such information as the town may request.



   (E)   Public hearing. Within 180 days after receiving an application
for a new license, a public hearing shall be held to consider the application
and receive public comments.



   (F)   Consideration. In making any determination regarding the
application for a license, the town may consider any and all factors relevant
to interests of the community in cable television including, but not limited
to, the quality of the cable services proposed, areas to be served, rates to
subscriber, benefit to the town, experience, character, background, and
financial responsibility of any applicant, and its management and owners,
technical and performance quality of equipment, willingness and ability to
meet construction and physical requirements, to meet all requirements set
forth in this chapter, and to abide by all policy conditions, license
limitations and requirements, and all other matters deemed pertinent by the
town for satisfying the community needs and for safeguarding the interests of
the town and the public.



   (G)   Timeframes. The determination shall be completed within the
following maximum timeframes: (1) for cable operators with existing authority
to access streets, after 90 days; and (2) for persons that do not have
authority to access streets, 180 days. The times start on the date an
applicant files an application or other writing including certain minimum
information which is set forth in § 114.08 License Application Procedures
and deemed complete by the town. The town and an applicant may agree, in
writing, to extend the 90- or 180-day time period for negotiations. It may
then be adopted at the date as permitted by this section. If the 90/180-day
time elapses without action by the town, the applicant is automatically
granted an interim license based on the application submitted. Thereafter,
the town and applicant may continue to negotiate the terms of a license in an
attempt to reach a negotiated license. The 90/180-day time may be tolled by
the town if it has requested and not received information from the applicant.



   (H)   Determination. Following the public hearing, the Council may
direct staff to conduct further negotiations with an applicant, or set
further public hearings. Within 180 days following the first public hearing
on an application for a new license, the Council shall make 1 of the
following determinations:



      (1)   That such application is denied, which determination
shall be final and conclusive; or



      (2)   That such license is granted with the terms and
conditions approved by Council.



   (I)   Approval or denial based on public record. It is the intention
of the town to approve or deny a new license solely on the basis of the
public record.



   (J)   Town Council decisions shall be final. Any decision of the
Council approving or denying a new license shall be final.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.11  TERM OF LICENSE.



   Unless otherwise provided in the license, the term of any license shall
not exceed 15 years. A license may be renewed by the town pursuant to the
procedure established in § 114.13 Renewals and in accordance with the
then-applicable law.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.12  GRANT OF ADDITIONAL LICENSE AND COMPETING SERVICE.



   Since competing or overlapping licenses may encourage the introduction
of better cable services and quality at lower prices, the town will at all
times attempt to accommodate additional entrants. At the same time it is
recognized that the introduction of overlapping cable systems could have a
potential adverse impact on the streets, and on the quality and availability
of existing cable services to the public. Accordingly, the town shall issue a
license in an area where another licensee is operating only following a
public hearing to consider the potential impact which the grant of an
additional license may have on the community and the streets. In considering
whether to grant 1 or more additional licenses, the town shall specifically
consider, and address in a written report, the following issues:



   (A)   Whether or not applicant has provided, at a minimum,
information with its application as required by § 114.08 License Application
Procedures, and application fee described in § 114.09 License Application
Fees;



   (B)   The legal, technical, and financial qualifications of
applicant and agreement by a licensee to comply with such requirements of the
town as may be determined by it to be applicable to a licensee in conformance
with applicable law;



   (C)   Acceptance of a license and the terms therein;



   (D)   The capacity of the streets to accommodate 1 or more
additional cable systems and the potential disruption of streets and private
property that may occur if 1 or more additional licenses are granted; and



   (E)   Such other information as the town may deem appropriate to be
considered prior to granting any competing or overlapping license.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.13  RENEWALS.



   Renewals will be processed and granted according to valid applicable
law, as amended. The town and a licensee, by mutual consent, may enter into
renewal negotiations at any time during the license term of a license
agreement. Pursuant to applicable law, the town will review and evaluate the
past performance of a licensee, including compliance with an existing
license. The town will also consider review and determination of current and
future community needs and the technical, financial, and legal capabilities
of a licensee to meet the current and future cable service-related needs in a
new license considering the reasonable cost to do so.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.14  TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS.



   (A)   A license shall not be sold, assigned or transferred, either
in whole or in part, or leased, sublet, or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall
title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property
therein, pass to or vest in any person, without prior written consent of the
town, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.



   (B)   The transfer of an existing license to an affiliate of
licensee does not require prior approval of the town so long as (a) licensee
provided written notice to town at least 30 days prior to the transfer and
has provided information sufficient for town to determine that the transfer
is as described in (b) or (c) of this section and the proposed transfer will
not cause any increased risks of nonperformance of the license or any loss to
the town of its bargained for consideration in the license; (b) the transfer
is to an entity controlling, controlled by, or under common control with
licensee; or (c) a transfer is in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation,
or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of licensee in the license
or cable system in order to secure indebtedness. If town objects to the
transfer, it shall notify licensee in writing within 20 days of receipt of
the written notice, in which case the transfer of control shall be stayed
until town confirms in its discretion that it is as described in (b) or (c)
above; otherwise, a transfer of control shall be deemed to occur when the
legal or practical ability to exert actual working control over the affairs
of the licensee transfers to a person other than the licensee, either
directly or indirectly, whether by contractual agreement, majority ownership
interest, any lesser ownership interest or in any other manner. Consent of
the town shall not be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other
hypothecation in whole or in part to secure an indebtedness. The transferee
must assume all obligations of the license and provide new insurance and
performance bonds.



   (C)   Except for a transfer to an affiliate of licensee, no change,
transfer, or acquisition of control of the licensee shall occur without prior
written consent of the town, which consent shall not be unreasonably
withheld. The licensee shall promptly notify the town of any actual or
proposed change in, or transfer to, or acquisition by any other party of,
control of the licensee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to
major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner
exercised.



   (D)   A rebuttable presumption that transfer of control has occurred
shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or affiliated
group (other than an affiliate of licensee) of more than 25% of the voting
interest of the licensee or of the person exercising management authority
over the licensee.



   (E)   Except in the case of an assignment of the license to an
affiliate of licensee, upon written notification by the licensee to the town
of a proposed assignment of the license, or transfer of control or ownership
of the licensee company, the manager shall issue his written notice fixing
and setting forth the day, hour and place certain when and where any persons
having any interest therein may appear and be heard. The Clerk shall cause
such notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the
town. The Clerk also shall cause a copy of such notice to be mailed to the
licensee at least 10 days prior to the date specified for the hearing. At the
time set for such hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the manager shall
proceed to hear the matter. Following the close of such hearing, the manager
shall prepare and file with the Council his report of the hearing, his
findings, and an opinion containing his recommendations and the reasons
therefor.  If, after the expiration of 10 days following receipt of the
manager's report and opinion, the Council shall find that the assignment of
the license or transfer of control or ownership of the licensee company will
not be detrimental or injurious to the best interests and welfare of the
subscribers and users, and of the town, then the Council by resolution shall
consent to the assignment of the license or transfer of control or ownership
of the licensee company. Such resolution shall thereupon become and shall be
a part of any license granted under this chapter and affected thereby.



   (F)   The consent or approval of the Council to any transfer of a
license shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the town in
and to the streets, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly
subordinate to the terms and conditions of the license.



   (G)   Except in the case of an assignment of the license to an
affiliate of licensee, each applicant for a transfer or assignment must
furnish with its request a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount of $2,500
payable in cash, certified or cashier's check, wire transfer, or in any other
manner acceptable to the manager made payable to the town. No application for
a transfer or assignment of license shall be considered without receipt of
said fee. The licensee shall be responsible for reimbursing the town's full
reasonable costs in excess of the application fee in investigating the
qualifications of the transferee under the Cable Act as part of acting on the
licensee's request for a transfer or assignment of a license.



   (H)   The town shall act on any request for approval of a sale or
transfer within 120 days of the request if the request contains or is
accompanied by the information required by the FCC and this chapter.



   (I)   In no event shall a transfer of ownership be approved without
the successor-in-interest becoming a signatory to the license.



   (J)   As long as a grant, rent or lease does not amount to a
transfer as defined in this section and is made in the ordinary course of
business with prior notice to the town, a licensee in the normal course of
providing cable services may grant, rent, or lease use of its cable system to
other persons. Any such use shall be restricted to and consistent with (1)
such uses as the licensee is authorized in this chapter and the license, (2)
other telecommunications services which have received a license from town, or
(3) other telecommunications services for which no license is required by the
town. Any such use shall be in compliance with applicable federal and state
law. Any such grants, lease or rent by the licensee shall not, however,
thereby relieve its use of the streets and public ways, and any such grant,
rent or lease shall require that such other person comply with the
appropriate provisions of this chapter and the license as such use warrants.
The grant, lease or rent shall expressly provide for the authority of the
town under applicable law to regulate the use provided by the grant, lease or
rent (including but not limited to the authority to protect the public
welfare, safety and health) and to enforce compliance with any applicable
standards established by this chapter or the license. be a privilege which is
personal to the original grantee.  It shall not be sold, transferred,
leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by sale, merger,
consolidation or otherwise, without prior consent of the Council expressed by
resolution, and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.15  EFFECT OF AWARD OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Ordinance binding. Upon award of license pursuant to this
chapter, a licensee shall be bound by all the terms and conditions contained
in this chapter.



   (B)   Incorporation by reference of application for a license. A
licensee shall provide all of the cable service specifically set forth in its
application to provide cable services within the license area, and by its
acceptance of the license, the licensee specifically agrees that its
application is hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of the
license. In the event of a conflict between the license and the application,
the provisions of the license shall apply. Failure to provide services as
promised in licensee's application or agreed to in its license may be deemed
a breach of this chapter, to which the provisions of § 114.51 Liquidated
Damages shall apply.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.16  PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   In consideration that the streets used by the licensee in the
operation of its cable system within the town are valuable public properties
acquired and maintained by the town at great expense to its taxpayers, and
that the grant to the licensee for the use of said streets is a valuable
property right without which the licensee would be required to invest
substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, and because the
town will incur costs in regulating and administering the license, the
licensee shall pay to the town a license fee in an amount no more than 5% of
licensee's annual gross revenues.



   (B)   If licensee provides its subscriber a bundling discount if the
subscriber purchases a bundle of cable service and non-cable services, then
the price of cable service included in the bundle shall be allocated based on
the licensee's standard, non-discounted rate. For example: if a subscriber's
charges for a given month for cable service alone would be $40, for local
telephone service alone would be $30, and for internet services alone would
be $30, for a total of $100; and if the 3 services are then bundled and
offered at a combined price of $80 (overall 20% discount), then the gross
revenue from the cable service will be deemed to be $32 ($40, less 20% of
$40.00). Licensee may allocate the discount differently over the services, so
long as such allocation does not reduce the gross revenues from cable
services below what it would be from the above calculation. Licensee shall
not use bundled package offerings as a means of evading the payment of
financial obligations that are based on cable service revenue.



   (C)   Should federal or state laws or regulations be amended in the
future to allow the town to receive a greater fee than the fee set forth in
division (A) of this section, then the town shall have the right to increase
the fee to the extent specified in the license, or meet with licensee to
modify the license.



   (D)   The payment of the license fee by the licensee to the town
shall be made quarterly by delivery of the same to the manager on or before
the twentieth day of the month following the quarter end, and shall become
delinquent if not paid before 45 days after the end of the quarter. Payment
shall be accompanied by a license fee payment worksheet provided by the
town.  If such payment is not made by the next to the last business day of
the following month, the town shall impose interest at a rate of 1.5% per
month commencing from the date payment should have been made, unless the
payment is subject to a bona fide dispute, and continuing until the payment
is made. Fractions of a month shall be considered to constitute a full month
for the purpose of computing interest. In addition to interest which may be
assessed under this division, if licensee fails to pay any license fee,
licensee shall be subject to the following civil penalties:



      (1)    A licensee who fails to pay the license fee or any
portion thereof within the time prescribed shall pay a penalty of 10% of the
unpaid fee each month, unless the licensee shows that the failure is due to
reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect.



      (2)    A licensee who fails or refuses to pay a license fee or
any portion thereof after notice and demand by the town shall pay a penalty
of 25% of the unpaid fee, unless licensee shows that the failure is due to
reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect.



      (3)    If the cause of failure to pay the licensee fee or any
portion thereof is determined by the town to be due to civil fraud or evasion
of the license fee, the licensee shall pay a penalty of 50% of the amount of
deficiency.



   (E)   The town shall have the right to inspect the licensee's cable
service income records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts
determined to be payable under this chapter; provided, however, that such
audit shall take place within 36 months following the close of each of the
licensee's fiscal years. Any additional amount due to the town as a result of
the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the
licensee by the town, said notice shall include a copy of the audit report;
provided, however, that licensee shall not be required to pay such deficiency
until 30 days after completion of the administrative review process if
licensee commences such process pursuant to § 114.51(A)(3). If there is a
deficiency in the payment of license fees to the town of 10% or more, the
town may assess the cost of the audit to the licensee. If town owes a refund
to licensee or if licensee owes additional amounts to town, town and licensee
shall agree upon a reasonable payment schedule with interest from the date of
request until paid at the rate provided for hereunder.



   (F)   In compliance with applicable law, licensee shall not be
required to pay any town right-of-way construction permit and development
review fees which the town imposes under town code requirements on licensee's
construction permit activities in or on the town streets for cable services
and such fees shall be included in the license fee. If facilities constructed
by licensee serve not only cable services but also internet service or
telecommunications services, then licensee shall pay a proportionate cost of
the permit fees attributable to those services for which an annual license
fee is not being paid.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.17  USE OF TELEPHONE COMPANY'S FACILITIES.



   If a licensee uses a telephone company's cable system distribution
channels furnished to the licensee pursuant to tariff or contract on file
with a regulatory body having jurisdiction and licensee makes no use of the
streets independent of such telephone company furnished facilities, licensee
remains fully bound by the terms of its license and this chapter.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.18  REQUIRED SERVICES AND FACILITIES.



   (A)   A licensee shall maintain the broad categories of video
programming or other services set forth in its license. Where there has been
a substantial failure to maintain the broad categories of video programming
or other services as set forth in the license, the town may, following due
notice and public hearing as provided in §§ 114.52 Administrative Hearing
and 114.53 Hearing by Council, direct the licensee to comply with its
obligations in this regard. Written notice of such hearing shall be provided
to the licensee and to the public at least 30 days prior to such hearing.



   (B)   A license may require a licensee to provide channel capacity
to the town for educational and governmental programming on terms and
conditions specified in the license.



   (C)   Licensee shall provide high definition television to its
subscribers as such broadcasting becomes available from the broadcasting
stations on the channels, consistent with and as required by the regulations
of the FCC.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.19  SUBSCRIBER SERVICES; RATES.



   (A)   Initial rates. A licensee shall establish and notify the town
of initial rates for its cable services prior to commencement of services.
All rates established shall be reasonable, just, and fair to the public.



   (B)   Authority to regulate rates. To the extent permitted, the town
may regulate the rates for cable service in accordance with federal and state
law.



   (C)   Notice of rates. Notice of rates shall be given in accordance
with § 114.41 Subscriber and Town Notification.



   (D)   Any rate established shall be reasonable, just and fair to the
public, and shall provide the grantee a return upon its investment reasonably
sufficient to:



      (1)   Assure confidence in grantee's financial soundness;



      (2)   Support its credit and attract necessary capital under
efficient and economical management; and



      (3)   Provide a return to equity owners commensurate with
current returns on investment in other enterprises having corresponding risks.



   (E)   No rate established shall afford any undue preference or
advantage among subscribers, but separate rates may be established for
separate classes of subscribers and rates may reflect the populated areas
where there are less than 50 residences per strand mile or trunk line cable
to be installed.



   (F)   Changes in established rates may be made by grantee by
notification to the Council, with the changes to be supported by financial
data showing a change to be necessary in accordance with division (B) above.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.20  GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL.



   Unless otherwise provided in the license, licensee shall provide
channel capacity for a minimum of 1 government access channel dedicated for
town use. The management and operation of the government access channel shall
be the responsibility of the town.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.21  EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNELS.



   Unless otherwise provided in the license, licensee shall provide
channel capacity for a minimum of 1 educational access channel dedicated for
use by all schools in the town (as defined in this chapter), Arizona State
University, Northern Arizona University, and the Yavapai County Community
College. The management and operation of the educational access channels
shall be the responsibility of the town.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.22  GENERAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING ACCESS



   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all access
channels.



   (B)   Technical design of access channels and responsibilities.



      (1)   In general, the town or its designees (other than
licensee) is responsible for:



         (a)   Delivering channel signals to the licensee at
origination points and processing the signals so that they can be carried on
the cable system; and receiving signals from licensees at all connection
points to public buildings and origination points;



         (b)   Controlling the routing of signals from the
origination points to the appropriate channels; and



         (c)   Providing and maintaining the studios and
equipment used to produce programming.



      (2)   In general, licensee is responsible for transmitting
access channel signals from the origination point and/or other
cities/origination points for access programming to all connection points to
public buildings and origination points identified in the license, and to
subscribers without material degradation, and maintaining all the facilities
required to do so.



   (C)   The licensee shall not take any actions that would discourage
or prevent maximum utilization of all access channels provided, and shall
cooperate with the town and managers of access channels to ensure that
subscribers are aware of the channels, can access them easily, and, to the
extent that a licensee (or some entity acting on a licensee's behalf) is
involved in publishing licensee's channel schedules, that the access channels
are similarly published.



   (D)   Public building connections. Upon request of the town and
consistent with the joint trench requirements of division (E) of this
section, licensee shall provide, without charge, at a minimum, 1 activated
standard drop to all of the following present and future public buildings, as
designated by the town from time to time:



      (1)   Town fire stations and police stations;



      (2)   All public libraries, including branches;



      (3)   Town Hall, community center, recreation facilities,
senior center, public works building and such other facilities used for
municipal purposes as may be designated in the license;



      (4)   Other locations as set forth in a license agreement. If
provided in the license, the licensee shall provide basic service free of
charge to those facilities specified above. A license may further specify the
particular conditions under which the connections will be provided.



   (E)   Joint trench requirements. The town shall notify licensee in
writing at least 30 days prior to opening trenches for use by utilities to
serve public buildings. If such notice is given and subject to the
construction or rebuild schedule and line extension policy, licensee shall
install cable facilities in order to provide the connection to the public
building without charge for trenching. If no notice is given, the town shall
pay the reasonable cost of such trenching.



   (F)   Access channel assignments. To the extent that it is legally,
economically and technically feasible, licensee will employ reasonable
efforts to use the same channel numbers for the educational and governmental
access channels as are used by another cable licensee, if any, with the
greatest number of subscribers in the town.



   (G)   Access interconnections.



      (1)   Subject to the limitations of applicable federal and
state law, licensee shall interconnect access channels with any or all other
cable systems in the town or in other nearby municipalities, owned by
licensee or an affiliate or other cable operator as provided in the license,
at no cost to the town or the other municipality.



      (2)   The town or its designated access provider shall have
the right to control and schedule the operation of all interconnected access
channels. In addition, the town shall have the right to use, at its sole
discretion and at no cost to the town, any access channels to be provided
under a license agreement for access interconnection.



      (3)   Licensee shall take all necessary technical steps to
ensure that technically adequate signal quality and routing/switching systems
are initially and continuously provided for all access interconnections
between local jurisdictions. The cost for any equipment, operation or
maintenance dedicated to such access interconnections shall be shared on pro
rata basis or as mutually agreed upon among all participating jurisdictions,
and paid to licensee.



      (4)   A licensee may be granted reasonable extensions of time
to interconnect or the town may rescind its order to interconnect upon
petition by the licensee to the town. The town shall grant said request, if
it finds that a licensee negotiated in good faith and failed to obtain an
approval from another cable system(s), governmental entity or educational
institution for the proposed interconnection.



   (H)   Access channel capital costs. The licensee voluntarily
provides grants, funding, training, services, or any other kind of support
reasonably necessary to meet the community needs of the town for the access
channels, the value of which shall be offset against the license fee in the
manner provided for by state law. If state law is amended to allow the town
to require contribution of costs, the parties shall negotiate in good faith
for amendment of this license, and licensee shall, to the extent consistent
with federal law, make capital expenditures in support of access channels and
related facilities and equipment as provided in the license. If there is more
than 1 licensee providing cable service in the town, the town will use its
best efforts to assure that the licensee's capital expenditures for access
channels, facilities and equipment are reasonably equivalent as provided in
the license. To the extent licensee's rates for cable services are subject to
regulation, and to the extent consistent with applicable law, licensee shall
have the right to treat such capital expenditures as external costs in
support of access channels in setting regulated rates for cable services.



   (I)   Access channels on basic service tier. All access channels
provided to subscribers shall be included, without limitation, on all basic
tiers, including digital basic.



   (J)   Change in technology. In the event a licensee makes any change
in the cable system and related equipment and facilities or in licensee's
signal delivery technology, licensee shall ensure that town analog signals
are converted by licensee and the signal quality or transmission of access
services or programming remains substantially the same.



   (K)   Technical quality. Licensee shall maintain all access channels
and interconnections at the same level of technical quality and reliability
required by this chapter and any license agreement and all other applicable
laws, rules and regulations for residential subscriber channels subject to
the technical quality or reliability of the signal received from the source.
Licensee shall provide routine maintenance and shall repair and replace all
transmission equipment including channel modulators, associated cable and
equipment, required to carry signal quality to and from licensee's facilities
for the access channels; provided, however, licensee shall have no duty to
provide, maintain, repair or replace equipment for which the town is
responsible under division (B)(1) of this section.



   (L)   Access cooperation. The town and licensee may agree to
designate any other jurisdiction which has entered into an agreement with the
licensee or an affiliate of the licensee to receive any access benefit due
the town hereunder, or to share in the use of access services, facilities,
equipment or channel operations hereunder. The purpose of this division shall
be to allow cooperation in the use of access channels, facilities and
equipment.



   (M)   Indemnification by access programming producers and users. All
local producers and users of any of the access facilities or channels shall
agree in writing to hold harmless the licensee, the town, and any responsible
educational institution, from any and all liability or other injury
(including the reasonable cost of defending claims or litigations) arising
from or in connection with claims for failure to comply with applicable
federal laws, rules, regulations or other requirements of local, state or
federal authorities; for claims of libel, slander, invasion of privacy, or
the infringement of common law or statutory copyright; for unauthorized use
of any trademark, trade name or service mark; for breach of contractual or
other obligations owing to third parties by the licensee, town, or
responsible educational institution; and for any other injury or damage in
law or equity, which claims result from the use of an access facility or
channel.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.23  TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE.



   For any license or contract entered into pursuant to this chapter, time
shall be deemed of the essence and any failure of the licensee to perform
within the time allotted, or within a reasonable time if a period is not
specified, shall be sufficient grounds for the town to invoke liquidated
damages or revocation of a license in accordance with §§ 114.50
Construction Bonds and § 114.53 Hearings by Council.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.24  ACCEPTANCE AND EFFECTIVE DATE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   No license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall become effective unless and until all insurance, letter of credit and
bond requirements are met, all of such provisions being hereby declared to be
conditions precedent to the effectiveness of any such license granted
hereunder. If any of such provisions are not done and completed in the time
and manner required, the license shall be null and void.



   (B)   Within 20 days after the date of awarding any license, or
within such extended period of time as the Council in its discretion may
authorize, the licensee shall file with the Clerk its written acceptance of
the license, in a form satisfactory to the town attorney, together with the
construction bond and insurance policies required by this chapter, and its
agreement to be bound by and to comply with and to do everything which is
required of the licensee by the provisions of this chapter and the applicable
license. Such acceptance shall be acknowledged by the licensee before a
notary public, and shall, in form and content, be satisfactory to and
approved by the Town Attorney.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.25  PERMITS, INSTALLATIONS AND SERVICE.



   Within 180 after acceptance of any license, the licensee shall proceed
with due diligence to apply for necessary permits and authorizations which
are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to,
any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and
any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly
constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of
cable systems, or their associated microwave transmission facilities.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.26  CABLE SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION MAP AND SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Within 180 after acceptance of any license, licensee shall
submit a specific construction plan or reconstruction plan, as applicable,
which shall be incorporated as an exhibit in the license. The plan shall
include an overall plant mileage schedule of any construction or
reconstruction effort and a time schedule of said work and system design
criteria. The plan shall be updated on each 5-year anniversary of issuance of
the license.



   (B)   Within 90 days after obtaining necessary permits, licenses,
and authorizations, licensee shall commence construction and installation of
the cable system or any reconstruction of the cable system.



      (1)   Licensee shall comply with the time schedule for
construction required in division (A) of this section; provided, however, the
town issues permits in a timely manner.



      (2)   Installation and operation of the new or any rebuilt
cable system by licensee shall proceed on a nondiscriminatory basis, without
regard for subscriber affluence or other discriminatory factors.



      (3)   Immediately following commencement of construction and
installation of the cable system under a license, licensee shall diligently
proceed to deliver cable services, as described in the license.



   (C)   Failure on the part of the licensee to commence and diligently
pursue each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters
set forth herein shall be grounds for liquidated damages and/or termination
of such license pursuant to §§ 114.50 Construction Bonds and 114.53
Hearings by Council; provided, however, that the Council in its discretion
may extend the time for the commencement and completion of construction and
installation for additional periods if any of the conditions set forth in §
114.59 Force Majeure exist.



   (D)   A license may contain alternative provisions that further the
purposes of this section to provide cable services in the town.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.27  LINE EXTENSION.



   (A)   Residential service. After completion of construction in an
area pursuant to a construction schedule, a licensee shall make cable
services available to dwelling units within the town and shall extend its
cable system as follows:



      (1)   Each unit in a multiple dwelling unit (MDU) shall be
counted as a dwelling unit in determining residential density where a
mutually acceptable agreement granting licensee reasonable access to the MDU
has been executed by the owner of the property and delivered to the licensee.
Licensee shall not be required to make service available to residents of a
MDU where the owner of the property has not granted licensee such reasonable
access to the property.



      (2)   When requested by a resident in the town, licensee
shall, at licensee's sole expense, extend the cable system to any
single-family residence or dwelling within the town; provided, that the
residence or dwelling is located within 225 feet of the nearest technically
feasible point of connection on the cable system. Such extension(s) shall
include cutting in 1 or more taps and extending cable as necessary.



      (3)   A license may provide for different line extension
requirements from that required in division (A)(2) of this section so long as
such requirements are not less restrictive and provide similar benefits.



      (4)   To prevent unnecessary disruption and damage to streets,
rights-of-way, and other property, the installation of underground cable
shall be accomplished in new subdivisions that meet the requirements of
division (A)(2) of this section at the same time, and in the same trench, as
other communications, electric and other permanent services to structures,
unless to do so would be economically infeasible. Except as federal law may
grant them other rights, developers of new residential buildings or mobile
homes within a new or undeveloped subdivision, new residential units within
new multiple-occupancy residential developments, and new commercial and
industrial buildings and structures shall treat cable television facilities
as they treat other communication facilities, utilities and other underground
facilities, in regards to availability and cost of trenching for
undergroundings.



      (5)   A license may provide for different line extension
requirements from that required in division (A)(4).



      (6)   Absent a showing by licensee to the manager of
circumstances beyond licensee's reasonable control, an extension of service
pursuant to division (A)(2) of this section or this division shall be
accomplished within 120 of the developer's or resident's request.



      (7)   Licensee shall not be required to install the cable
system or conduit in the joint trench of a new subdivision or to provide
cable service to residents of the subdivision when the developer or
homeowner's association of the subdivision has entered into an agreement in
which another party has agreed to provide cable television or other
comparable video services to all residents of the subdivision and in which
the subscribers' fees for such services are paid to the provider from
collection of homeowner's association fees. However, upon termination of such
agreement, the line extension required by this section shall apply.



   (B)   Commercial service. After completion of construction in an
area pursuant to a construction schedule, a licensee shall make cable
services available to commercial establishments as follows, except licensee
shall not be required to make service available to commercial establishments
where the owner of the property has not granted licensee reasonable access to
the property:



      (1)   When requested by the owner of a commercial
establishment; provided, that no plant extension and nothing more than a
standard drop is required to make cable services available; or provided, that
the building is located within 225 feet of the nearest technically feasible
point of connection on the cable system.



      (2)   Absent a showing by licensee to the manager of unusual
circumstances, including without limitation street crossings, an extension of
service shall be accomplished within 120 days of owner's execution of any
necessary easement documents and capital contribution agreements.



      (3)   A license may provide for different line extension
requirements from that required in divisions (B)(1) and (2).



   (C)   Service drops.



      (1)   Licensee shall make service available to any
single-family residence or any commercial establishment within the town at
applicable standard connection charge if the connection requires a standard
drop.



      (2)   If making service available requires more than a
standard drop, licensee shall not be required to make such service available
unless the person requesting service pays to licensee (a) the standard
connection charge and (b) an amount equal to the reasonable actual labor and
material costs incurred by licensee for the additional facilities and work.



      (3)   Licensee may offer bulk billing service, but shall not
require a bulk billing agreement as a condition of providing service.



      (4)   Absent a showing by licensee to the manager of unusual
circumstances, including without limitation street crossings, (a) any
standard drop to a single-family residence or dwelling shall be accomplished
within 7 business days after an order has been placed, and (b) any drop that
is not a standard drop shall be accomplished within a reasonable time under
the circumstances. Line extensions shall be done as provided in division (A)
of this section.



      (5)   Absent a showing by licensee to the manager of unusual
circumstances, including without limitation street crossings, (a) any
standard drop to a commercial establishment shall be accomplished within 10
days after the owner of such commercial establishment executes any necessary
easement documents and capital contribution agreements, and (b) any
commercial drop that is not a standard drop shall be accomplished within a
reasonable time under the circumstances.



   (D)   If a licensee elects to extend cable service to a customer in
a licensed area which does not meet the standard drop requirements of this
section, the licensee shall not refuse to extend service to any other
customer in the same area solely on the grounds that service to the first
customer did not meet the standard drop requirements.



   (E)   The line extension requirements set forth in this section
shall not apply to any area covered by a construction phase described in the
construction schedule until the construction phase for that area has been
completed.



   (F)   Discrimination prohibited. No person, firm or corporation in
the existing cable service area of the licensee shall be arbitrarily refused
cable services; provided, however, that the licensee shall not be required to
provide cable services to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable line
extension connection fee and/or cable service charge(s).



   (G)   Annexed territory. Newly annexed territory shall be subject to
the terms of this chapter and this section.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.28  PLACEMENT OF TRANSMISSION FACILITIES.



   Except as provided in the license, facilities shall be placed in
accordance with Chapter 150 of the Chino Valley Town code.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.29  CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   Compliance with construction and technical standards.



      (1)   As provided in the license, licensee shall construct,
install, operate and maintain its system in a manner and at all times
consistent with (a) all laws, this chapter, construction standards of the
town, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Rules and Regulations, Part
76 Subpart K (Technical Standards), as amended from time to time, and (b)
detailed standards submitted by licensee as part of its application, which
standards are to be incorporated by reference in a license.



      (2)   When there have been multiple, similar complaints by
subscribers, or when there exists other evidence which suggests that licensee
is not in substantial compliance with the technical standards, or the cable
system is not operating in accordance with this chapter or the license, the
manager shall have the right and authority to compel licensee to test,
analyze and report on the performance of the cable system under the
supervision of the manager. Such report shall be delivered to the manager no
later than 30 days after the manager requests such test(s) in writing and
shall include the following information: the nature of the complaints that
precipitated the test(s), which cable system component(s) was/were tested,
the equipment used and procedure(s) employed in such testing, the result(s)
of such test(s) and the manner in which such complaints were resolved. If
such report indicates licensee is in partial compliance with the technical
standards, but there exists evidence suggesting that licensee is nonetheless
not in substantial compliance, the manager may require that the test(s) be
repeated within 30 days of the delivery of such report, under the supervision
of a professional engineer not on the permanent staff of licensee. Such
engineer shall sign all records of such repeated test(s) and shall forward to
the manager (a) such records, (b) a report interpreting the results, and (c)
recommended corrective actions, if any. The fees of such engineer shall be
paid by (a) licensee, if the repeated test(s) show(s) licensee is not in
substantial compliance with the technical standards of this chapter, or (b)
the town, if the repeated test(s) show(s) licensee is in substantial
compliance with said standards.



   (B)   Additional specifications. Construction, installation and
maintenance of a cable system shall be performed in an orderly and
professional manner. All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible,
parallel with and in a manner similar to the installation of electric and
telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel
and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. Underground
installations shall be in conformance with all applicable codes. Each cable
system shall include equipment capable of providing standby power as
specified in the license. The equipment shall be so constructed as to
automatically revert to the standby mode when the electrical utility power
returns. The system shall incorporate safeguards necessary to prevent injury
to technicians resulting from licensee's standby power sources. Licensee
shall at all times comply with applicable sections of:



      (1)   National Electrical Safety Code (ANSI)C2;



      (2)   National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire
Underwriters);



      (3)   The International Building Code as may be adopted and
amended by the town, together with applicable portions of all other uniform
codes, as may be adopted and amended by the town, promulgated by the
International Conference of Building Officials;



      (4)   Town zoning code and subdivision regulations, all as
from time to time amended and revised, and all other applicable rules and
regulations now in effect or hereinafter adopted by the town;



      (5)   The Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction including the latest town
supplement thereto.



   (C)   Emergency service. The licensee shall design and construct the
system to provide for a restricted audio override of the audio portion of all
channels during emergencies consistent with FCC regulations. Emergency or
standby power sources will be installed at the main electronic control center
and appropriate locations so as to minimize loss of signal. Key cable
routings shall also be equipped with a standby power source as set forth in
the license. In case of any declared emergency or disaster, consistent with
FCC regulations, the cable system shall, upon request of the mayor or
manager, make available immediately its facilities to the town for emergency
use during the emergency or disaster period. A "declared emergency or
disaster" as used in this section means such event that has been proclaimed
by the mayor, the governor, or other competent authority. In any event, the
cable system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or
property in the license area or other areas where the licensee may have
equipment located.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.30  UTILITY LOCATING SYSTEM.



   A licensee shall be required to be a participant in the regional 1 call
utility locating system (Blue Stake). Licensee shall accurately identify its
facilities in accordance with the requirements of the 1 call utility locating
system (blue stake), and the town shall not be liable for any damages to a
licensee's facilities that have not been accurately identified. Licensee
shall use paint that dissolves within 3 weeks. In the event licensee's
utility markings paint remains visible after 3 weeks, licensee shall remove
such markings. If licensee fails to remove such markings after notice and a
reasonable time for cure, the town may cause the markings to be removed and
invoice the licensee for the removal costs, which costs shall be promptly
paid.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.31  RESIDENT NOTIFICATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY REQUIRED.



   Licensee shall provide reasonable advance notice to all affected
residents prior to system construction or upgrade crews entering the
right-of-way or easement in front of or on their property; provided, that
licensee shall not be required to provide such notice in emergencies.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.32  LOCATION OF PROPERTY OF LICENSEE.



   (A)   Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of
a licensee to be constructed or installed in streets shall be so constructed
or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved
by the public works director acting in the exercise of his reasonable
discretion consistent with the town's regulations. The director's decision
shall accommodate reasonable technical requirements of the facilities.



   (B)   Except as permitted by the town, a licensee shall not install
or erect any facility or apparatus in or on any privately owned area within
the town which is intended to become a public street, whether or not
designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any preliminary
subdivision approved by the town.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter or any
license granted pursuant thereto, all cable system lines of a licensee in any
public street, shall be located underground in accordance with § 150.081 and
at such depths and locations as shall be approved by the public works
director. This requirement shall not apply to existing above-ground
facilities.



   (D)   Except as provided in the license, upon the undergrounding of
other utility lines or shared overhead facilities, licensee shall
concurrently (or earlier) place its facilities underground, at its own
expense, at depths and locations approved by the public works director.



   (E)   All new underground wires or cable of licensee placed after
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be placed
in conduits except for service drop lines.



   (F)   The licensee or its authorized contractors will obtain
permits, prior to any physical work being performed in the town's
rights-of-way or on town-owned property. All work will be done in accordance
with the town's technical and permitting specifications and in accordance
with the Chino Valley Town Code.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.33  EMERGENCY WORK.



   The town reserves the right to move any portion of the licensee's
equipment and facilities as may be required in any emergency as determined by
the town without liability for interruption of cable service. Prior to taking
any actions pursuant to this section, the town shall provide, if feasible,
reasonable notice to licensee of the emergency to allow licensee the
opportunity to protect or repair licensee's facilities involved in the
emergency.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.34  REMOVAL AND ABANDONMENT OF PROPERTY OF LICENSEE.



   The following provisions shall not apply to facilities used in the
provision of services other than cable services as to which no cable license
is required:



   (A)   If the use of substantial part of the cable system is
discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of 12 months, or if such
cable system or property has been installed in any street or public place
without complying with the requirements of the licensee's license or this
chapter, or the license has been terminated, canceled or has expired without
renewal, the licensee shall promptly, upon being given 10 days' written
notice from the public works director, remove from the streets or public
places all such property and poles of such cable system other than any
underground cable or any other underground property which the manager may
permit to be abandoned in place. Upon such removal, the licensee shall
promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been
removed to a condition satisfactory to the manager.



   (B)   Any property of the licensee remaining in place 180 after the
termination or expiration of the license shall be at the option of the town
considered permanently abandoned. The town may extend such time.



   (C)   Any property of the licensee permitted to be abandoned in
place shall be abandoned in such a manner as the public works director shall
prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of the licensee in
place, the property shall become that of the town, and the licensee shall
submit to the town an instrument in writing, to be approved by the town
attorney, transferring to the town the ownership of such property.



   (D)   At the town's discretion, any property of the licensee not
permitted by the town to be abandoned in place may be removed by the town at
licensee's expense.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.35  TEMPORARY REMOVAL OF WIRE FOR BUILDING IMPROVEMENTS.



   The licensee, on the request of any person, firm or corporation holding
a building moving permit issued by the town, shall temporarily raise or lower
its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary
removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid to the licensee by the
person, firm or corporation requesting the same, and the licensee shall have
the authority to require such payment in advance. The licensee shall be given
not less than 10 days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire
changes.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.36  CHANGES REQUIRED BY PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   The licensee shall from time to time, at its own expense, protect,
support, temporarily dislocate, temporarily or permanently, as may be
required, remove or relocate, without expense to the town any facilities
installed, used or maintained under the license, if and when made necessary
by any lawful change of grade, alignment, or width of any street by the town,
or made necessary by any other public improvement or alteration in, under,
on, upon or about any street, when such public improvement or alteration is
at the instance of the town, when such improvement or alteration is for a
governmental or proprietary function, or made necessary by traffic
conditions, public safety, street vacation or any other public project or
purpose of the town, and when the licensee has substantially the same
obligations with respect to the cost thereof as all other users of the public
rights-of-way.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.37  METHODS AND MATERIALS OF STREET CONSTRUCTION.



   The town shall have the right to specify the methods and materials of
street construction or reconstruction, together with the horizontal and
vertical location of any underground facility proposed by licensee within any
public property or right-of-way. The town shall also have the right to limit
the work of the licensee to assure a minimum of inconvenience to the
traveling public and to impose traffic control requirements, as specified in
the town's subdivision regulations and Town Code. Licensee will be required
to obtain permits from the town, allowing licensee to work in the public
rights-of-way pursuant to chapter 150 of the Chino Valley Town Code.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.38  FAILURE TO PERFORM STREET WORK.



   If a licensee causes damage to pavement, sidewalks, driveways,
landscaping or other property, the licensee or the authorized agent shall, at
its own expense and in a manner approved by the town, replace and restore
such places in accordance with the Chino Valley Town Code and Unified
Development Ordinance.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.39  TELEPHONE COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.



   A licensee shall provide efficient customer service to subscribers over
the telephone and, at a minimum, meet the standards set forth below:



   (A)   Licensee shall have a publicly listed, local or toll-free
telephone number, for the purpose of receiving inquiries regarding new
service or terminating service, disconnection or reconnection of service
during or after vacation, handling converters, paying bills, receiving
complaints, scheduling service calls or repairs, making changes in type of
programming, and providing information to subscribers on a 24 hours a day, 7
days a week basis.



   (B)   Trained licensee representatives will be available to respond
to subscriber telephone inquiries 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.



   (C)   Under normal operating conditions, the time taken for a live
licensee representative to answer the telephone and speak directly with a
subscriber, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds after the
connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall
not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90% of the
time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. No
caller should be left on hold more than 60 seconds without being informed of
the status of the call.



   (D)   Under normal operating conditions, the subscribers will
receive a busy signal less than 3% of the time.



   (E)   Licensee shall provide reasonable methodology to measure
compliance with the telephone answering standards.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.40  SUBSCRIBER SERVICE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Each licensee shall at all times meet or exceed Federal
Customer Service Standards and the subscriber service standards for
subscribers set forth in this chapter and in its license. If there is a
conflict among standards, the stricter standard shall prevail, unless
preempted by federal law.



   (B)   Upon termination of cable services to any subscriber, a
licensee shall promptly remove its converter equipment from the premises of
such subscriber upon the subscriber's request.



   (C)   Licensee shall render efficient cable services, make repairs
promptly, and interrupt cable services only for good cause and for the
shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall occur
during periods of minimum cable system use.



   (D)   Licensee shall not knowingly allow its cable or other
operations to interfere with television reception of persons not serviced by
licensee, nor shall the cable system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in
any manner the operation of the various utilities serving the residents of
the town.



   (E)   A licensee shall continue, through the term of the license, to
maintain the technical, operational, and maintenance standards and quality of
cable service set forth in this chapter and as specified in the license.



   (F)   Under normal operating conditions, each of the following 4
standards for subscribers will be met no less than 95% of the time measured
on a quarterly basis:



      (1)   Standard drops will be installed within 10 business days
after an order has been placed.



      (2)   Except for conditions beyond the control of the
licensee, the licensee must take actions to correct its service problems the
next business day after notification of the service problem and will begin
working on service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours
after the interruption becomes known.



      (3)   The "appointment window" for installations, service
calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or,
at a maximum, a 4-hour time block during normal business hours. (The licensee
may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of
normal business hours for the express convenience of the subscriber.)



      (4)   If a licensee representative is running late for an
appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as
scheduled, the licensee will attempt to contact the subscriber. The
appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time convenient for the
subscriber.



   (G)   Licensee shall respond immediately to any outage. It shall be
deemed a violation if licensee exceeds a 4-hour average response time to
outages during any consecutive 3-month period.



   (H)   Licensee shall respond and resolve all complaints within a
reasonable time.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.41  SUBSCRIBER AND TOWN NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   The licensee shall provide written information in
easy-to-understand language on each of the following areas prior to or at the
time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers and the
town, and at any time upon request:



      (1)   Products and services offered;



      (2)   Prices and options for programming services and
conditions of subscription to programming and other services;



      (3)   Installation and service maintenance policies;



      (4)   Instructions on how to use the cable service;



      (5)   Information on a parental control feature that will
permit a subscriber to lock out any objectionable programming from the cable
services entering his or her home;



      (6)   Channel positions of programming carried on the system;
and



      (7)   Billing and complaint procedures, including the address
and telephone number of the local business office and of the town's
designated office for handling cable television matters.



   (B)   Subscribers and the town will be notified of any changes in
rates, programming, services or channel positions as soon as possible in
writing. Notice shall be given to the town and subscribers a minimum of 30
days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the
licensee, unless the town concurs that notice is not necessary. In addition,
the licensee shall notify the town and subscribers 30 days in advance of any
significant changes in the other information required by division (A) of this
section.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.42  BILLING PRACTICES; INFORMATION AND PROCEDURES



   (A)   Bills to subscribers will be clear, concise and
understandable. Bills to subscribers shall be fully itemized, with
itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges
and equipment charges. Bills to subscribers shall clearly delineate all
activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and
credits.



   (B)   Licensee shall bill all subscribers to its cable system in a
uniform manner, regardless of subscriber's level of service. A licensee may
offer bulk billing service, but shall not require bulk billing service as a
condition of providing service. In no case shall any subscriber be billed for
services in excess of 30 days prior to receipt of such service. Payment shall
be due no sooner than the 15th day of each billing period, and the due date
shall be listed on each bill. Bills shall be mailed no later than the first
day of the billing period. No late fee shall be charged until 7 days after
the current due date of the current billing cycle.



   (C)   In case of a billing dispute, the licensee must respond to a
written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. The licensee shall follow
a written internal appeal or dispute resolution procedure for resolution of
billing disputes. A current copy of the procedures shall be provided to the
Town Clerk and shall be kept on file in the Town Clerk's office.



   (D)   Any subscriber shall be entitled, upon request, oral or
written, to licensee, to a refund equal to 1 day's service for each
subscriber's service interruption: (1) for each continuous 24-hour period or
(2) a period of 2 or more hours of any 4 days within a monthly billing period.



   (E)   Refunds and credits shall be issued promptly, as follows:



      (1)   Payment deposits shall be refunded after 12 months of
satisfactory customer payments.



      (2)   Billing refunds and credits shall be issued no later
than the next billing cycle following correction of the error or 30 days
following the determination that a refund or credit is warranted, whichever
is earlier.



      (3)   Equipment deposits shall be refunded within 7 days after
the equipment supplied by licensee is returned to the licensee.



      (4)   Service credits will be issued no later than the
subscriber's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is
warranted.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.43  SUBSCRIBER SOLICITATION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   All personnel, agents and representatives of the licensee,
including subcontractors, shall wear a cable uniform or clearly display a
photo-identification badge when acting on behalf of the licensee in the town.



   (B)   The licensee shall afford each subscriber of the cable system
with a 3-day right of rescission for ordering installation of cable service
from the cable system; provided, that such right of rescission shall end upon
initiation of physical installation of cable system equipment on such
subscriber's premises.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.44  DISCONNECTION AND TERMINATION OF CABLE SERVICES.



   Licensee shall only disconnect or terminate a subscriber's cable
service for good and just cause. In no event shall licensee disconnect said
cable service for nonpayment without the prior written notification to the
affected subscriber at least 7 days prior to such disconnection or
termination. In no event shall such disconnection or termination for
nonpayment occur in less than 30 days after a subscriber's failure to pay a
bill due. Where the licensee has improperly discontinued cable system service
to any such subscriber, it shall provide free reconnection to the cable
system to such subscriber.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.45  PROTECTION OF SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.



   (A)   Licensee shall at all times comply with the Cable Act
provisions related to protection of subscriber privacy as set forth in 47
U.S.C. Section 551 as may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   A subscriber shall be provided, free of charge, access to all
personally identifiable information regarding that subscriber which is
collected and maintained by a licensee. Such information shall be made
available to the subscriber at reasonable times and at a convenient place
designated by licensee. A cable subscriber shall be provided reasonable
opportunity to correct any error in such information.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the
town from enacting or enforcing additional laws consistent with this section
for the protection of subscriber privacy.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.46  REPORTS.



   (A)   Annual reports. Within 90 days after the close of the
licensee's fiscal year, the licensee upon request of the town shall submit a
written annual report, in a form approved by the town including, but not
limited to, the following information:



      (1)   A summary of the previous year's (or, in the case of the
initial report year, the initial year's) activities in development of the
cable system including, but not limited to, services begun or discontinued
during the reporting year, and the number of subscribers for each class of
service.



      (2)   A summary of cable system revenues subject to the
license fee provided for under § 114.16 Payment of License Fee.



      (3)   Full financial statements for the previous year,
including income statement, balance sheet, cash flow statement, and
appropriate explanatory footnotes, for the licensee or any parent company.
Financial statements for the licensee or any parent company shall be audited
by an independent CPA, and all other statements shall be certified by an
officer of the licensee to be an accurate reflection of licensee's books and
records. In the event any audited financial report has not been published by
the date due under this section, then the audited financial report shall be
deemed presented on time if presented within 30 days after publication. Upon
request by the town, the licensee shall also provide an oral briefing to the
Town Manager of its financial condition. This will include revenues,
operating expenses and capital expenditures for the previous year.



   (B)   Optional reports. Upon request of the town, licensee shall
provide within a reasonable time, any of the following reports:



      (1)   A current statement of costs of construction of the
cable system, if needed in connection with rate regulation.



      (2)   A projected income statement and statement of projected
costs of construction of the cable system for the next 2 years, in connection
with rate regulation. To protect the proprietary nature of such information,
the town may review these reports at the local business office of the
licensee.



      (3)   A list of the licensee's officers, members of its board
of directors, and other principals of the licensee.



      (4)   A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding
5% or more of the voting interest in the licensee and its parent, subsidiary
and affiliated corporations and other entities, if any.



      (5)   Licensee's annual and other periodic public reports and
those of its parent, subsidiary and affiliated corporations and other
entities, as is reasonably appropriate.



      (6)   Information or reports, as needed, to establish
licensee's compliance with the various standards and other provisions of this
chapter and the license.



   (C)   Copies of federal and state reports. Upon request of the town,
licensee shall submit to the town copies of all pleadings, applications,
reports, communications and documents of any kind, submitted by the licensee
to the Federal Communications Commission, as well as copies of all decisions,
correspondence and actions by any federal, state and local courts, regulatory
agencies and other government bodies relating to its cable television
operations within the license area. The licensee shall submit such documents
to the town simultaneously with its submission to such courts, agencies and
bodies; and within 5 days after their receipt from such courts, agencies and
bodies. The licensee hereby waives any right to claim confidential,
privileged or proprietary rights to such documents unless such confidential
rights are determined to be confidential by law or by the practices of
federal or state agencies. Such confidential data exempt from public
disclosure shall be retained in confidence by the town and its authorized
agents and shall not be made available for public inspection.



   (D)   Service complaint reports. Licensee shall make a monthly
report to the town identifying the general nature and number of all service
complaints, and summarizing the timeliness of licensee's response and the
disposition of such complaints in a form approved by the town. Licensee is
free to provide any supplemental information it wishes to the town.



   (E)   Inspection of facilities. The licensee shall allow the town to
make inspections of any of the licensee's facilities and equipment at any
time upon reasonable notice, or, in case of emergency, upon demand without
prior notice, to allow the town to verify the accuracy of any submitted
report.



   (F)   Inspection of business office and files. At the licensee's
area office the licensee shall keep complete books and records. Subject to
confidentiality restrictions required by federal or state law or § 114.45
Protection of Subscriber Privacy, the town shall have the right to inspect at
any time during normal business hours all books, records, construction maps
and plans, income tax returns, financial statements, service complaint logs,
performance test results and other like materials of the licensee which
relate to the operation of the cable system. Upon request of the town,
licensee shall in advance redact any confidential information prior to review
by the town.



   (G)   Public inspection. All reports submitted by licensee to the
town are subject to public disclosure, and shall be available for public
inspection at a designated town office during normal business hours.



   (H)   Failure to report. The refusal, failure, or neglect of the
licensee to file any of the reports required, or provide such other reports
as the town reasonably may request, shall be deemed a breach of the license,
and shall subject the licensee to all remedies, legal or equitable, available
to the town under the license or otherwise.



   (I)   False statements. Any materially false or misleading statement
or representation made knowingly by the licensee in any report required under
the license shall be deemed a material breach of the license and shall
subject the licensee to all remedies, legal or equitable, available to the
town under the license or otherwise.



   (J)   Cost of reports. All reports and records of licensee required
to be provided by licensee under this or any other section shall be furnished
at the sole expense of the licensee.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.47  INSPECTION OF PROPERTY AND RECORDS.



   (A)   At all reasonable times, the licensee shall permit any duly
authorized representative of the town to examine all property of the
licensee, together with any appurtenant property of the licensee situated
within or without the town, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps
and other records kept or maintained by the licensee or under its control
which relate to license compliance and deal with the operations, affairs,
transactions or property of the licensee, subject to confidentiality
restrictions required by federal or state law or § 114.45 Protection of
Subscriber Privacy.



   (B)   The licensee shall at all times make and keep full and
complete design maps showing the exact location of all cable system equipment
installed or in use in public rights-of-way and other places in the town and
make them available to the town for inspection and review upon request at the
office where licensee maintains such records.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.48  PROTECTION OF TOWN AGAINST LIABILITY.



   (A)   Indemnification.



      (1)   Licensee shall fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless
the town, its officers, boards, commissions, elected officials, agents,
attorneys, representatives, servants and employees against any and all costs,
damages, expenses, claims, suits, actions, liabilities and judgments for
damages, including, but not limited to, expenses for legal fees, whether suit
be brought or not, and disbursements and liabilities incurred or assumed by
town in connection with:



         (a)   Damage to persons or property, in any way arising
out of or through the acts or omissions of licensee, its servants, officials,
agents, attorneys, representatives or employees;



         (b)   Requests for relief arising out of any licensee
action or inaction which results in a claim for invasion of right of privacy,
for defamation of any person, firm or corporation; for the violation or
infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent;
or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation;



         (c)   Any and all claims arising out of licensee's
failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or a license or any
federal, state or local law or regulation applicable to licensee or the cable
system;



         (d)   Any and all disputes arising out of a claim by any
party other than the town or licensee wherein damages or other relief is
sought (1) as a result of the town's cable system licensing of licensee or
(2) as a result of the renewal or non-renewal of licensee's cable system
license.



      (2)   If a lawsuit covered by the provisions of division
(A)(1) of this section be brought against the town, either independently or
jointly with a licensee, or with any other person or municipality, the
licensee, upon notice given by the town, shall defend the town at the cost of
the licensee. If final judgment is obtained against the town, either
independently or jointly with licensee or any other defendants, the licensee
shall indemnify the town and pay such judgment with all costs and attorneys'
fees and satisfy and discharge the same. The town shall cooperate with the
licensee and reserves the right to participate in the defense of any
litigation.



      (3)   A licensee shall bring no claim or demand any right to a
refund of license fees paid to the town as a percentage of gross revenues
derived from services that are later determined to be telecommunications
services rather than cable services.



      (4)   The town is in no manner or means waiving any
governmental immunity it may enjoy or any immunity for its agents, officials,
servants, attorneys, representatives and/or employees.



      (5)   A licensee shall make no settlement in any matter
identified above without the town's written consent, which shall not be
unreasonably withheld. Failure to inform the town of settlement shall
constitute a breach of the license and the town may seek any redress
available to it against the licensee whether set forth in this chapter or
under any other municipal, state or federal laws.



      (6)   All rights of the town, pursuant to indemnification,
insurance, letter of credit or performance bond(s), as provided for by this
chapter, are in addition to all other rights the town may have under this
chapter or any other chapter, rule, regulation or law.



      (7)   The town's exercise of or failure to exercise all rights
pursuant to any section of this chapter shall not affect in any way the right
of the town subsequently to exercise any such rights or any other right of
the town under this chapter or any other chapter, rule, regulation or law.



      (8)   It is the purpose of this section to provide maximum
indemnification to the town under the terms and conditions expressed and, if
there is a dispute, this section shall be construed (to the greatest extent
permitted by law) to provide for the indemnification of the town by the
licensee.



      (9)   The provisions of this section shall not be dependent or
conditioned upon the validity of this chapter or the validity of any of the
procedures or agreements involved in the award or renewal of a license, but
shall be and remain a binding right and obligation of the town and a licensee
even if part or all of this chapter, or the grant or renewal of a license, is
declared null and void in a legal or administrative proceeding. It shall be
expressly stated in a license, that it is the intent of the licensee and
town, upon the effective date of the license, that the provisions of this
section survive any such declaration and shall be a binding obligation of and
inure to the benefit of the licensee and town and their respective successors
and assigns, if any.



   (B)   Comprehensive liability insurance.



      (1)   Upon acceptance of a license, the licensee shall file
with the Town Clerk and shall thereafter during the entire term of such
license maintain in full force and effect, at its own expense, a general
comprehensive liability insurance policy or policies which shall insure
licensee and provide primary coverage for the town, its officers, boards,
commissions, agents and employees, against liability for loss or liability
for personal injury, death, property damage (both automobile and
non-automobile caused), or other damages. Such policy or policies shall
include, but are not limited to, insurance against damages from unfair
competition, copyright infringement (common law or statutory) and a failure
of licensee to secure consents, occasioned by any activity or operation of
licensee under such license, and regardless of any claimed or actual
activities of the town, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and
employees other than gross negligence or willful misconduct. The manager, in
any license granted, may waive the requirement for insurance from 1 or more
perils mentioned in the last preceding sentence upon a finding that such
insurance cannot be procured or cannot be procured at a reasonable cost, and
in connection therewith may reduce the otherwise required limits on coverage
hereafter set forth. Such policy or policies shall be issued by a company
approved by the manager and shall be in a form approved by the town attorney,
with minimum combined single limits of liability coverage in the amount of
$3,000,000. The policy or policies shall name the town, its officers, boards,
commissions, agents and employees as additional insured and contain a
provision that a written notice of any cancellation, modification or
reduction in coverage of said policy shall be delivered to the Clerk 30 days
in advance of the effective date thereof. No license granted under this
chapter shall be effective unless and until certificates of insurance
evidencing coverage required above are delivered to the Clerk. Any substitute
policy or policies shall be subject to the same approvals and shall comply
with all of the provisions of this division.



      (2)   The Council may require increases in the amount or types
of coverage no more frequently than every 3 years, based on increases in the
CPI, so as to ensure full protection of the town and the public. The licensee
shall have 6 months from the date of notification from the manager to comply
with any increase.



      (3)   A licensee may self-insure the above-described policy
coverages if such licensee or its parent is of sufficient financial standing
to reasonably provide such insurance. A licensee that elects to self-insure
shall file with the town a certificate of insurance as specified by the town.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.49  LETTER OF CREDIT.



   (A)   Within 30 days after the award or renewal of a license, a
licensee shall deposit with the town an irrevocable and replenishable letter
of credit in an amount of $25,000 issued by a federally insured commercial
lending institution. The form and substance of said letter of credit shall be
used to assure the faithful performance by a licensee of all provisions of
this and resulting license; and compliance with all orders, permits and
directions of any agency, commission, board, department, division or office
of the town having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under a license and
the payment by the licensee of any penalties, liquidated damages, claims,
liens and taxes due to the town which arise by reason of the construction,
operation or maintenance of the cable system, including cost of removal or
abandonment of any property of the licensee.



   (B)   The letter of credit may be drawn upon by the town by
presentation of a draft at sight on the lending institution, accompanied by a
written certificate signed by the public works director certifying that the
licensee has been found, pursuant to § 114.52 Administrative Hearing,
division (C) or § 114.53 Hearing by Council, to have failed to comply with,
its license or license agreement, stating the nature of noncompliance, and
stating the amount being drawn. Examples of the nature of the noncompliance
for drawing upon the letter of credit include, but are not limited to, the
following:



      (1)   Failure of the licensee to pay to the town any license
fees or taxes after 10 days written notice of delinquency.



      (2)   Failure of the licensee to pay to the town, after 10
days written notice, after all judicial remedies have been exhausted, any
amounts due and owing the town by reason of the indemnity provisions of §
114.48 Protection of Town against Liability.



      (3)    Failure of the licensee to pay to the town any
liquidated damages due and owing to the town pursuant to § 114.48 Protection
of Town against Liability and/or the license.



   (C)   The letter of credit shall be structured in such a manner so
that if the town at any time draws upon the letter of credit, upon notice to
the licensee by the issuing lending institution, licensee shall increase
immediately the amount of available credit to the extent necessary to
replenish that portion of the available credit exhausted by the honoring of
the town's draft. The lending institution shall notify the town of the
replenishment by licensee. The intent of this paragraph is to make available
to the town at all times a letter of credit in the amount of $25,000.



   (D)   The rights reserved to the town with respect to the letter of
credit are in addition to all other rights of the town, whether reserved by a
license or authorized by law, and no action proceeding against a letter of
credit shall affect any other right the town may have.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.50  CONSTRUCTION BONDS.



   (A)   Thirty days prior to the commencement of any construction in
the town's rights-of-way, a licensee shall obtain and maintain throughout the
period of system construction, at its cost and expense, and file with the
Clerk, a corporate surety bond issued by a company authorized to do business
in the state of Arizona, and found acceptable by the town attorney, in an
amount established in a license agreement solely for the purpose of
guaranteeing the timely construction and/or reconstruction of the cable
system and the safeguarding of private property during construction and/or
reconstruction. The bond shall provide, but not be limited to, the following
condition: There shall be recoverable by the town, jointly and severally from
the principal and surety, any and all damages, losses or costs suffered by
the town resulting from the failure of a licensee to satisfactorily complete
construction and/or reconstruction of its cable system throughout the license
area pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter and such licensee's
license.



   (B)   Any extension of the prescribed construction or reconstruction
time limit must be authorized by the town. The construction bond shall be
available throughout any such extension period.



   (C)   The construction bond shall be terminated only after the
Council finds that a licensee has satisfactorily completed initial
construction and activation or reconstruction of its cable system pursuant to
the terms and conditions of this chapter and such licensee's license.



   (D)   The rights reserved to the town with respect to the
construction bond are in addition to all other rights of the town, whether
reserved by this chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or
exercise of a right with respect to such construction bond shall affect any
other rights the town may have.



   (E)   (1)   The construction bond shall contain the following
endorsement:



      (2)   It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may
not be canceled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the
surety until 60 days after receipt by the town, by registered mail, of
written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.51  LIQUIDATED DAMAGES.



   (A)   Each license granted by the town shall state that a licensee
understands and shall agree that failure to comply with any time and
performance requirements as stipulated in this chapter and the license will
result in damage to the town, and that it is and will be impracticable to
determine the actual amount of such damage caused by delay or nonperformance;
the license shall include provisions for liquidated damages to be paid by the
licensee, in amounts to be negotiated and set forth in the license and
chargeable to the letter of credit for the following defaults:



      (1)   Failure to complete system construction or
reconstruction in accordance with the schedule in the license unless the
Council specifically approves the delay by motion or resolution;



      (2)   Failure to provide a cable connection within the time(s)
set forth in § 114.27 Line Extension;



      (3)   Failure to properly restore the public right-of-way or
to correct related violations of specifications, code, or standards after
having been notified by the town to correct such defects;



      (4)   Failure to test, analyze and report on the performance
of the cable system following a written request pursuant to § 114.29
Construction and Technical Standards, division (A)(2);



      (5)   Failure to provide in a continuing manner the type of
services proposed in the accepted application for license or in the final
license unless the Council specifically approves modification of a licensee's
obligation;



      (6)   Failure to cure any violation of § 114.40 Subscriber
Service Standards, following notice and an opportunity to cure pursuant to
the provisions of that section; and



      (7)   Any other action or non-action by the licensee, as
agreed upon between the town and licensee, and set forth in the license.



   (B)   If the manager concludes that a licensee is in fact liable for
liquidated damages pursuant to the license, he shall issue to licensee by
certified mail a notice of intention to assess liquidated damages. The notice
shall set forth the nature of the violation and the amount of the proposed
assessment or the licensee shall, within 30 days of receipt of such notice:



      (1)   Respond to the town in writing, contesting the town's
assertion of violation and providing such information or documentation as may
be necessary to support licensee's position; or



      (2)   Cure any such violation (and provide written evidence of
the same), or, if, in the town's sole discretion, such violation cannot be
cured within such 30-day period, take reasonable steps to cure said violation
as soon as practicable and diligently continue such efforts until said
violation is cured. Licensee shall report to the town, in writing, at 30-day
intervals as to licensee's efforts, indicating the steps taken by licensee to
cure said violation and reporting licensee's progress until such violation is
cured.



   (C)   If licensee contests the town's assertion of violation or
fails to respond to the town's notice of intent to assess liquidated damages,
within 15 days the town shall schedule a hearing in accordance with the
procedures set forth in § 114.52 Administrative Hearing.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.52  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.



   (A)   Within 15 days of: (1) receipt of licensee's notice of contest
pursuant to § 114.49(B)(1); or (2) expiration of the response time referred
to in §§ 114.40(G) or 114.42(C); or (3) notice from licensee that it
contests an audit determination of license fees under § 114.16(D), an
administrative hearing shall be scheduled by the manager. This shall be a
public hearing, and licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard and
to present relevant information.



   (B)   Within 15 days after the conclusion of such hearing, the
manager shall issue a determination. In that determination the manager may:



      (1)   Find that licensee is not in violation of the terms of
the license;



      (2)   Find that the licensee is in violation, but that such
violation was with just cause and waive any liquidated damages that might
otherwise be imposed;



      (3)   Find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the
license, take corrective action, make written demand of licensee for the
amount owed by licensee as a result thereof, and if not paid by licensee
within 30 days following the date of such notice, pursue all remedies
available, subject to licensee's right to appeal the manager's decision;



      (4)   Find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the
license and impose liquidated damages; and



   (C)   In the case of a material violation recommend that the Council
terminate the license; provided, that the Council may take action on any such
recommendation only after a public hearing as set forth in § 114.53 Hearing
by Council.



   (D)   If the manager determines that licensee has committed a
violation, the determination shall be accompanied by a detailed statement of
reasons for the determination, including findings of fact.



   (E)   The decision of the manager shall become final unless licensee
requests a public hearing before the Council within 15 days of its receipt of
the statement of reasons and findings of fact by the manager.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.53  HEARING BY COUNCIL.



   (A)   If a public hearing before the Council is requested by
licensee or is held pursuant to § 114.52 Administrative Hearing, it shall be
on the record as supplemented by the licensee and other relevant information.
It shall convene within 30 days of the request therefor. The Council may
designate 3 of its members to act as a hearing subcommittee in the matter and
to present written findings of fact and conclusions of law to the entire
Council. The Council's decision, which shall include findings of fact, shall
be made not later than 45 calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing.
In that decision, the Council may:



      (1)   Find that licensee is not in violation of the terms of
the license;



      (2)   Find that licensee is in violation but that such
violation was with just cause and waive any liquidated damages or penalty
that may otherwise be imposed;



      (3)   Find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the
license, take corrective action, make written demand of licensee for the
amount owed by licensee as a result thereof, and if not paid within 30 days
following the date of such notice, foreclose on all or any appropriate part
of the letter of credit provided pursuant to § 114.50 Construction Bonds to
pay the cost thereof;



      (5)   Find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the
license and impose liquidated damages; and



      (6)   In the case of a substantial violation of the license
within the meaning of § 114.51 Liquidated Damages, declare the licensee in
violation and revoke the license.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.54  REVOCATION.



   (A)   In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the
Council under this chapter or otherwise, the Council shall have the right to
revoke the license and all rights and privileges of the licensee thereunder
upon a recurring or protracted substantial breach of the license terms and
conditions, or this chapter, which substantially affects the provision or
quality of cable services, the ability of the town to effectively regulate
the licensee, or the town's collection of all fees and charges. The power of
revocation shall not be used if the breach is a result of force majeure. The
breaches appearing on the list set forth below in this section shall be
considered substantial breaches. The list is not exhaustive:



      (1)   Failure to complete system construction or
reconstruction in accordance with a license;



      (2)   Failure to provide cable service within the time(s)
specified for line extensions;



      (3)   Each failure to properly restore streets or to correct
related violations of specifications, code, ordinance or standards;



      (4)   Each failure to comply with subscriber service standards;



      (5)   Failure to comply with operational, maintenance or
technical standards;



      (6)   Failure to provide on a continuing basis the broad
categories of programming specified in a license;



      (7)   Failure to provide the access channel requirements
specified in a license;



      (8)   An unauthorized partial or total transfer of a license;



      (9)   Failure to commence construction as required in a
license;



      (10)   Failure to cure any other violation of a license after
notice and opportunity to cure;



      (11)   Any other material action or non-action of a licensee
regarding a requirement of a license.



   (B)   Before proceeding with a revocation hearing, the manager shall
make a written demand that the licensee comply. If a violation by the
licensee continues for a period beyond that set forth in the written demand
without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being
actively and expeditiously pursued, the manager may hold an administrative
hearing in accordance with § 114.52 Administrative Hearing or may recommend
that the Council act directly. The Council may revoke the license as provided
in this section.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.55  CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY.



   (A)   It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving
cable service insofar as their financial and other obligations to a licensee
are honored.



   (B)   If the license terminates, the licensee shall cooperate with
the town to ensure continuity of cable service to all subscribers for a
period not to exceed 90 days. Said period may be extended by mutual agreement
between the town and licensee. During such period, licensee shall be entitled
to the revenues for any period during which it operates the cable system.



   (C)   If licensee fails to operate the cable system for 96
consecutive hours without prior approval of the town or without just cause,
the town may, at its option, operate the cable system or designate an
operator until such time as licensee restores cable services under conditions
acceptable to the town or a new permanent operator is selected. If the town
is required to fulfill this obligation for a licensee, the licensee shall
reimburse the town for all reasonable costs or damages that are the result of
the licensee's failure to perform.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.56  FAILURE OF TOWN TO ENFORCE A LICENSE; NO WAIVER OF THE TERMS
THEREOF.



   A licensee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms
and conditions of a license or this chapter by any failure of the town upon
any 1 or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such
terms or conditions.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.57  LICENSE SUBJECT TO OTHER LAWS.



   (A)    The license is subject to and shall be governed by all
applicable provisions of federal, state and local law. Notwithstanding any
other provisions of the license to the contrary, the licensee shall at all
times comply with all laws and regulations of the state and federal
government or any administrative agencies thereof; provided, however, if any
such state or federal law or regulations shall require the licensee to
perform any service, or shall permit the licensee to perform any service, or
shall prohibit the licensee from performing any service, in conflict with the
terms of the license or this chapter, then as soon as possible following
knowledge thereof, the licensee shall notify the town attorney of the point
of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and this chapter
or the license.



   (B)   In the event of deregulation by the FCC, conformance to
current FCC Rules or Regulations, as specified in this chapter may continue
to be required by the town.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.58  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   (A)   When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein
required to be filed with the town shall be filed with the Office of the
Clerk.



   (B)   Neither licensee nor any of its officers or employees shall
receive referral fees or gratuities from any television or radio sales or
repair business.



   (C)   All notices which the town may give to a licensee or which a
licensee may give to the town shall be given in writing and may be given by
first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to licensee's most recent
address on file with the town, and addressed to the town. Such notices, when
sent by mail, shall be deemed given 1 day after deposit in the U.S. Mail.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.59  FORCE MAJEURE.



   With respect to any provision of this chapter or any license granted
pursuant thereto, the violation or noncompliance with which could result in
the imposition of a financial penalty, liquidated damages, forfeiture or
other sanction upon a licensee, such violation or noncompliance shall be
excused where such violation or noncompliance is the result of Acts of God,
war, civil disturbance, strike or other labor unrest, or similar events, the
occurrence of which was not reasonably foreseeable by licensee and is beyond
its reasonable control.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



§ 114.60  CONTINUED USE OF INDIVIDUAL ANTENNAS.



   It is not the Council's intention to prohibit the erection or continued
use of individual television antennas, and no one is or will be required to
receive cable television service or connect with a cable television system.



(Ord. 16-825, passed 9-13-2016)



CHAPTER 115:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section




General Provisions




   115.01   Purpose and findings



   115.02   Definitions



   115.03   Classification




Licenses




   115.20   License required



   115.21   Issuance of license



   115.22   Fees



   115.23   Inspection



   115.24   Expiration of license



   115.25   Suspension



   115.26   Revocation



   115.27   Transfer of license




Conditions




   115.40   Location



   115.41   Adult motels



   115.42   Exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live
entertainment in viewing rooms



   115.43   Escort agencies



   115.44   Nude model studios



   115.45   Public nudity



   115.46   Children in sexually oriented business



   115.47   Hours of operation



   115.48   Exemptions



 



   115.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 115.01  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually
oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the citizens of the town, and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of
sexually oriented businesses within the town. The provisions of this chapter
have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction
on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by
the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution
of obscene material.



   (B)   Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of
adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made
available to the council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City
of Renton v. Playtime Theatres. Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American
Mini Theatres 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Barnes v. Glenn Theatre. Inc., 501 U.S.
560 (1991), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited
to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis,
Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California;
Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas; and also on findings from the
Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually
Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the Council finds:



      (1)   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to
ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled
by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no
mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the
activities that occur on their premises.



      (2)   Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses
defined in this chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher
incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other
establishments.



      (3)   Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal
sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide
private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos or live
sex shows.



      (4)   Offering and providing such space encourages such
activities, which creates unhealthy conditions.



      (5)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades
and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex
within the premises of the sexually oriented businesses.



      (6)   At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by
activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not
limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immuno-deficiency virus infection (HIV
AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B. Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella
infections and shigella infections.



      (7)   Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an
increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human
immuno-deficiency virus (HIV) in the United States, 600 in 1982, 2,200 in
1983, 4,600 in 1984, 8,555 in 1985 and 253,448 through December 31, 1992.



      (8)   As of November 1, 1997, there have been 5,278 reported
cases of AlDS in the state, and 63 reported cases in Yavapai County, Arizona,
37 of which have died.



      (9)   Since 1981 and to the present, there have been an
increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive for the HIV antibody
test in Yavapai County.



      (10)   The number of cases of early (less than 1 year)
syphilis in the United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases
reported in 1982 and 45,200 through November of 1990.



      (11)   The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States
reported annually remains at a high level, with over one half million cases
being reported in 1990.



      (12)   The Surgeon General of the United States in his report
of October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV
infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse,
exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother
to her newborn.



      (13)   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV
infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by
sexual acts.



      (14)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented
businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are
unhealthy, and in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities
and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self
regulate those activities and maintain those facilities.



      (15)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen
is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view
“adult” oriented films.



      (16)   The findings noted in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(15)
of this section raise substantial governmental concerns.



      (17)   Sexually oriented businesses have operational
characteristics, which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect
those substantial governmental concerns.



      (18)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate
mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and
the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing
procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to
see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with
the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the
citizens of the town. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that
the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully
in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein.



      (19)   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring
sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial
governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity
occurring in adult theaters.



      (20)   Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to
keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will
help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by
facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by
preventing minors from working in such establishments.



      (21)   The disclosure of certain information by those persons
ultimately responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of the
sexually oriented business, where the information is substantially related to
the significant governmental interest in the operation of the uses, will aid
in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.



      (22)   It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of
communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is
designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to the activity.



      (23)   The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has
been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption
that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this
chapter.



      (24)   The barring of such individuals from the management of
adult uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents
conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.



      (25)   The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the
citizens of the town will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-1)



§ 115.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ARCADE.  Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin operated, slug operated, or for any form of consideration,
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image
producing devices are maintained to show images to 5 or fewer persons per
machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished
or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.



      (1)   A commercial establishment which, as one of its
principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration
any 1 or more of the following:



         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations which are characterized
by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, provided that the foregoing material, taken as a whole,
appeals to the prurient interest, and lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value; or



         (b)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are
designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities.



      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store or
adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store or adult video store so long as its principal business purpose
is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, provided that the foregoing
material, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest and lacks
serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.



   ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:



      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminude;



      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or



      (3)   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT MOTEL.  A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:



      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and has a sign
visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of
this adult type of photographic reproductions;



      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
that is less than 10 hours; or



      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
subrent the room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A commercial establishment where, for
any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, and further provided that the foregoing
material, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest, and lacks
serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.



   ADULT THEATER.  A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a
state of nudity or seminude, or live performances which are characterized by
the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities,
and further provided that the foregoing performances, taken as a whole,
appeal to the prurient interest, and lack serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.



   EMPLOYEE.  A person who performs any service on the premises of a
sexually oriented business on a full time, part time or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor,
agent or otherwise and whether or not the person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of the business. EMPLOYEE does not include
a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the
premises.



   ESCORT.  A person who, for monetary consideration agrees or offers to
act as a date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately
perform a striptease for another person.



   ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  Any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented
business as a new business;



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;



      (3)   The additions of any sexually oriented business to any
other existing sexually oriented business; or



      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.



   LICENSEE.  A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a
person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a
sexually oriented business.



   NUDE MODEL STUDIO.  Any place where a person who appears seminude, in
a state of nudity or who displays specified anatomical areas and is provided
to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or
similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration. NUDE MODEL STUDIO shall not include a proprietary school
licensed by the State of Arizona or a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or
university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits
are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:



      (1)   That has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person
is available for viewing; and



      (2)   Where in order to participate in a modeling session an
artist must arrange to participate in the session at least 1 day in advance
of the session.



   NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY.  The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva or anus, with less than a fully opaque covering,
the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of
any part of the nipple, or the showing of the uncovered male genitals with
less than a fully opaque covering.



   PERSON.  An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.



   SEMINUDE or IN A SEMINUDE CONDITION.  The showing of the female breast
below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point, or
a showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This
definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast,
but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast,
exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing
apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.



   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.  A business or commercial enterprise that, as
one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration
activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex
when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual
encounter center.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



      (1)   The human male genitals, or the human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or



      (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, or a female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola.



   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.  Any of the following offenses:



      (1)   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination
of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor;
sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child
pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child;
engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a
child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar
offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of other
states or countries;



      (2)   For which:



         (a)   Less than 2 years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;



         (b)   Less than 5 years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or



         (c)   Less than 5 years have elapsed since the date of
the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of 2 or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any 24 month period.



      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have
no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with
the applicant.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Any of the following:



      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;



      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or



      (3)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
of the activities set forth herein.



   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT (OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS).  The
increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the
floor areas exist on the date this chapter takes effect.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL (OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS). 
Any of the following:



      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar
means; or



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-2)



§ 115.03  CLASSIFICATION.



   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:



   (A)   Adult arcades;



   (B)   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores or adult video stores;



   (C)   Adult cabarets;



   (D)   Adult motels;



   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters;



   (F)   Adult theaters;



   (G)   Escort agencies;



   (H)   Nude model studios; and



   (I)   Sexual encounter centers.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-3)




LICENSES




§ 115.20  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful:



      (1)   For any person to operate a sexually oriented business
without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the town
pursuant to this chapter.



      (2)   For any person who operates a sexually oriented business
to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not
licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the town pursuant to
this chapter.



      (3)   For any person to obtain employment with a sexually
oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business
employee license pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided
by the town.



   (C)   All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions
of this chapter. Each applicant for a license pursuant to this chapter shall
submit a full set of fingerprints to the town’s Police Department for the
purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to
A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Pub. Law No. 92 544. The Department of Public Safety is
authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications
established in this chapter.



   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business
is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
other than an individual, each individual who has a 20% or greater interest
in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each
applicant must be qualified under § 115.23 of this chapter and each
applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.



   (E)   The completed application for a sexually oriented business
license shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by
the following documents:



      (1)   If the applicant is:



         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state his/her
legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he or she is 18 years of age
or more.



         (b)   A partnership, the partnership shall state its
complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.



         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its
complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation
is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names
and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the
name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered
office for service of process.



      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually
oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she
must state:



         (a)   The sexually oriented business’s fictitious
name; and



         (b)   Submit the required registration documents.



      (3)   Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the
applicant, has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in
this chapter, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date,
place and jurisdiction of each;



      (4)   Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the
applicant, has had a previous license under this chapter or other similar
sexually oriented business ordinances from another city or county denied,
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as
well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation and whether the
applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been a partner in a
partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation
that is licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been denied,
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as
well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation;



      (5)   Whether the applicant or a person residing with the
applicant holds any other license under this chapter or other similar
sexually oriented business ordinances from another city or county and, if so,
the names and locations of such other licensed businesses;



      (6)   The single classification of license for which the
applicant is filing;



      (7)   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business,
including a legal description of the property, street address and telephone
number(s), if any;



      (8)   The applicant’s mailing address and residential
address;



      (9)   A recent photograph of the applicant(s);



      (10)   The applicant’s driver’s license number, social
security number, and/or his or her state or federally issued tax
identification number;



      (11)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business; (The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus 6 inches;



      (12)   A current certificate and straight line drawing
prepared within 30 days prior to application by a registered land surveyor
depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing
sexually oriented businesses within 1,000 feet of the property to be
certified; the property lines of any established religious
institution/synagogue, school or public park or recreation area within 1,000
feet of the property to be certified; and  (For purposes of this section, a
use shall be considered existing or established if it is legally in existence
at the time an application is submitted.)



      (13)   If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in
a viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor space, films,
videocassettes, other video reproductions or live entertainment which depict
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant
shall comply with the application requirements set forth in § 115.42 of this
chapter.



   (F)   Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented
business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be
provided by the town the following information:



      (1)   The applicant’s name or any other name (including
“stage” names) or aliases used by the individual;



      (2)   Age, date and place of birth;



      (3)   Height, weight, hair and eye color;



      (4)   Present residence address and telephone number;



      (5)   Present business address and telephone number;



      (6)   Date, issuing state and number of driver’s permit or
other identification card information;



      (7)   Social security number; and



      (8)   Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.



   (G)   Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented
business employee license as provided above, shall be the following:



      (1)   A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the
applicant’s face, and the applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by
the Police Department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be
paid by the applicant.



      (2)   A statement detailing the license history of the
applicant for the 5 years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application, including whether the applicant previously operated or is
seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state or country has
ever had a license, permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked or
suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied,
revoked or suspended. In the event of any  such denial, revocation or
suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction
and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation or suspension. A
copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to
the application.



      (3)   A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of
a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of
each.



   (H)   The following information provided pursuant to this chapter
shall not be deemed to be a public record:



      (1)   Criminal history information obtained pursuant to A.R.S
§ 41-1750 and/or Pub. Law No. 92-544.



      (2)   Information required and provided pursuant to divisions
(E)(8), (E)(10), (F)(4), (F)(6) and (F)(7) above.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-4)



§ 115.21  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon the filing of the application for a sexually oriented
business employee license, the town shall issue a temporary license to the
applicant. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate town
departments for an investigation to be made on such information as is
contained on the application. The application process shall be completed
within 30 days from the date the completed application is filed. After the
investigation, the town shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a
preponderance of the evidence that 1 or more of the following findings is
true:



      (1)   The applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;



      (2)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;



      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity as defined in this chapter;



      (4)   The sexually oriented business employee license is to be
used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute,
rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter;
or



      (5)   The applicant has had a sexually oriented business
employee license revoked by the town within 2 years of the date of the
current application. If the sexually oriented business employee license is
denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null
and void. Denial, suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to
this subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in § 115.26 of this
chapter.



   (B)   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to
annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by
the town that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal
activity as defined in this chapter or committed any act during the existence
of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license
application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of
the fee as set forth in § 115.22 of this chapter.



   (C)   Within 30 days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented
business application, the town shall approve or deny the issuance of a
license to an applicant. The town shall approve the issuance of a license to
an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that
1 or more of the following findings is true:



      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;



      (2)   An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing
is overdue in payment to the town of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed
against or imposed upon him or her in relation to any business;



      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the license, has failed to provide all
information required by this chapter, or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form;



      (4)   An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is
residing has been denied a license by the town to operate a sexually oriented
business within the preceding 12 months or whose license to operate a
sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months;



      (5)   An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is
residing has been convicted of a specified criminal activity defined in this
chapter;



      (6)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented
business has not been approved by the Health Department, Fire Department and
the Building Official as being in compliance with applicable laws and
ordinances;



      (7)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been
paid; and



      (8)   An applicant of the proposed establishment is in
violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this
chapter.



   (D)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address
of the sexually oriented  business and the classification for which the
license is issued pursuant to § 115.03 of this chapter. All licenses shall
be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually
oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time.



   (E)   The Health Department, Fire Department and the Building
Official shall complete their certification that the premises is in
compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of receipt of the application
by the town.



   (F)   A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only 1
classification as found in § 115.03 of this chapter.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-5)



§ 115.22  FEES.



   (A)   Every application for a sexually oriented business license or
for a sexually oriented business employee license (whether for a new license
or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application and investigation fee as adopted by resolution.



   (B)   In addition to the application and investigation fee required
above, every sexually oriented business and every employee of a sexually
oriented business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the
town an annual nonrefundable license fee as adopted by resolution within 30
days of license issuance or renewal.



   (C)   All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the
Police Chief of the town.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-6)



§ 115.23  INSPECTION.



   (A)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the
Police Department, County Health Department, Fire Department, Community
Development Department or other town departments or agencies to inspect the
premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.



   (B)   A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his or
her agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he or she refuses to permit
such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is open for business.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-7)



§ 115.24  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license shall expire 1 year from the date of issuance and
may be renewed only by making application as provided in § 115.20 of this
chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the license will not be affected.



   (B)   When the town denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall
not be issued a license for 1 year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to
denial, the town finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has
been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least
90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-8)



§ 115.25  SUSPENSION.



   The town shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if
it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:



   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this
chapter; and



   (B)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-9)



§ 115.26  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The town shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in §
115.25 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The town shall revoke a license if it determines that:



      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process;



      (2)   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or
sale of controlled substances on the premises;



      (3)   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises;



      (4)   A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;



      (5)   Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has
knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises; or



      (6)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the town, county
or state for any taxes or fees past due.



   (C)   When the town revokes a license, the revocation shall continue
for 1 year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business
license for 1 year from the date the revocation became effective. If,
subsequent to revocation, the town finds that the basis for the revocation
has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at
least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.



   (D)   When the decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license or
permit becomes final, the applicant or licensee shall have the right to seek
judicial review of the decision by way of special action or other available
procedure in the Superior Court. The town shall consent to an expedited
hearing to be held no later than 20 days after the filing of the action, and
to an expedited disposition. The decision to suspend, revoke or refuse to
renew a license or permit shall be stayed until a decision on the merits by
the Superior Court, provided that the applicant or licensee files the action
within 30 calendar days after final administrative action by the town.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-10)



§ 115.27  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall
a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the application.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-11)




CONDITIONS




§ 115.40  LOCATION.



   (A)   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates or
causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district
other than industrial, as defined and described in the Chino Valley Zoning
Code. (See Town of Chino Valley Zoning Code).



   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes
to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of:



      (1)   A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is
used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities;



      (2)   A public or private educational facility including, but
not limited to, child daycare facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, charter schools,
intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools,
vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special
education schools, junior colleges, and universities; school includes the
school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another
purpose and only incidentally as a school;



      (3)   A boundary of a residential district as defined in the
Chino Valley zoning code;



      (4)   A public park or recreational area which has been
designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to,
a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field,
basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas or
other similar public land within the town which is under the control,
operation or management of the town park and recreation authorities, or which
has been designated as open space or similar space for use by the general
public;



      (5)   The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use
as defined in the Chino Valley zoning code;



      (6)   An entertainment business which is oriented primarily
towards children or family entertainment; or



      (7)   A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic
beverage control regulations of the state, being A.R.S. §§ 4-101 et seq.,
other than the licensed premises in which the sexually oriented business is
located.



   (C)   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or
permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of
ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of
another sexually oriented business; or within 1,000 feet of 2 other sexually
oriented businesses.



   (D)   A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or
permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than 1 sexually
oriented business in the same building, structure or portion thereof, or the
increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building,
structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.



   (E)   For the purpose of division (B) above, measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of the property line containing a building
or structure used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented
business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use
listed in division (B) above. Presence of a city, county or other political
subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and
applying the distance requirements of this section.



   (F)   For purposes of division (C) above, the distance between any 2
sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from
the closest property line in which each business is located.



   (G)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on February
10, 1998, that is in violation of divisions (A) through (F) of this section
shall be deemed a non-conforming use. The non-conforming use will be
permitted to continue for a period not to exceed 1 year, unless sooner
terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days
or more. The non-conforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended
or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If 2 or
more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and
otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was
first established and continually operating at a particular location is the
conforming use and the later-established business(es) is/are non-conforming.



   (H)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a
conforming use is not rendered a non- conforming use by the location,
subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license,
of a use listed in division (B) above within 1,000 feet of the sexually
oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid
license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted
after a license has expired or been revoked. 



(2001 Code, § 8-7-12)



§ 115.41  ADULT MOTELS.



   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or a similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated 2 or more times in a
period of time that is less than 10 hours creates a rebuttable presumption
that the establishment is an “adult motel”, as that term is defined in
this chapter.



   (B)   A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of
a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that
does not have a sexually oriented license, he or she rents or subrents a
sleeping room to a person and, within 10 hours from the time the room is
rented, he or she rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 



   (C)   For purposes of division (B) above, the terms RENT or SUBRENT
mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-13)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.42  EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS, VIDEOS OR LIVE
ENTERTAINMENT IN VIEWING ROOMS.



   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises
in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film,
videocassette, live entertainment or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with
the following requirements:



      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of 1 or more manager’s stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may
not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the
place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or
architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should
be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be
drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the
various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to
an accuracy of plus or minus 6 inches. The town may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.



      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by
the applicant.



      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a
manager’s station may be made without the prior approval of the town.



      (4)   It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure
that at least 1 licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s
station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.



      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such
a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment. If the premises has 2 or more manager’s stations designated,
then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least 1 of the manager’s
stations. The view required in this division must be by direct line of sight
from the manager’s station.



      (6)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the
view area specified in division (A)(5) of this section remains unobstructed
by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or
other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in
which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to
division (A)(1) of this section.



      (7)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than 1 person at
any time.



      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than 5 foot- candles as
measured at the floor level.



      (9)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.



      (10)   No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist
between viewing rooms or booths.



      (11)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of
any kind between viewing booths or rooms.



      (12)   The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly
inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or
holes exist.



      (13)   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing
booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.



      (14)   The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling
surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by,
nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or
other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor.



   (B)   A person having a duty under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(14)
of this section commits a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill
that duty.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-14)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.43  ESCORT AGENCIES.



   (A)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of
18 years.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or
agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-15)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.44  NUDE MODEL STUDIOS.



   (A)   A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age
of 18 years.



   (B)   A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if the
person appears seminude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a
nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this division if the
person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or visible to
any other person.



   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state
of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an
area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public
right-of-way.



   (D)   A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or
mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-16)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.45  PUBLIC NUDITY.



   (A)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly and
intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a state of nudity
or depicts specified sexual activities.



   (B)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or
intentionally in a sexually oriented business appears in a nude or seminude
condition unless the person is an employee who, while nude or seminude, shall
be at least 10 feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least 2
feet from the floor.



   (C)   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while nude or
seminude in a sexually oriented business, to solicit or accept any pay or
gratuity from any patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or
give any gratuity to any employee, while said employee is nude or seminude in
a sexually oriented business.



   (D)   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while nude or
seminude, to touch a customer or the clothing of a customer.



   (E)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a customer of a sexually
oriented business to touch an employee, while that employee is nude or
seminude.



   (F)   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee to allow a customer
of a sexually oriented business to touch that employee, while that employee
is nude or seminude.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-17)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.46  CHILDREN IN A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.



   A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person
under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-18)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.47  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain
open at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and
Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-19)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.48  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Exempt from the provisions of this chapter are massage
therapists who have satisfied 1 of the following requirements:



      (1)   Have successfully completed the curriculum or curricula
totaling a minimum of 500 hours of 1 or more approved massage/bodywork
schools, such institutions being approved by the Arizona State Board for
Private Postsecondary Education or Arizona Department of Education, or its
equivalent in other states;



      (2)   Hold a current license from any other state whose
licensure requirements meet or exceed those defined within this section;



      (3)   Have received the designation of “Nationally
Certified” or “Internationally Certified” by the National Certification
Board of Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork or other massage therapist agency
approved by the National Commission for Certifying Agencies; or



      (4)   Are members in good standing of a national professional
massage association that establishes standards based upon educational
qualifications.



   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under § 115.45(A) of this
chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a properly
licensed adult cabaret, as a part of that person’s performance; provided,
however, that compliance with § 115.45(B) through (F) of this chapter, as
well as the remainder of this chapter, shall still be required.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-20)



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided
in § 10.99 of this code.



(2001 Code, § 8-7-21)



CHAPTER 116:  REGULATION OF THE SALE OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING PSEUDOEPHEDRINE



Section



   116.01   Definitions



   116.02   Duties of retail establishments



 



   116.99   Penalty



§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT.  Any product containing ephedrine or
pseudoephedrine and includes any compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine,
norpseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine or their salts, optical isomers,
or salts of optical isomers.  Product packaging that lists ephedrine,
pseudoephedrine, norpseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine as an active
ingredient shall constitute prima facie evidence that the product is a
pseudoephedrine product.



   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place of business that offers any
pseudoephedrine product for sale at retail.



(Ord. 06-648, passed 2-23-2006)



§ 116.02  DUTIES OF RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   The operator of a retail establishment shall keep all products
containing pseudoephedrine behind a store counter or otherwise in a manner
that is inaccessible to customers without the assistance of the operator or
an employee of the establishment.



   (B)   A person making a retail sale of a product containing
pseudoephedrine shall require a government-issued, photo identification from
the purchaser and shall record the purchaser’s name, date of birth,
quantity of pseudoephedrine product purchased, transaction date, and the
initials of the seller.



   (C)   The information required to be obtained by division (B) of
this section will be retained by the retail establishment for a period of 90
days, will be considered a confidential document that will only be available
to the operator of the retail establishment, and shall be available to the
town Police Department officers, Arizona Department of Public Safety
officers, Yavapai County Sheriff’s department officers, and other law
enforcement officers.



(Ord. 06-648, passed 2-23-2006)



§ 116.99  PENALTIES.



   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided
in § 10.99.



(Ord. 06-648, passed 2-23-2006)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   GENERAL OFFENSES





         131.   NOISE REGULATIONS




CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Burning



   130.02   Water; flow upon streets prohibited



   130.03   Curfew for minors



   130.04   Public urination and defecation prohibited



   130.05   Funeral picketing; unlawful acts



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  BURNING.



   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to kindle any grass,
trash, brush, rubbish or crop fire within the town without first securing a
written permit from the Fire Chief, his or her duly authorized assistant or
other designated town officer.  The permit may contain any conditions
necessary for the protection of life and property, unless such fire is
contained within a suitable container to prevent the escape of sparks or
burning materials.



(2001 Code, 10-1-1)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  WATER; FLOW UPON STREETS PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or
cause the escape or flow of water from any source in such quantity as to
cause flooding, or to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a
hazardous condition to such traffic, to create a condition which constitutes
a threat to the public health and safety, or to cause damage to the public
streets of the town.



(2001 Code, 10-1-2)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action.



      GUARDIAN.  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of
the person of a minor or a public or private agency with whom a minor has
been placed by an authorized agency or court; or at least 21 years of age and
authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.



      INSUFFICIENT CONTROL.  Failure to exercise reasonable care and
diligence in the supervision of the juvenile.



      MINOR.  Any person under 18 years of age.



      PARENT.  A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or
step-parent of another person.



   (B)   Offenses.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 16 years
to be in, about or upon any place in the city away from the property where
the youth resides between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the
following day.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any minor 16 years of age or older
and under the age of 18 years, to be in, about or upon any place in the city
away from the property where the minor resides between the hours of 12:00
a.m. and 5:00 a.m.



      (3)   It is unlawful for a parent, guardian or other person
having supervisory custody of the minor to knowingly permit, or by
insufficient control, allow a minor to violate the provisions of sections
divisions (B)(1) or (2) above, except as expressly provided herein. It shall
not constitute a defense hereto that such parent, guardian or other person
having supervisory custody of the minor did not have actual knowledge of the
minor’s violation of divisions (B)(1) or (2) above, if the parent, guardian
or other person having responsibility for the minor, in the exercise of
reasonable care and diligence, should have known of the aforementioned
unlawful acts of the minor.



      (4)   It is unlawful for parent, guardian or other person
having the care, custody or supervision of the minor to fail or refuse to
take custody of the minor after the demand is made upon him or her by a law
enforcement officer who arrests the minor for violation of divisions (B)(1)
or (2) above.



   (C)   Defenses; exceptions.  It is a defense to prosecution under
divisions (B)(1) through (3) above that the minor was:



      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian or an
adult having supervisory custody of the minor;



      (2)   With prior permission of the parent or guardian or an
adult having supervisory custody, in motor vehicle involved in interstate
travel;



      (3)   With prior permission of the parent or guardian or an
adult having supervisory custody, in an employment activity or going to or
returning home from an employment activity without a detour or stop by the
most direct route;



      (4)   On an emergency errand;



      (5)   Specifically directed to the location by the parent or
guardian or an adult having supervisory custody, on reasonable, legitimate
business or some other activity, or going to or returning home from the
business or activity;



      (6)   With prior permission of the parent or guardian or an
adult having supervisory custody, engaged in a reasonable and legitimate
exercise of first amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution;



      (7)   Married and 16 years of age or over, or in the military;
and/or



      (8)   On the sidewalk abutting their residence or on the next
door neighbor's property with the consent of the neighbor.



   (D)   Enforcement.



      (1)   Before taking any enforcement action under this section,
a police officer shall attempt to ascertain the apparent offender’s age and
reason for being at the place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make
an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based upon the circumstances, the minor’s
responses and minor’s conduct, no defense as provided in division (C) above
is probably present.



      (2)   In addition to any other powers he or she may have, any
law enforcement officer who arrests a minor for violating any of the
provisions of divisions (B)(1) or (2) above is also hereby empowered to
demand of the parent, guardian or adult having supervisory custody that the
parent, guardian or other adult come and take the minor into custody. The law
enforcement officer is also empowered to take the minor to a designated
location where arrangements can be made for a parent, guardian, an adult
having supervisory custody or other appropriate party to take the minor into
custody. Should there be a failure of the parent, guardian or other person to
take custody of the minor, the officer may then be empowered to take the
minor home.



   (E)   Separate offenses.  Each violation of any provisions of
division (B) above shall constitute a separate offense.



(2001 Code, 10-1-3)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in a public place
or in any place exposed to public view, except in an established lavatory or
toilet.



(2001 Code, 10-1-4)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  FUNERAL PICKETING; UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   The Council finds that:



      (1)   It is generally recognized that families have a
substantial interest in organizing and attending funerals for deceased
relatives;



      (2)   The interests of families in privately and peacefully
mourning the loss of deceased relatives are violated when funerals are
targeted for picketing and other public demonstrations;



      (3)   Picketing of funerals causes emotional disturbance and
distress to grieving families who participate in funerals; and



      (4)   Full opportunity exists under the terms and provisions
of this section for the exercise of freedom of speech and other
constitutional rights at times other than within one hour prior to, during
and two hours following the commencement of funerals.



   (B)   The purposes of this section are to:



      (1)   Protect the privacy of grieving families within one hour
prior to, during and two hours following the commencement of funerals; and



      (2)   Preserve the peaceful character of cemeteries,
mortuaries and churches within one hour prior to, during and two hours
following the commencement of funerals.



   (C)   As used in this section:



      (1)   FUNERAL.  The ceremonies, processions and memorial
services held in connection with the burial or cremation of the dead.



      (2)   PICKETING.  Protest activities engaged in by a person
or persons stationed within 500 feet of any entrance to a cemetery, mortuary
or church within one hour prior to, during and two hours following the
commencement of a funeral.



   (D)   It is unlawful for any person stationed within 500 feet of any
entrance to a cemetery, mortuary or church to engage in picketing within one
hour prior to, during and two hours following the commencement of a funeral.



   (E)   If any provision of this section or the application thereof to
any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions or applications of this section which can be given effect
without the invalid provisions or application. To this end the provisions of
this section are severable.



(Ord. 06-659, passed 5-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates § 130.03(B)(1), (2) or (4)
is guilty of Class 1 misdemeanor. This offense is designated as an
incorrigible offense for minors under the jurisdiction of the juvenile court.



      (2)   Any person who violates § 130.03(B)(3) shall be guilty
of a petty offense.



   (C)   A violation of § 130.05(D) is a Class 1 misdemeanor.  The
minimum fine for a first offense shall be $500 and a subsequent offense shall
be $1,000. Each day on which a violation of § 130.05(D) occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.



(2001 Code, 10-1-3)  (Am. Ord. 06-659, passed 5-25-2006)



CHAPTER 131:  NOISE REGULATIONS



Section



   131.01   Noise generally



   131.02   Prohibition of loud or unusual noise



 



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  NOISE GENERALLY.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM.  Any device, instrument or system,
whether electrical or mechanical or otherwise, for amplifying sound or for
producing or reproducing sound, including but not limited to any radio,
stereo, musical instrument, phonograph, sound or musical recorder or player,
sound truck, loud speaker or any instrument of any such kind or character.



      JAKE BRAKING.  The operation of a truck or other motor vehicle
in such a manner as to cause the engine to emit additional noise from its
exhaust or muffler system through deceleration or down shifting gears.



   (B)   Offense.  It is unlawful to play, operate or use any sound
amplification system which:



      (1)   Can be heard from a distance of 50 feet or more; or



      (2)   Annoys or disturbs the quiet, comfort or repose of any
person in the vicinity.



   (C)   Exceptions.  Division (B) above shall not apply to:



      (1)   An authorized emergency vehicle;



      (2)   A vehicle operated by a gas, electric communications or
water utility company or governmental entity;



      (3)   A vehicle used for advertising in a parade or in a
political or other special event permitted by the town; or



      (4)   An owner of such having first applied to and received
permission from the Chief of Police to operate any such sound amplification
system.



   (D)   Motor vehicles. It is unlawful for any person:



      (1)   To operate a motor vehicle which shall not at all times
be equipped with a muffler upon the exhaust thereof in good working order and
in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and it is
unlawful for any person operating any motor vehicle to use a cut out, by-pass
or similar muffler elimination appliance; and/or



      (2)   To operate a truck or other motor vehicle in such a
manner as to cause the engine to emit additional noise from its exhaust or
muffler system through deceleration or through a practice commonly known as
“Jake braking”, unless an emergency exists.



   (E)   Separate offenses. Each violation of any provisions under
divisions (B) or (D) above shall constitute a separate offense.



(2001 Code, § 10-2-1)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.02  PROHIBITION OF LOUD OR UNUSUAL NOISE.



   (A)   Offense.  It is unlawful between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., for any person, establishment, corporation or institution to allow
or cause excessive, loud or unusual noise regardless of the instrument,
device or other source from which the noise emits so long as such noise emits
from property, whether real or personal, owned or within the control, of 1 or
more persons, establishments, corporations or institutions. It shall be prima
facie evidence that the loud noise is loud, excessive or unusual if it can be
heard by a person, who has normal hearing ability, for a distance of 200
feet, or more from its source.



   (B)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Persons, establishments, corporations or institutions
who operate vehicles, devices, machinery or other apparatus while engaged in
interstate or intrastate commerce which by the nature of the activities emits
a noise the volume or nature of which cannot be controlled are exempt from
the operation of this division. 



      (2)   Emergency vehicles are exempt from the operation of this
section so long as said vehicles are actually engaged in emergency
activity.  Emergency vehicles include, but are not limited to, fire
apparatus, vehicles operated by volunteer firefighters, vehicles operated by
law enforcement agencies and vehicles operated as ambulances.



(2001 Code, § 10-2-2)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99



   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates § 131.01(B) or (D)(2) is
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor violation.



      (2)   Any person who violates § 131.01(B) above by means of
radio, stereo, boom box, phonograph, sound or musical recorder or player
shall be subject to the following minimum fines:



         (a)   Minimum $100 fine for first offense;



         (b)   Minimum $250 fine for second offense; and



         (c)   Minimum $1,000 fine for third offense.



      (3)   Any person who violates § 131.01(D)(1) is guilty of a
civil violation, having a penalty of at least $100.



(2001 Code, § 10-2-1)


Chino Valley, AZ Code of Ordinances


TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION





         151.   DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES





         152.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION





         153.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION





         154.   UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE





         155.   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS




CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION



Section




Building Codes Generally




   150.001   Adoption of International Code Council Codes



   150.002   Conformance with zoning ordinance



   150.003   Building inspection fees



   150.004   Electrical Code



   150.005   MAG standards



   150.006   Supplemental research and recommendation services



   150.007   Board of Appeals



   150.008   Manufactured housing standards



   150.009   ADA standards and regulations




Street Numbering System




   150.020   Purpose



   150.021   Definitions



   150.022   Generally



   150.023   Street naming



   150.024   Address numbers




Rights-of-Way and Grading Permits




   150.040   Purpose



   150.041   Scope



   150.042   Adoption of permit application form



   150.043   Definitions



   150.044   Enforcement



   150.045   Appeals



   150.046   Permit requirements; classes of permit



   150.047   Life of permit



   150.048   Denial of permit



   150.049   Fees



   150.050   Additional stipulations




Roadway Standards




   150.065   Compliance with code



   150.066   Rights-of-way



   150.067   Construction requirements




Underground Electric, Telephone, Cable and Communication Lines




   150.080   Definitions



   150.081   Underground utility lines



   150.082   Exceptions



   150.083   Town participation as developer



   150.084   Waiver of underground installation requirements




Mailboxes




   150.100   General



   150.101   Location



   150.102   Sizes



   150.103   Structures



   150.104   Shoulder and parking area construction



   150.105   Removal of nonconforming or unsafe mailboxes




BUILDING CODES GENERALLY




§ 150.001  ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL CODE COUNCIL CODES.



   (A)   International Building Code. That certain code entitled
International Building Code, 2012 edition, together with appendices B, C, I,
and J, published by the International Code Council, as amended by the Town of
Chino Valley Building and Technical Code Amendments - 2015 Edition is hereby
adopted as the Building Code of the town for regulating the erection,
construction, enlargement, replacement, alteration, repair, moving, removal,
demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, location, height, area and
maintenance of all buildings or structures in the town and said building code
is hereby referred to and made a part hereof as though fully set forth in
this section. Three copies of said building code shall be kept on file and
available for public use in the office of the Town Clerk and Planning and
Building Department.



 



2016 S-6 Repl.




   Building Regulations; Construction   5



   (B)   International Residential Code for one- and two-family
dwellings.  That certain code entitled International Residential Code, For
One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 Edition, together with appendices A, B,
C, H, J, L and Q, published by the International Code Council, as amended by
the Town of Chino Valley Building and Technical Code Amendments - 2015
Edition is hereby adopted as the Residential Code for one- and two-family
dwellings of the Town of Chino Valley for regulating the erection,
construction, enlargement, replacement, alteration, repair, moving, removal,
demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, location, height, area and
maintenance of all one- and two-family dwellings in the town and said
residential code is hereby referred to and made a part hereof as though fully
set forth in this section. Three copies of said residential code shall be
kept on file and available for public use in the office of the Town Clerk and
Planning and Building Department.



   (C)   International Fuel Gas Code. That certain code entitled
International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, together with appendices A, B, and
C published by the International Code Council, as amended by the Town of
Chino Valley Building and Technical Code Amendments - 2015 Edition is hereby
adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the Town of Chino Valley for regulating and
controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials,
location,  operation and maintenance or use of fuel gas systems and
gas-fired appliances and said fuel gas code is hereby referred to and made a
part hereof as though fully set forth in this section. Three copies of said
fuel gas code shall be kept on file and available for public use in the
office of the Town Clerk and Planning and Building Department.



   (D)   International Mechanical Code. That certain code entitled
International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, together with appendix A,
published by the International Code Council, as amended by the Town of Chino
Valley Building and Technical Code Amendments - 2015 Edition,  is hereby
adopted as the Mechanical Code of the Town of Chino Valley for regulating and
controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials,
location, operation and maintenance or use of heating, ventilating, cooling,
refrigeration systems, incinerators,  and other miscellaneous heat-producing
appliances in the town and said mechanical code is hereby referred to and
made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this section. Three copies of
said mechanical code shall be kept on file and available for public use in
the office of the Town Clerk and Planning and Building Department.



   (E)   International Plumbing Code. That certain code entitled
International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, together with appendices D, E and
F, published by the International Code Council, as amended by the Town of
Chino Valley Building and Technical Code Amendments - 2015 Edition is hereby
adopted as the Plumbing Code of the Town of Chino Valley for regulating and
controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, replacement, addition to,
operation and maintenance or use of plumbing systems in the town and said
plumbing code is hereby referred to and made a part hereof as though fully
set forth in this section. Three copies of said code shall be kept on file
and available for public use in the office of the Town Clerk and Planning and
Building Department.



   (F)   International Energy Conservation Code. That certain code
entitled International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, published by
the International Code Council, as amended by the Town of Chino Valley
Building and Technical Code amendments - 2015 Edition, is hereby adopted as
the Energy Conservation Code of the Town of Chino Valley for regulating and
governing energy efficient building envelopes and installation of energy
efficient mechanical, lighting, and power systems of all buildings or
structures in the town and said energy conservation code is hereby referred
to and made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this section. Three
copies of said energy conservation code shall be kept on file and available
for public use in the office of the Town Clerk and Planning and Building
Department.



(2001 Code, § 7-1-1)  (Am. Ord. 04-569, passed 2-12-2004; Am. Ord. 04-570,
passed - -; Am. Ord. 07-686, passed 5-10-2007; Am. Ord. 07-689, passed
5-10-2007; Am. Ord. 09-721, passed 7-23-2009; Am. Ord. 14-790, passed
11-18-2014)



§ 150.002  CONFORMANCE WITH ZONING ORDINANCE.



   Whenever a building permit is issued to any person or entity and a
building inspection performed, the building must conform to the provisions of
the town zoning ordinance (also referred to as the “Unified Development
Ordinance,” which was adopted and made a part of this code in § 154.01),
in addition to the provisions of this chapter.  It shall be the
responsibility of the person or entity to whom the permit is issued to comply
with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and this chapter, and any damage
resulting from the lack of conformity to the zoning ordinance and this
chapter shall be chargeable to the person or entity.



(2001 Code, § 7-1-2)  (Am. Ord. 04-569, passed 2-12-2004; Am. Ord. 07-686,
passed 5-10-2007)



§ 150.003  BUILDING INSPECTION FEES.



   The Council shall adopt a schedule of building inspection fees by
resolution. Building inspection fees relate to and are to be used in
conjunction with the relevant provisions of the various uniform codes
described in this chapter.  When inspections are required a fee shall be
charged in accordance with the schedule as established by resolution of the
Council.



(2001 Code, § 7-1-3)  (Am. Ord. 04-569, passed 2-12-2004; Am. Res. 04-690,
passed 2-26-2004)



§ 150.004  ELECTRICAL CODE.



   That certain code entitled “National Electrical Code”, 2011
edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, as amended by
the “Town of Chino Valley Building and Technical Code Amendments - 2015
Edition” is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the Town of Chino
Valley for regulating the installation, alteration and maintenance of all
electrical installations in the town and said electrical code is hereby
referred to and made a part here of as though fully set forth in this
section. Three copies of said electrical code shall be kept on file and
available for public use in the office of the Town Clerk and Planning and
Building Department.



(2001 Code, Art. 7-2)  (Am. Ord. 04-569, passed 2-12-2004; Am. Ord. 07-686,
passed 5-10-2007; Am. Ord. 07-689, passed 5-10-2007; Am. Ord. 14-790, passed
11-18-2014)



§ 150.005  MAG STANDARDS.



   Those certain documents entitled Maricopa Association of Governments
Standard Specifications and Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform
Details for Public Works Construction, 1992 edition, with appendices, adopted
by Resolution No. 512 and made a part of this chapter, the same as though the
code and appendices were specifically set forth in full herein; and at least
3 copies of the code shall be filed in the office of the Clerk and kept
available for public use and inspection.



(2001 Code, Art. 7-5)



§ 150.006  SUPPLEMENTAL RESEARCH AND RECOMMENDATION SERVICES.



   In addition to the basic codes as described in §§ 150.001 through
150.005 and Chapter 153, the Building Official may enforce standards as a
part of this chapter that are contained in any recognized research and
recommendation services, such as the International Conference of Building
Officials, or such other research and recommendation service as recommended
by the Building Official and approved by the Mayor and Council.



(2001 Code, Art. 7-6)



§ 150.007  BOARD OF APPEALS.



   Section 112 of that certain code entitled International Building Code,
2003 edition, adopted in § 150.001 of this chapter, is hereby amended in its
entirety to read as follows:




Section 112:  Board of Appeals





In order to determine the suitability of alternative materials and methods of
construction and provide for reasonable interpretations of this code, there
is hereby created a Board of Appeals of the town to consist of three (3)
members appointed by the council.  The terms of the board members shall be
set at three, two and one years. All members shall serve without pay. 
However, members of the board may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred
in connection with their duties upon authorization and ratification by the
board and approval of such expenditures by the council.




(2001 Code, Art. 7-7)



§ 150.008  MANUFACTURED HOUSING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Manufactured housing unit construction and safety standards
adopted by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
pursuant to § 7(D), Department of Housing and Urban Development Act, 42
U.S.C. § 3535(D), Title VI, Housing and Community Development Act of 1974
(42 U.S.C. § 5401) and amendments thereto are hereby adopted as manufactured
housing unit construction and safety standards for the town.



   (B)   The Building Official shall issue no building permit for the
installation of any manufactured housing unit within the town unless the
manufactured housing unit can be proven to comply with the standards set
forth in division (A) above.  This prohibition shall also apply to any
manufactured housing unit installation permit to be issued for the relocation
of a manufactured housing unit within the town.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of permit applicants to
demonstrate to the Building Official that any manufactured housing unit for
which an installation permit is requested is in compliance with the standards
set forth in division (A) above.  Proof of compliance shall be a decal
certifying that the manufactured housing unit has been inspected and
constructed in accordance with the requirements of HUD in effect at the date
of manufacture wherein the date shall not have been prior to June 15, 1976.



   (D)   All manufactured housing units placed within the town shall be
required to have skirting installed within 60 days after both the setup and
utilities have passed inspection.  It shall be the permit holder’s
responsibility to call for a final inspection from the town’s Building
Inspector after skirting is completed.  Any skirting installed pursuant to
this section shall comply with A.R.S. § 41-2155, A.A.C. R4-34-205, the
Office of Manufactured Housing Installation Standards and the town
manufactured housing standards, copies of which may be obtained from the
Chino Valley Building Department.



(2001 Code, Art. 7-8)



§ 150.009  ADA STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.



   The certain document entitled “ADA Standards and Regulations,”
dated September 15, 2010, is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter,
the same as though the document were specifically set forth in full herein;
and at least 3 copies of the document shall be filed in the office of the
Town Clerk and the office of the Building Division, and shall be kept
available for public use and inspection.



(Ord. 12-757, passed 2-28-2012)




STREET NUMBERING SYSTEM




§ 150.020  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish an organized street and
numbering system to accommodate and facilitate the orderly growth of the Town
of Chino Valley. Additionally, this system will promote public health, safety
and welfare by providing an efficient method of identifying and locating
various properties and structures within the town.



(2001 Code, § 7-9-1)



§ 150.021  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADDRESS PREFIX.  A word preceding the street name and indicating a
direction.



   ADDRESS SUFFIX.  A word following a street name, which indicates and
shall include the designated quadrant, i.e. N.W., N.E., S.W. or S.E.



   BLOCK INTERVAL.  The hundred number interval between grid lines, or
the point when the next higher hundred number is used.



   BOULEVARD or PARKWAY.  A major thoroughfare running in a diagonal
direction, rather than east-west or north-south, connecting at least 2
sections, and acting as a collector, a special scenic or park drive or
unusually wide thoroughfares in residential sections with shade trees or
shrubbery in a center median strip.



   CIRCLE.  A short street that returns to itself.



   COURT.  A permanently closed street such as a cul-de-sac.



   DRIVE.  A winding thoroughfare that is diagonal, curvilinear or
otherwise not aligned parallel to the gridlines that continue through to
other rights-of-way.



   GRID LINES.  Imaginary lines constructed approximately perpendicular
and parallel to meridian lines as defined in § 150.024.  These lines
indicate the point where block numbers change from one hundred to the next
higher hundred.  Grid lines divide each section into ten equal block
intervals on both a north-south and east-west basis.  Grid lines are used
only for the assignment of street numbers, not necessarily for street layout
purposes.



   GROUP HOUSING.  Physically separate housing units under individual or
common ownership, owner occupied or leased and served by a private drive or
easement.  The term GROUP HOUSING includes mobile home parks.



   HIGHWAY.  A designated state or federal highway.



   LANE.  A reduced right-of-way branching from a court, place or way or
a curving street of less than 1,000 feet or an uninterrupted street ending in
a cul-de-sac.



   LOOP.  A short drive that begins and ends in the same street.



   PLACE or WAY.  A cul-de-sac running in any direction less than 1,000
feet in length.



   PRIVATE DRIVE OR EASEMENT.  A vehicular pathway not designated for
general public use and through traffic, in private ownership and serving a
few structures.



   QUADRANT.



      (1)   A portion of the town that is divided by the following
division lines:



         (a)   North-south division line is Center Street.



         (b)   East-west division line is U.S. Highway 89.



      (2)   The respective quadrant designations N.W., N.E., S.W.
and S.E. shall be included in every street address.



   ROAD.  A thoroughfare that is frequently used as a secondary facility
connecting to a U.S. or state primary highway.



   STREET and AVENUE.  A thoroughfare that runs north-south or east-west.



   TRAIL or PATH.  A local street serving as a collector for 1 or more
local streets.



(2001 Code, § 7-9-2)



§ 150.022  GENERALLY.



   (A)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building
unless the building shall first have affixed thereto address numbers as
assigned in the building permit issued by the town.



   (B)   In all newly annexed areas, street addressing numbers shall be
affixed to existing buildings in accordance with § 150.024(F) within 60 days
of the effective date of the ordinance effecting the annexation.



   (C)   All new subdivisions shall be addressed in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.  No new subdivision plat shall be approved
until all proposed lots have been assigned addresses approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission. Address numbers on new buildings in such subdivision
shall be affixed in accordance with § 150.024(F).



   (D)   Private easements with 3 or more parcels or units that qualify
for an address number may be included on the street map and assigned a street
name and address number according to the provisions of this subchapter. 
However, inclusion of easements or other access paths on the street map
neither promises nor implies any maintenance services or other
responsibilities by the town.



(2001 Code, § 7-9-3)



§ 150.023  STREET NAMING.



   (A)   A map containing the street and address numbering system for
areas inside the corporate limits of the Town of Chino Valley, 3 copies of
which are on file and available for inspection in the office of the Clerk, is
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this subchapter as if fully
set out in this subchapter.  All streets and roads within the town shall be
named pursuant to this subchapter in accordance with those names shown on the
map described herein.



   (B)   As far as possible, all streets presently named prior to the
adoption of this subchapter shall retain the same names.  The names of
future streets may be assigned by the Zoning Commission from a list of
western and local historic names kept on file when desirable.



   (C)   The following rules shall be followed in assigning future
street names:



      (1)   Duplication of names.  There shall be no duplication of
street names in the town limits.  Similar sounding names are considered to
be duplication regardless of spelling. Duplication of street names within the
City of Prescott shall be avoided, if possible.



      (2)   Continuity of names.  A continuous street, or one
proposed to be continuous, should bear the same name throughout, with the
exception of the suffix, even though it changes directions.  If it is
interrupted and eventual connection is not probable, the segments shall bear
different names.



      (3)   Guidelines for acceptable names.



         (a)   Names should be pleasant sounding, appropriate,
easy to read and should add to pride of home ownership.



         (b)   Large subdivisions should use a single,
significant category of names. A small subdivision should use the same
category as the surrounding or adjacent area to help establish locational
identity.



         (c)   Prefixes are to be avoided, if possible.



         (d)   Suffix terms, including designated quadrant, that
may be utilized for future streets are listed and defined in § 150.021.



   (D)   Street name change procedure.  Citizens may request street
name changes according to the following procedures:



      (1)   Present to the Zoning Commission a petition stating the
desired change, containing the signatures of 51% by number of the property
owners affected by the change.



      (2)   The Zoning Commission shall formulate an ordinance
implementing the change, and a recommendation on the change, to the Council.



      (3)   The Council may enact the change by adopting the
ordinance.



      (4)   The following guidelines shall be considered when
renaming streets:



         (a)   Does a street have any historical reason for
having the name it has?



         (b)   Which street has the least number of houses on it
and thus would require the least number of address changes?



         (c)   Which street has had its name for the longest
period of time?



         (d)   Is the name appropriate according to the other
street names in the neighborhood?



         (e)   Which street name is used for the longest distance
or the most traveled section?



(2001 Code, § 7-9-4)



§ 150.024  ADDRESS NUMBERS.



   (A)   A “mile” shall be considered the distance between 2
consecutive section lines.  There shall be available 1,000 address numbers
per mile.  Even digit numbers shall be used on the west and north sides of
the streets, and odd digit numbers shall be used on the east and south sides
of the streets.



   (B)   For the purpose of address numbering on east-west streets,
address numbers shall increase linearly with distance from U.S. Highway 89,
the division line to be the reference meridian with an address number of 0.



   (C)   For the purpose of address numbering on north-south streets,
address numbers shall increase linearly with distance from Center Street, the
division line to be designated the reference meridian with an address number
of 0.



   (D)   Each structure of human occupancy or principal building on any
building site to which all other uses on the site are subordinate shall have
an assigned number.  Other permanent structures with enclosed floor areas
may have an assigned address number.



   (E)   The following rules shall be followed in assigning address
numbers:



      (1)   The intersection of the grid lines should approximately
and reasonably conform to the intersections of existing streets so that a
traveler can observe a distinct change, for instance, from a 300 block to a
400 block. Where there is no intersection within a long block interval, said
block interval shall be divided between 2 streets at a grid line.  Numerical
block interval changes at minor streets should be avoided where the grid does
not indicate a new block.



      (2)   If a street changes direction drastically and for a
substantial length, the numbering should be changed to reflect the
orientation with a different meridian line.



      (3)   The address numbers on parallel streets shall be
comparable except on loops and circles.



      (4)   The numbering shall allow for expansion to accommodate
future growth in the area.



      (5)   Each location where business is conducted or mail is
received shall have an address number.



      (6)   Address numbers shall be assigned to correspond with the
predominant direction of the loop or circle.  The address number assignment
shall begin with the corner nearest the appropriate meridian line and
continue around the loop in a regular manner with even numbers on the inside
and odd numbers on the outside.



      (7)   The general principle to apply when numbering diagonal
streets is to treat the street as either a north-south or an east-west street
if it is not a perfect diagonal.  If it is a perfect diagonal, an arbitrary
decision is made to treat it as a north-south or an east-west street,
maintaining consistency in neighboring areas.



      (8)    When assigning a number to a building on a corner lot,
assign a number from the street upon which the front entrance faces. Dual
addresses shall be avoided.  If a corner building has two entrances which
both look like front entrances, the decision is based on the general site
layout.  If the direction a corner structure is facing is indeterminate,
consider the street from which the number should be most readily identified
as the street upon which the structure faces.



      (9)   Apartments, rooms and offices contained within any
structure or complex shall have an assigned address number based on an
intersection point with a street.  The owner of the structure or complex
shall be responsible for assignment of appropriate numbers within the
structure or complex.



      (10)   Separate numbers should be assigned to the entrances of
a duplex house, for an upstairs apartment which has an outside entrance or
for separate buildings in the rear of other buildings.  If a commercial
enterprise that is part of a residence has a separate entrance from the
street, it may also be assigned a separate number.  The owner of the duplex
shall be responsible for the assignment of appropriate numbers to the
buildings.



      (11)   Each mobile home park shall have an assigned address
number based on an intersection point with a street which shall include
appropriate space numbers for each space within the park.  The mobile home
park owner shall be responsible for the space numbering within the park.



      (12)   The same address number is assigned for all lots and
units with primary access from a private drive or private easement based upon
point of intersection with a public thoroughfare.  All lots and units shall
further be assigned a lot/space number as part of the address.



      (13)   Rear houses and buildings hidden but plainly subsidiary
or auxiliary to a separate front unit and sharing the same vehicular entry
shall be assigned the next number in sequence to the front or main structure.



   (F)   Posting of designated address numbers.



      (1)   The owner, occupant or person in charge of any house or
building to which an address number and street name has been assigned will be
notified in writing by the town of the number assigned to the same.  Within
60 days after the receipt of such written notification from the Zoning
Commission, the owner, occupant or person in charge of a house or building to
which a number has been assigned shall affix the number in a conspicuous
manner in a conspicuous place.



      (2)   It is the duty of the owner, occupant or person in
charge thereof, upon affixing the new number, to remove any different number
which might be mistaken for or confused with the number assigned to the
structure by the Zoning Commission.



      (3)   Numerals indicating the official numbers for each
principal building or each front entrance to the building shall be posted in
a manner as to be legible and distinguishable from the street on which the
property is located according to the following standards:



         (a)   House numbers shall be large enough to be seen
easily from the street.



         (b)   House numbers shall be set on a background of a
contrasting color.



         (c)   When a house is some distance from a road or when
view of the house is blocked by trees or shrubs, house numbers shall be on a
sign attached to a tree, fence, gate or lawn stake.



         (d)   On a corner lot, the house number shall face the
street named in the address.



         (e)   House numbers shall be easily visible at night.



         (f)   House numbers shall be plain block numerals, not
script or written numbers and a minimum 5 inches in height.



      (4)   Mobile home parks and other group housing served by
private drives or easements are assigned an address number based on the
intersection point on a street, and the point shall be posted with numerals
giving that address number and the range of lot numbers served by the
easement. Additionally, the structure on the easement having an address
number shall post the designation “Lot_____” according hereto.



(2001 Code, § 7-9-5)




RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND GRADING PERMITS




§ 150.040  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to accommodate installation
and placement of objects within town rights-of-way while providing for the
public health, safety and general welfare and protecting the natural
environment. The intent is to provide for public safety, improve traffic flow
on streets and roads, and assure that such rights-of-way are free of physical
obstructions. This is accomplished by establishing construction standards,
based on sound engineering principles, to protect the physical integrity of
streets, roads and other rights-of-way as defined in § 150.043, and their
associated drainage systems.



   (B)   All work authorized and performed in public rights-of-way
shall be in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter but shall not
be construed to prevent the enforcement of other laws which, prescribe more
restrictive limitations, nor shall the provisions of this subchapter be
presumed to waive any limitations imposed by other statutes or ordinances.



(2001 Code, § 7-10-1)



§ 150.041  SCOPE.



   This subchapter sets forth rules to regulate and control all
construction and maintenance performed within a right-of-way, which, has been
dedicated and declared by the town to be public. Public rights-of- way
grading permit shall include, but not be limited to, streets, roads, alleys
and ways, highways, sidewalks, bridges and public places. It establishes the
administrative procedures for issuance of permits and provides for approval
of plans and specifications and inspection of the construction. The rules
shall pertain to, but shall not be limited to, persons, organizations, public
service utilities and franchise grantees. The rules shall apply to
construction and maintenance upon, over, along, across and under present and
future public rights-of-way.



(2001 Code, § 7-10-2)



§ 150.042  ADOPTION OF PERMIT APPLICATION FORM.



   The form entitled “application for permit to construct or maintain on
town grading and rights-of- way” is hereby adopted into this subchapter.



(2001 Code, § 7-10-3)



§ 150.043  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTRACTOR.  The applicant or contractor hired by the applicant.



   CONTRACTING AGENCY.  The applicant.



   ENGINEER.  Unless otherwise specified, shall mean the applicant’s
engineer.



   ENGINEERING and ENGINEERING PRACTICE.  The practice of engineering, as
defined in A.R.S. § 32-101.



   GENERAL PERMIT.  The permit to construct or maintain on town utilities
holding franchises with the Town of Chino Valley.



   MAG.  Maricopa Association of Governments and refers to public works
standards published by that organization.



   OPTIMUM MOISTURE.  The water content corresponding to the maximum soil
density, as defined by A.S.M.D.-698 or A.S.S.H.T.O. T-99 density curve
obtained from laboratory compaction test trials.



   OWNER.  That party, holding title to property placed within the town
rights-of-way.



   PERMIT.  The permit to construct or maintain on town rights-of-way
authorized by the Town Engineer.



   PERMITTEE.  The grantee of a permit by the Town Engineer.



   PRE-CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE CONFERENCE.  A meeting pursuant to §
150.046(C)(5).



   PROJECT PERMIT.  The permit to construct or maintain on town
rights-of-way issued to applicants for specific construction or maintenance
projects.



   PROJECT PERMIT AMENDMENT.  A modification by the Town Engineer of the
time extension requirement of the permit pursuant to § 150.047(C), and any
modification allowed by this subchapter.



   RIGHTS-OF-WAY.  Streets, roads, alleys, ways, highways, sidewalks,
bridges, utility easements, structures, grounds and places which have been
dedicated to and declared by the town to be public and permits are not
limited to public rights-of-ways.



   SOLID ROCK.  Material which results in refusal during excavation by a
backhoe with a 1-foot bucket of 55 horsepower or greater.



   STREET PAD.  Any rubber or metal device of sufficient strength,
thickness and area to protect paved surfaces from damage or deformation.



   TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN.  A plan pursuant to § 150.046(C)(7), the
details of which shall be specified by the Town Engineer.



   UTILITIES.  Any person or business providing service to the public
through the use of lines, pipes or other distribution systems.



(2001 Code, § 7-10-4)



§ 150.044  ENFORCEMENT.



   The official charged with the enforcement of this subchapter shall be
the Town Engineer.



(2001 Code, § 7-10-5)



§ 150.045  APPEALS.



   Appeals from the decision of the Town Engineer in the interpretation of
this subchapter may be taken by filing an appeal with the Town Clerk within
10 days of the decision. A copy of the appeal shall be provided to the Town
Engineer. The Town Council shall agendize the appeal for the next regular or
special meeting, hear arguments and decide the matter. The decision shall be
final.



(2001 Code, § 7-10-6)



§ 150.046  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; CLASSES OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Compliance. No person, organization, public service utility or
franchise grantee shall be issued a permit for construction and maintenance
upon, over, along, across and under present and future public rights-of-way
without first having complied with § 150.47(B) or (C) as applicable.



   (B)   Classes of permit. There shall be 2 classes of permit.



      (1)   General permit. Public service utilities and franchise
grantees may be issued a general permit by the Town Engineer. This permit
authorizes the permittee to perform each of the following types of work on a
repetitive basis.



         (a)   Above ground.



            1.   Any appurtenance located not less than 10
feet from the edge of the traveled way. NOTE: Gas meters must meet the
additional requirement of being located within 1 foot of the right- of- way
property line.



            2.   Appurtenances other than gas facilities
located less than 10 feet from the edge of the traveled way not protruding
more than 2 inches above the surface.



            3.   Emergency work as necessary to protect
health, safety and welfare of the public.



         (b)   Below ground.



            1.   Emergency work as necessary to protect
health, safety and welfare of the public.



            2.   Work done in providing Blue Stake locations
of utility lines or appurtenance.



      (2)   General permit performance criteria.



         (a)   All construction shall comply with standards
established in this subchapter.



         (b)   Each installation shall be reported by the
permittee on the Monthly Summary of Utility Rights-of-Way Work form, as in
Exhibit “E”, provided by the Town Engineer.



         (c)   The Town Engineer may request compaction testing
to verify compliance with this subchapter.



         (d)   Timeliness.



            1.   All construction and maintenance shall be
accomplished at such time and in such manner as to be least inconvenient to
the traveling public.



            2.   All work shall be performed between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. This shall not apply to
emergency work. Work in progress may be allowed to continue until the time
specified by the Town Engineer.



         (e)   The permittee shall be responsible and liable for
replacing and restoring the disturbed rights-of-way; including but not
limited to the paving, sidewalk, driveway, surfacing, planting and ground
cover; in as good condition as it was prior to disturbance. The permittee
shall not be responsible for replacing and restoring improvements that have
been disturbed in the rights-of-way, if these improvements constitute a
hazard in the rights-of-way, and the permittee has applied for and received
approval from the Town Engineer not to replace or restore the improvements.



         (f)   Work not specified by the General Permit may be
authorized under the project permit.



      (3)   Project permit. Persons, organizations, public service
utilities and franchise grantees, which apply for construction and
maintenance projects not specified by a general permit, may be issued a
project permit by the Town Engineer.



   (C)   Conditions for issuance of a project permit. A project permit
may be issued by the Town Engineer provided the applicant signs the permit
application agreeing to all of the following terms and conditions pertaining
to the permit; plus any additional conditions specified by the Town Engineer
in the project permit.



      (1)   Appurtenances. The exact location of the appurtenance
relative to the right-of-way boundary shall be submitted with the application
for a project permit.



         (a)   No valves, closures, transformers, standing pipes,
poles and the like will be allowed in any surface drainage ditch that
requires maintenance.



         (b)   All utilities will be placed in utility easements
as close to right-of-way lines as feasible.



      (2)   Lines under pavement. All service lines located below
pavement shall be not less than 30 inches below the pavement surface at any
point under the pavement, unless connecting to existing lines that are less
than 30 inches below pavement. In such cases, lines shall be no higher than
the existing lines. Lines located below pavement in solid rock, as defined in
§ 150.043, shall be not less than 24 inches below the pavement surface at
any point under the pavement, unless connecting to existing lines that are
less than 24 inches below pavement. In such cases, lines shall be no higher
than the existing lines. Lines out of pavement must be 30 inches below the
surface for maintenance purposes.



      (3)   Liability.



         (a)   The permittee shall be responsible and liable for
any disturbance, injury or damage to all rights-of-way, including but not
limited to surfacing, planting and ground cover and to utility property
below, in and above the same rights-of-way.



         (b)   The permittee shall be responsible and liable for
replacing and restoring the disturbed rights-of-way; including but not
limited to the paving, sidewalk, driveway, surfacing, planting and ground
cover; in as good condition as it was prior to disturbance. The permittee
shall specify the details of all replacement work, including any deviations
from the existing condition. The permittee shall not be responsible for
replacing or restoring improvements that constitute a significant impediment
to the maintenance of the roadway or appurtenances or that constitute a
hazard in the right-of-way; and the permittee has applied for and received
approval from the Town Engineer not to replace or repair.



         (c)   The permittee shall be responsible and liable for,
and shall hold the town harmless from: any injury or damage to any person,
animal or vehicle, which may be using the rights-of-way in a lawful manner,
caused by or arising out of the exercise of the permit. The permittee shall
be responsible and liable for all maintenance work on any property to which
he has title and possession after the construction time limit has expired.



         (d)   The permittee shall be responsible and liable for,
and shall hold the town harmless from allowing any condition to exist, which
may be a hazard or source of danger to the public.



         (e)   A certificate of insurance shall be submitted with
the permit application. When the total cost of furnishing equipment, labor
and materials exceeds $1,500. This certificate shall verify Comprehensive
General Liability coverage of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and
$2,000,000 aggregate, and shall name the town as additional named insured.
Utility companies may choose to submit a certificate of insurance upon
application for a general permit. This coverage shall be in force for a
period of 1 year from the date of issuance of the general permit.



         (f)   Applications for work that is to be performed by
licensed contractors shall include verification of licensing as required by
the state’s Registrar of Contractors. The Town Engineer may require
additional insurance, performance bonds or other bonding for large projects.



      (4)   Cost; expense.  Unless otherwise agreed, the town shall
not bear any cost or expense for construction and maintenance.



      (5)   Pre-construction and maintenance conference. The Town
Engineer may require the applicant to attend a pre-construction and
maintenance conference.



      (6)   Timeliness.



         (a)   All construction and maintenance shall be
accomplished at such time and in such manner as to be least inconvenient to
the traveling public.



         (b)   All work shall be performed between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Work in progress may be
allowed to continue until the time specified by the Town Engineer provided:



         (c)   The provisions of § 150.046(C)(6) shall not apply
to emergency work.



      (7)   Traffic and traffic control.



         (a)   Traffic adjacent to and within the construction
area shall be controlled in accordance with the “Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices” (MUTCD). The Town Engineer may require signs, flaggers,
pilot cars and other devices and methods. A control plan shall be submitted
with the application before the permit is issued.



         (b)   The permittee shall give notification to the Town
Engineer no less than 2 working days before work is to begin or before work
is to re-commence after stoppage.



         (c)   The permittee shall not partially or fully block
rights-of-way to pedestrian or vehicular traffic under any circumstances
without a valid permit. Whenever possible, 1-way traffic shall be maintained.
In no case shall blockage of emergency vehicle access be permitted.
Notification shall be given to the Chief of Police and the Chino Valley Fire
Department.



         (d)   If flaggers are needed to control traffic,
Flaggers will be certified or show proof of having training on the correct
flagging procedures, as set forth in the (Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices) M.U.T.C.D.



         (e)   When flagging, flaggers will use a stop and slow
paddle or in the case of emergencies a red 24 inches by 24 inches flag until
a stop and slow paddle can be obtained.



      (8)   Notification to the Town Engineer.



         (a)   The Town Engineer shall be notified after any
trench or excavation has been backfilled, but before placement of any
pavement courses;



         (b)   After placement of final pavement course; and



         (c)   After completion of all work.



      (9)   Routine and final inspections.



         (a)   The Town Engineer may routinely inspect work
authorized by the permit at any time.



         (b)   The Town Engineer shall perform a final inspection
of all work authorized by the permit.



         (c)   Following final inspection of all work authorized
by the permit, the Town Engineer shall determine if the completed work
conforms with the permitted work.



         (d)   In addition, the Town Engineer may request
compaction testing be performed at the expense of the contractor to verify
compliance with this subchapter.



      (10)   Actions resulting from non-compliance.



         (a)   The Town Engineer shall notify the permittee in
writing that work is not in compliance.



         (b)   If the permittee does not correct such
deficiencies within the time specified by the Town Engineer the Town Engineer
shall immediately proceed to correct the deficiencies and collect all costs
from the permittee plus 28% administration fees.



         (c)   Additional penalties may apply, pursuant to this
subchapter.



      (11)   Cancellation of permit. The Town Engineer may
immediately cancel and thereby revoke the rights provided by either a general
permit or a project permit if he or she determines that, during the life of
the permit, the permittee is conducting the work permitted in a manner so as
to endanger the public or themselves or if the work is not proceeding
acceptable to the Town Engineer.



      (12)   Removal and abandonment of facilities within the
right-of-way.



         (a)   The Town Engineer may, upon written notice,
require the permittee to remove or abandon in place as specified by the Town
Engineer, all property to which the permittee has title or which has been
rented or leased by the permittee, if the right-of-way is needed by the town.



         (b)   Whenever a permit is canceled by the Town
Engineer, the permittee shall be responsible and liable for replacing and
restoring the disturbed rights-of-way; including but not limited to the
paving, sidewalk, driveway surfacing, planting and ground cover; in as good
condition as it was prior to disturbance, pursuant to § 150.046(C)(3)(b).



(2001 Code, § 7-10-7)



§ 150.047  LIFE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   General permit. The Town Engineer shall determine the life of
the general permit, but it shall not exceed 1 year, as stated in the permit.
The Town Engineer may revoke this permit at any time based on unsatisfactory
performance.



   (B)   Project permit. Each project permit shall be in full force and
effect for 30 days from the date of issue, unless otherwise stated in the
permit.



   (C)   Time limits. The Town Engineer may determine that a specific
project may require more than 30 days for completion and may permit such time
as deemed necessary for completion. He or she may determine the necessity for
a time extension during the life of the project permit, and thereby amend the
permit.



   (D)   Time for excavation, backfillinq and compaction of trenches
across rights-of-way. The Town Engineer shall determine time for excavation,
backfilling and compaction across rights-of-way



(2001 Code, § 7-10-8)



§ 150.048  DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   The Town Engineer shall deny a project permit if he determines the
proposed work will adversely affect the integrity of public rights-of-way or
impair public safety. Applicants may appeal any such decisions pursuant to §
150.045.



(2001 Code, § 7-10-9)



§ 150.049  FEES.



   (A)   (1)   At the issuance of a permit, the Town Engineer shall
collect the permit fees set forth by resolution from time to time. The fees
shall be paid in lawful money of the United States or by collectable draft or
check. Should the draft or check be uncollectible within 15 days, the permit
shall be null and void.



      (2)   (a)   Inspection fees shall be waived for utilities
holding a general permit.



         (b)   Inspection fees for 1 inspection are included in
the project permit fees.



   (B)   Other charges:



 



Special fees
 
At the issuance of a permit, the Town Engineer shall collect the special fees
set forth in the Town of Chino Valley Ord. 411 Other Engineering Services.
Special fees will be withheld for Utilities that have Franchise agreements
with the Town of Chino Valley.


Samples and testing of materials
 
The permittee shall be responsible to insure that, when so required by the
permit, he or she shall employ an independent testing laboratory to test all
physical materials, at his cost, pursuant to § 106.2 of MAG specifications.


Use of explosives
 
The permittee shall be responsible to insure that a permit for blasting is
obtained from the Chino Valley Fire Department and the Town Engineer.


Preservation of property
 
The permittee shall be responsible to insure that existing landscaping shall
be preserved and special care given to protect trees and large shrubbery, in
accordance with § 150.046(C)(3)(b). The permittee shall also be responsible
to insure that property protection shall be in accordance with MAG § 201.2.


Backfilling and compacting shall be an approved 1-sack slurry concrete mix
from the bottom of pavement to 6 inches above pipe.


All pipes and lines shall be located pursuant to § 150.050(E)(1).


Weather and moisture condition limitations for asphaltic concrete.


Asphalt concrete shall be deposited only when the sub grade surface is dry,
and when the ambient    temperature in the shade is sixty- (60) degrees
Fahrenheit and is rising.


All pavement and concrete repair shall be approved by the Town Engineer.


Variances may be granted by the Town Engineer in accordance with acceptable
engineering standards and practices.


Traffic control measures
 
Traffic control measures shall be in accordance with specifications in the
M.U.T.C.D. Devices and measures to adequately control vehicular and
pedestrian traffic adjacent to and within the construction area shall be
provided and maintained.




 



(2001 Code, § 7-10-10)



§ 150.050  ADDITIONAL STIPULATIONS.



   (A)   Soil boring priority. Soil boring shall be required on all
roads unless the Town Engineer gives a variance.



   (B)   Samples for testing. When the permit does not require
materials testing, the Town Engineer may request and obtain materials samples
in suitable quantities from the permittee for testing to determine compliance
with specifications. The town shall charge the costs to the permittee.



   (C)   Site conditions. The permittee shall conduct the project to
conform with the following stipulations:



      (1)   Rubber-tired equipment shall be operated on paved
surfaces except that, when street pads, as defined in § 150.043, are
employed to protect asphalt surfaces, the following shall apply:



         (a)   Crawler equipment with street pads may be utilized
with written permission of the Town Engineer.



         (b)   Backhoes and similar equipment with pods shall
utilize street pads as defined in § 150.043.



      (2)   Site shall be maintained during the life of the permit
in a clean and orderly condition.



      (3)   Trenches across roadways shall be bridged by suitable
plate, approved by the Town Engineer, whenever work is stopped overnight.



      (4)   All signs temporarily moved shall be reinstalled and all
signs damaged during construction shall be replaced. Arrangements may be made
with the Town Engineer to have these replaced and the costs charged to the
permittee by the town.



      (5)   Prior to final inspection by the Town Engineer, the
permittee shall clear pavement surfaces, dress shoulders, clean surfaces; and
remove debris, garbage, unused native and manufactured materials and similar
objects, which are not an integral part of the rights-of-way; to the
satisfaction of the Town Engineer.



   (D)   Road closures. All trenches shall be closed at the end of each
workday.



   (E)   Compliance.  The Town Engineer in compliance with good
engineering practice may waive portions of theses requirements on a
case-by-case basis.



(2001 Code, § 7-10-11)




ROADWAY STANDARDS




§ 150.065  COMPLIANCE WITH CODE.



   Any person, contractor, firm, utility company or other entity involved
in the design or construction of roads or streets within the town shall
comply with standards set forth herein.  Further, and in addition thereto,
the standards and requirements of this subchapter shall be complied with.



(2001 Code, § 7-11-1)



§ 150.066  RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   (A)   The minimum widths of rights-of-way for roadways within the
town shall be as follows:



      (1)   Arterial roads.  Rights-of-way for arterial roads shall
be 100 feet wide.



      (2)   Residential collectors.  Rights-of-way for residential
collectors shall be 68 feet wide.



      (3)   Residential streets.  Rights-of-way for residential
streets shall be 50 feet wide.



   (B)   Lands for rights-of-way shall be deeded to the town and
recorded prior to any construction being accomplished.



(2001 Code, § 7-11-2)



§ 150.067  CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Prior to construction of any base or subbase, the subbase
shall be scarified and compacted to a minimum depth of 6 inches.  Compaction
shall be a minimum of 95% density.



   (B)   Base course shall consist of a minimum depth of 6 inches of
Aggregate Base Course (ABC) or Mineral Aggregate (MA) compacted to a minimum
of 95% density.  The ABC or MA shall be shaped to the width and cross slope
of the approved typical section.  Placement of any select material and
minimum depth requirements shall be approved by the Road Department.  The
ABC shall meet the following gradation specifications:



 


GRADATION SPECIFICATIONS



 
Percentage by Weight Passing Sieve


Sieve Sizes (Square Openings)
 
Select Material
 
 
Aggregate Base


 
Type A
 
Type B
 




3 inches
 
100
 
 


1-1/2 inches
 
 
100
 


1-1/8 inches
 
 
 
100


No. 4
 
30–75
 
30–70
 
38–65


No. 8
 
20–60
 
20–60
 
20–60


No. 30
 
10–40
 
10–40
 
10–40


No. 200
 
0–12
 
0–12
 
3–12


P.I. Maximum
 
5
 
5
 
5




 



   (C)   All materials in the subbase or base course shall be placed
using moisture and density control in accordance with good engineering
practice and approval by the Road Department.  Prior to the acceptance of
roads for maintenance by the town, the contractor shall provide the town with
engineering certifications of materials used and density testing.



   (D)   A dust free surface consisting of tack or prime coat penetrant
asphalt and at least a single coarse bituminous surface treatment shall be
provided.  The Road Department shall have the authority to approve or
disapprove the design of the dust free surface and structural section
(base/subbase).



   (E)   (1)   Engineering calculations shall be submitted for all
drainage required such as but not limited to:



         (a)   Natural watercourses;



         (b)   Subgrade;



         (c)   Side ditches;



         (d)   Surface runoff; and



         (e)   Culvert sizes.



      (2)   Minimum cross culverts shall be 18 inches diameter. 
Minimum driveway culverts shall be 12 inches diameter.



   (F)   All computations and certifications required shall be
performed and sealed by an engineer licensed to practice by the Arizona State
Board of Technical Registration.



   (G)   (1)   The typical section minimum roadway for residential
and collector streets shall be:







 



      (2)   Notes:



         (a)   ABC material shall be compacted to 95% density.



         (b)   All driveways shall have minimum 12 inches C.M.P.
where roadway ditch evidenced.



         (c)   Maximum grade within 100 feet from intersection =
4%.



         (d)   Cross culverts for existing water courses shall be
18 inches minimum.  Culvert size calculations shall be required.



         (e)   Structural section to be determined by good
engineering practice.



(2001 Code, § 7-11-3)




UNDERGROUND ELECTRIC, TELEPHONE, CABLE AND COMMUNICATION LINES




§ 150.080  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEVELOPER.  The individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, syndication, trust or other legal entity (other than the serving
utility) that is responsible for the development of land thereby creating a
demand for service or causes alteration of existing services.



   DISTRIBUTION FEEDER.  That portion of the distribution system feeding
from a distribution substation to a specific load area and having a capacity
of over 3 MVA and less than 12.5 KV.



   EXISTING UTILITY POLES AND WIRES.  The poles and wires and other
related facilities that are in place and in operation as of the effective
date of this subchapter and including repairs, replacements, additions,
enlargements or betterments, changes, improvements hereinafter made to
maintain or increase service capabilities of existing utility poles, wires,
service drops and other facilities, but it does not include extensions made
to existing distribution lines.



   TRANSMISSION LINE.  An electric line used for the bulk transmission of
electricity between generating or receiving points and major substations or
delivery points, having a rating greater than 12,500 volts.



   NEW UTILITY POLES AND WIRES.  Poles and structures, wires, cables,
transformers and other related facilities used in or as a part of the
distribution or transmission of electricity or in the transmission of
telephone, telegraph, radio or television communications that are not in
place as of the effective date of this subchapter and constituting new
extensions made from existing poles and wires.



   UNDERGROUND POLICY.  The then current policy governing payment of the
cost of undergrounding distribution feeders and service facilities as
established by the serving utility.



(2001 Code, § 7-12-1)



§ 150.081  UNDERGROUND UTILITY LINES.



   Except as exempted in § 150.082, all existing and new utility and
telephone lines, electric utility distribution lines, cable television lines
and all other communication and utility lines adjacent to or within new
residential, commercial or industrial subdivisions or other areas to be
developed within the town shall be installed underground at the time of
development of the property as part of the required off-site and on-site
improvements. The developer of the property shall be responsible for the
costs of the underground construction in accordance with the underground
policy of the serving utility.



(2001 Code, § 7-12-2)



§ 150.082  EXCEPTIONS.



   The following construction may occur without meeting the underground
installation requirements:



   (A)   Transmission lines and betterment to existing utilities
together with related switch yards, substations and related equipment;



   (B)   Repair or improvement of existing utility poles and wires by
the serving utility, provided that activity is not initiated on request of or
by a developer;



   (C)   Installation of new utility poles and wires or relocation of
existing utility poles and wires not initiated by a developer;



   (D)   Pad-mounted transformers or pull boxes, service terminals,
pedestal type telephone terminals, telephone splice closures or similar
on-the-ground facilities attached to existing overhead facilities which are
used for the purpose of connecting an underground system with the existing
facilities;



   (E)   Temporary service facilities, such as facilities to furnish
emergency service during an outage, facilities to provide service to
construction sites or other service of a limited duration, such as to a fair,
carnival, outdoor exhibit or function where the facilities will be installed
for a temporary period only; and



   (F)   New service drops or improvement of existing service drops
from existing overhead lines to single family residential customers, except
when underground service is required by the Town of Chino Valley subdivision
regulations.



(2001 Code, § 7-12-3)



§ 150.083  TOWN PARTICIPATION AS DEVELOPER.



   In the event of relocation, improvement or repair of existing utility
poles and wires or installation of new utility poles and wires by the serving
utility, the town may elect to act as a developer and participate in the cost
of underground installation in accordance with the underground installation
policy of the utility. Prior to commencing any relocation, improvement or
installation work within the town, the serving utility shall notify the Town
Engineer of the pending action. Within 30 days of receipt of notification,
the town will determine its intent to act as developer and notify the utility
of the decision.



(2001 Code, § 7-12-4)



§ 150.084  WAIVER OF UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Town Council, upon petition by a developer, may waive or
modify the requirements for underground installation of existing or new
utility lines based on the findings that the strict enforcement of this
section would constitute an undue hardship on the developer and the minimal
benefits would accrue to the town.



   (B)   The Council’s decision shall include but not be limited to
review and analysis of the following factors:



      (1)   The extent of existing overhead lines and poles in the
immediate area of the project;



      (2)   The location and heights of the poles and wires and
their relation to present or future roads;



      (3)   The crossing of such lines over much-traveled highways
or streets;



      (4)   The proximity of such lines to schools, churches,
commercial areas or other places where people congregate;



      (5)   The aesthetic appearance of that portion of the town
should the lines be installed overhead instead of underground;



      (6)   The impact on future development expected in the area;
and



      (7)   The practicality and feasibility of underground
installation with due regard for the comparative costs between underground
and overhead installations; however, a mere showing that an underground
installation is more costly than overhead shall not be the sole criteria for
granting a waiver.



(2001 Code, § 7-12-5)




MAILBOXES




§ 150.100  GENERAL.



   (A)   A mailbox or newspaper delivery box, hereafter referred to as
mailbox, shall not be allowed to exist on the town’s right-of -way if it
interferes with the safety of the traveling public or the function,
maintenance or operation of the street, road or highway system.



   (B)   The location and construction of the mailboxes shall conform
to the rules and regulations of the U.S. Postal Service as well as to
standards established in this code.



   (C)   A mailbox installation that conforms to the criteria in this
subchapter shall be acceptable unless the Town Engineer determines that it
interferes with the safety of the traveling public or the function,
maintenance or operation of the street, road or highway system.



   (D)   Prior to installing a mailbox in the town right-of-way, the
property owner (or his or her agent) shall make a written application to the
Town Engineer. Written permission from the town is required prior to
installation of the mailbox.



   (E)   Where discretionary action is permitted by the postmaster for
location or construction of a mailbox, the property owner (or his or her
agent) shall make application to the postmaster. Written permission from the
postmaster is required prior to installation of the mailbox.



(2001 Code, § 7-13-1)



§ 150.101  LOCATION.



   (A)   Access.  A mailbox shall not be permitted where access is
obtained from the lanes of Highway 89 or where access is otherwise prohibited
by law or regulations.



   (B)   Placement.  A mailbox shall be placed on the right-hand side
of the roadway, in the direction of the delivery route, except on 1-way
streets where they may be placed on the left-hand side. The bottom of the
mailbox shall be set at an elevation established by the U.S. Postal Service,
generally between 36 inches and 4 feet above the roadway surface.



   (C)   Normal offset.  The roadside face of the mailbox shall be
offset from the edge of the traveled way a minimum distance of the greater 1
of the following:



      (1)   Eight feet where no paved shoulder exists.



      (2)   The width of the all-weather shoulder present plus 8 to
12 inches.



      (3)   The width of an all-weather turnout as specified by the
Town Engineer, plus 8 to 12 inches.



   (D)   Offset on curbed streets.  The roadside face of the mailbox
shall be sent back to a distance of between 6 and 12 inches.



   (E)   Driveway entrance.  Mailboxes at driveway entrances shall be
placed on the near side of the driveway in the direction of the delivery
route.



   (F)   Intersecting street or road. When a mailbox is located at an
intersection, it shall be placed a minimum distance of 100 feet beyond the
center of the intersecting street in any direction of the delivery route.
When the average daily traffic on the intersecting street exceeds 400
vehicles per day, the distance shall be 200 feet.



   (G)   Guardrail.  Where a mailbox is to be installed in the
vicinity of an existing guardrail, it shall be placed behind the guardrail
unless application is made and written permission received from the Town
Engineer as specified in § 150.100.



(2001 Code, § 7-13-2)



§ 150.102  SIZES.



   The following sizes of mailboxes as authorized by the U.S. Postal
Service shall be installed in the town.



   (A)   19-inch length — 6.5-inch width — 8.5-inch height.



   (B)   21-inch length — 8.8-inch width — 10.5-inch height.



   (C)   23.5-inch length — 11.5-inch width — 13.5-inch height.



(2001 Code, § 7-13-3)



§ 150.103  STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Materials.  Mailboxes shall be of light sheet metal,
fiberglass or plastic construction and conform to the requirements of the
U.S. Postal Service. Newspaper delivery boxes shall be of light sheet metal
or plastic construction and of minimum dimensions suitable for holding a
newspaper.



   (B)   Support.



      (1)   Number of boxes.  No more than 2 mailboxes shall be
mounted on a support structure unless the support structure and mailbox
arrangement have been shown to be safe by crash testing as conducted by the
Federal Highway Administration or the Arizona Department of Transportation.
Lightweight newspaper delivery boxes may be mounted below the mailbox on the
side of the mailbox support.



      (2)   Concrete foundation.  Mailbox supports shall be placed
in native soil or in crushed aggregate base materials whenever these
materials provide adequate support. Mailbox supports shall not be placed in
concrete unless necessary for support. Mailbox supports shall not be set in
concrete placed at depth any greater than 12 inches.



      (3)   Post.  A single 4 inch by 4-1/2 inch diameter wooden
post or metal post with a strength no greater than 2 inch diameter standard
strength steel pipe, and embedded no more than 24 inches into the ground
shall be acceptable as a mailbox support. A metal post shall not be fitted
with an anchor plate, but it may have an anti-twist device that extends no
greater than 10 inches below the ground surface.



      (4)   Attachment.  The post-to-mailbox attachment details
shall be of sufficient strength to prevent the mailbox from separating from
the post top if the installation is struck by a vehicle. The minimum spacing
between the centers of the support posts shall be 3/4 of the height of the
post above the ground line.



(2001 Code, § 7-13-4)



§ 150.104  SHOULDER AND PARKING AREA CONSTRUCTION.



   It shall be the responsibility of the postal patron to inform the Town
Engineer of any new or existing mailbox installation where shoulder
construction of the town maintained street is inadequate to allow all-
weather vehicular access to the mailbox.



(2001 Code, § 7-13-5)



§ 150.105  REMOVAL OF NONCONFORMING OR UNSAFE MAILBOXES.



   Any mailbox that is found to violate the public safety intent of this
subchapter shall be declared unacceptable and removed by the postal patron
upon notification by the Town Engineer. At the discretion of the Town
Engineer, based on an assessment of hazard to the public, the postal patron
shall be granted not less than 24 hours, nor more than 30 days, to remove an
unacceptable mailbox.  After the specified removal period has expired, the
unacceptable mailbox shall be removed by the town at the postal patron’s
expense.



(2001 Code, § 7-13-6)



CHAPTER 151:  DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES



Section



   151.01   Purpose and intent



   151.02   Definitions



   151.03   Additional provisions



   151.04   Appropriation of development fee funds, refunds, appeals,
exemptions and waivers



   151.05   Fees adopted by reference



   151.06   Delayed effective date



   151.07   Adjustment



   151.08   Automatic annual adjustment



§ 151.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purposes and intent of these development fee procedures are:



   (A)   To establish uniform procedures for the position, calculation,
collection, expenditure and administration of development fees imposed on new
development;



   (B)   To implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Chino
Valley General Plan relating to assuring that new development contributes its
fair share towards the costs of public facilities reasonably necessitated by
the new development;



   (C)   To ensure that new development is reasonably benefitted by the
provisions of the public facilities provided with proceeds of development
fees;



   (D)   To ensure that all applicable legal standards and criteria are
properly incorporated in these procedures;



   (E)   To ensure that all applicable procedures and requirements of
A.R.S. § 9-463.05 have been met.



(2001 Code, Art. 16-1)  (Am. Ord. 04-588, passed 12-9-2004)



§ 151.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.  Any person who files an application with the town for a
building permit.



   BUILDING PERMIT.  A permit required for the erection, construction,
modification, addition to or moving of any building, structure or use in the
incorporated area of the town.



   DEDICATION.  Conveyance of land to the town for public facility
purposes by deed, other instrument of conveyance, or by dedication, on a duly
filed and recorded plat or short plat.



   DEVELOPMENT FEES.  A fee adopted pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05 which
is imposed on new development on a pro rata basis in connection with and as a
condition of the issuance of a building permit and which is calculated to
defray all or a portion of the costs of the public facilities required to
accommodate new development at town-designated level of service (LOS)
standards and which reasonably benefits the new project.



   DEVELOPMENT FEE ACCOUNTS.  The account(s) established for each type of
public facilities for which impact fees are collected.  The accounts shall
be established pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



   DEVELOPMENT FEE DISTRICT.  A defined geographic area or sub-area of
the town and/or its planning area within which particular public facilities
are provided and in which development fees will be collected, appropriated
and expended for public facilities serving new development within such area
or sub-area.



   DEVELOPMENT FEE APPROPRIATION.  Includes amounts appropriated in
connection with the planning, design, engineering and construction of public
facilities; planning, legal, appraisal and other costs related to the
acquisition of land, financing and development costs; the costs of compliance
with purchasing procedures and applicable administrative and legal
requirements; and all other costs necessarily incident to provision of the
public facility.



   DWELLING UNITS.  A room or group of rooms within a building containing
cooking accommodations and designed to be used for living purposes.  Each
apartment unit, mobile home or mobile home space, or travel trailer or travel
trailer space shall be considered a dwelling unit.



      (1)   SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING UNIT.  A dwelling unit
designed and used only by 1 family and which unit is physically separated
from any other dwelling unit.



      (2)   MOBILE HOME DWELLING UNIT.  A dwelling unit typically
designed and used only by 1 family, which may be pre-manufactured and
delivered to a building site for connection to utilities. This dwelling unit
may include travel trailer units as well.



      (3)   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT.  A dwelling unit typically
attached to another dwelling unit, such as an apartment, duplex, townhouse,
single-family attached dwelling unit or mobile home dwelling unit located
within a mobile home park.



      (4)   ALL OTHER DWELLING UNITS.  A dwelling unit not
described in divisions (1) through (3) above.



   EXISTING USE.  Development which physically exists or for which the
owner holds a valid building permit as of the effective date of this chapter.



   GENERAL PLAN.  A generalized coordinated land use policy statement
adopted by the Council and ratified by voters of the town pursuant to A.R.S.
§ 9-461.05.



   GOVERNMENT IMPACT FEES.  A fee imposed on all new residential and
nonresidential development to fund the proportionate share of the costs of
municipal office space, town owned and operated vehicles and major capital
equipment.



   LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS).  An established minimum functional level of
public facilities that must be provided per unit of demand or other
appropriate measure of need.



   LIBRARY IMPACT FEES.  A fee imposed on new residential and
nonresidential development to fund the proportionate share of the costs of
land acquisition for libraries; library facilities, including construction,
furniture, fixtures, equipment and technology; and collection materials
including, but not limited to books, reference materials, audio and visual
materials, periodicals and others.



   NEW DEVELOPMENT.  Any construction or expansion of a building or
structure, or any changes in the use of the land that creates additional
demand for public facilities or services (such as a change which results in
an increase in the number of vehicle trips to and from the property, building
or structure), and requires a development permit from the town.



   PARKS AND RECREATION IMPACT FEES.  A fee imposed on new residential
and nonresidential development to fund the proportionate share of the costs
of community parks; open space, including, but not necessarily limited to,
open space lands, agricultural land preservation, purchase of land,
development rights and/or construction easements and trails; and recreation
facilities and improvements.



   POLICE IMPACT FEES.  A fee imposed on all new residential and
nonresidential development to fund the proportionate share of the costs of
public safety buildings and facilities, communication systems, vehicles and
major capital equipment.



   PUBLIC FACILITIES OR SERVICE.  Public improvements, facilities or
services necessitated by new development, including, but not limited to,
water resources, transportation, police facilities, public works, fire and
emergency medical services, community facilities, municipal facilities, water
facilities, sewer facilities, flood control and drainage, solid waste
disposal, open space, parks, utilities and educational facilities.



   ROAD IMPACT FEES.  A fee imposed on all new residential and
nonresidential development to fund the proportionate share of the costs of
transportation improvements and new roads designed to solve
congestion-related problems that are anticipated from increased traffic
demands resulting from new development, and including improvements to minor
arterials and/or collectors needed for access and traffic mobility, but
excluding project-specific traffic and transportation improvements such as
turn lanes, individual traffic signals for the benefit of a specific
development project, and the like.



   TOWN. The Town of Chino Valley.



(2001 Code, Art. 16-2)  (Am. Ord. 04-588, passed 12-9-2004)



§ 151.03  ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   This chapter and the procedures established shall remain in
effect unless and until repealed, amended or modified by council in
accordance with applicable state law and the town code, ordinances and
resolutions.



   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Previously issued building permits.



      (2)   Previous payment of development fees.



      (3)   No net increase in dwelling units-No development fee
shall be imposed on any new residential development which does not add a new
dwelling unit.



      (4)   No increase in public facilities-No development fee
shall be imposed on a use, development, project, structure, building, fence,
sign, or other activity, whether or not a building permit is required, which
does not result in an increase in the demand for public facilities.



      (5)   Development projects which are the subject of a
development agreement containing provisions that are in conflict with this
ordinance, but only to the extent of the conflict or inconsistency.



      (6)   Development by other governmental entities, school
districts or charter schools.  At the option of the Council, the town may
enter into intergovernmental agreements with governmental agencies to waive
town development fees and building permit fees.  Governmental agencies
include, without limitation, federal and state agencies, towns, cities,
colleges, universities and emergency response entities.  Pursuant to A.R.S.
§ 9-500.18, no development fee shall be imposed on school districts or
charter schools except for those fees assessed for streets, water and sewer
utility functions.



(2001 Code, Art. 16-3)  (Am. Ord. 04-588, passed 12-9-2004)



§ 151.04  APPROPRIATION OF DEVELOPMENT FEE FUNDS, REFUNDS, APPEALS,
EXEMPTIONS AND WAIVERS.



   (A)   The town, for each category of public facility for which
development fees are imposed, shall establish a development fee account. 
The account shall clearly identify the category, account or fund for which
the development fee has been imposed.



   (B)   Sub-accounts may be established for individual development fee
districts.  All development fees collected by the town shall be deposited
into the appropriate development fee account or sub-account, which shall be
interest bearing.  All interest earned on monies deposited to the account
shall be credited to and shall be considered funds of the account.  The
funds of each account shall be capable of being accounted for separately from
all other town funds, over time.  The town shall establish and implement
necessary accounting controls to ensure that the development fee funds are
properly deposited, accounted for and appropriated in accordance with this
chapter, A.R.S. § 9-463.05, and any other applicable legal requirements.



   (C)   Development fees shall be appropriated only: 



      (1)   For the particular public facility for which they were
imposed.



      (2)   Within the development fee district where collected
unless the development fee funds will be appropriated for a public facility
necessitated by or serving new development.



   (D)   Development fee funds may be appropriated for a public
facility located outside of the district where collected only if the demand
for the public facility is generated in whole or in part by the new
development.



   (E)   The town shall each year identify public facility projects
anticipated to be funded in whole or in part with development fees.  The
council may include development fee-funded public facilities in the town’s
annual budget and capital improvements program or at any other time
throughout the year, as deemed necessary.  The council shall verify that
adequate development fee funds are or will be available from the appropriate
development fee account for the particular public facility.



   (F)   Eligibility for refund.



      (1)   An applicant who has paid a development fee for a new
development for which the necessary building permit has expired or which the
building permit has been revoked may be eligible to apply for a refund of
development fees paid.



      (2)   An applicant who has paid a development fee for a new
development for which a building permit has been issued, and pursuant to
which construction has been initiated, but which construction is abandoned
prior to completion and issuance of certificate of occupancy, shall not be
eligible for a refund.



      (3)   Applicant must request the refund in writing and must do
so within 30 days following the expiration.  Full documentation must be
provided along with any documentary evidence.  The town manager or
designee(s) shall review the application and information provided that is
deemed relevant, and make a determination as to whether a refund is due. 
Additionally, applicant must be the property owner or designated agent of the
property owner.  Proof of fees paid must be provided with the request for
refund.  The town shall pay no interest on the funds refunded.



         (a)   A 5% administrative fee shall be deducted from the
amount of any refund granted and shall be retained by the town to defray the
administrative expenses associated with the processing of a refund
application.



         (b)   The town may, at its option, make refunds of
development fees direct payment, by offsetting the refunds against other
development fees due for the same category of public facilities for new
development on the same property, or by other means subject to agreement with
the property owner.



   (G)   An appeal from any decision of a town official pursuant to
this chapter shall be made to the council by filing a written appeal with the
Town Clerk within 30 days following the decision which is being appealed;
provided, however, that if notice of appeal is accompanied by a cash bond or
letter of credit in a form satisfactory to the Town Attorney and the Finance
Director in an amount equal to the development fee calculated to be due, a
building permit may be issued to the new development.  The filing of an
appeal shall not stay the imposition or the collection of the development fee
calculated by the town unless a cash bond or other sufficient surety has been
provided.



      (1)   The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to
demonstrate that the decision of the town is erroneous.



      (2)   All appeals shall detail the specific grounds therefor
and all other relevant information and shall be filed on a form provided by
the town for such purposes.



   (H)   Petitions for exemptions or waivers from specific development
fee shall be filed with the Town Manager or designee and must be done so in
writing.



   (I)   Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the town's authority
or ability to enter into development agreements pursuant to A.R.S. §
9-500.05 with applicants for new development who may provide for dedication
of land, payments in lieu of development fees, or actual infrastructure
improvements.  The development agreements may allow offsets against
development fees for contributions made or to be made in the future in cash,
or by taxes or assessments or dedication of land, or by actual construction
of all or part of a public facility by the affected property owner.



(2001 Code, Art. 16-4)  (Am. Ord. 04-588, passed 12-9-2004)



§ 151.05  FEES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   Development impact fees for police.  New construction within
the town limits shall be assessed a development impact fee for police.



   (B)   Development impact fees for library.  New construction within
the town limits shall be assessed a development impact fee for library.



   (C)   Development impact fees for parks and recreation.  New
construction within the town limits shall be assessed a development impact
fee for parks and recreation.



   (D)   Development impact fees for general government.  New
construction within the town limits shall be assessed a development impact
fee for general government.



   (E)   Development impact fees for roads.  New construction within
the town limits shall be assessed a development impact fee for roads.



(2001 Code, Art. 16-5)  (Ord. 507, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 04-588, passed
12-9-2004)



§ 151.06  DELAYED EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The effective date of Ord. 507 shall be from and after September 1,
2002.



(2001 Code, Art. 16-6)  (Am. Ord. 04-588, passed 12-9-2004)



§ 151.07  ADJUSTMENT.



   For the period from September 1, 2002 through June 30, 2003 the
development impact fees shall be as set forth above.  Thereafter, the amount
of the development impact fees shall be adjusted by the Finance Director in
the manner set forth herein.  Development impact fees shall be payable prior
to issuance of a building permit.



(2001 Code, Art. 16-7)  (Am. Ord. 04-588, passed 12-9-2004)



§ 151.08  AUTOMATIC ANNUAL ADJUSTMENT.



   On July 1 of each year, commencing in 2003, the amount of the
development impact fees to be paid to the town pursuant to this chapter shall
be increased by the percentage change in the annual average of the ENR Index
between the prior 2 calendar years.  The Finance Director shall make the
required calculation by April 1 of each year, and the amount of the
development impact fees for the next 12 month period beginning July 1 of that
year, as calculated by the Finance Director and reviewed by the Town Manager,
shall then be fixed by the Finance Director based upon such calculation,
without the necessity of further action by the Council.  In no event shall
the amount of the development impact fees be reduced based upon a change in
the ENR Index.  No later than 30 days after the development impact fees are
adjusted each year as provided in this section, the Town Clerk shall cause to
be published a public notice setting forth the amount of the adjusted
development impact fees. The notice shall be published 1 time in a newspaper
of general circulation in the town, provided, however, that the failure of
the Town Clerk to cause the notice to be published shall not affect the
validity of the adjustment to the development impact fees as made by the
Finance Director pursuant to this section.  In the event the ENR Index
information for the prior calendar years is unavailable by April 1, the
development impact fees as previously fixed for the prior fiscal year (July 1
to June 30) shall continue in effect until such time as the ENR Index for the
prior years is available and the finance director makes the required
calculation.



(2001 Code, Art. 16-8)  (Am. Ord. 04-588, passed 12-9-2004)



CHAPTER 152:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



   152.01   2019 Flood Prevention Ordinance adopted by reference



§ 152.01  2019 FLOOD PREVENTION ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   That certain document entitled “Town of Chino Valley Chapter 152
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance dated January 8, 2019 (the “2019 Flood
Prevention Ordinance”), is hereby incorporated by reference and made a part
of this code as if fully set forth herein. At least one paper and one
electronic copy of the ordinance shall be kept on file in the office of the
Town Clerk and open for public inspection during normal business hours.



(Ord. 2019-863, passed 1-8-2019)



CHAPTER 153:  FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



Section



   153.01   International Fire Code adopted



§ 153.01  INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED.



   That certain document entitled International Fire Code, 2012 Edition,
together with appendices A through I, published by the International Code
Council, as amended by the Chino Valley Fire District 2012 International Fire
Code Amendments is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the Town of Chino
Valley to regulate and govern the safeguarding of life and property from fire
and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life and
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises and said fire code is
hereby referred to and made a part hereof as though fully set forth in this
section. Three copies of said fire code shall be kept on file and available
for public use in the office of the Town Clerk and Community Development
Department.



(2001 Code, Art. 7-14)  (Am. Ord. 04-569, passed 2-12-2004; Am. Ord. 14-791,
passed 11-18-2014)



CHAPTER 154:  UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE



Section



   154.01   Regulations adopted by reference



§ 154.01  REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



Note: Unified Development Ordinance is maintained in a separate volume at:
www.amlegal.com



   That certain code entitled the “Unified Development Ordinance of the
Town of Chino Valley” is hereby incorporated by reference and made a part
of this code as if fully set forth herein. At least three copies of the code
shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk, and kept available for
public use and inspection during normal business hours.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



CHAPTER 155:  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS



Section



   155.01   Purpose



   155.02   Agreements optional



   155.03   Form of agreements



   155.04   General requirements



   155.05   Offset



   155.06   Developer



§ 155.01  PURPOSE.



   Inasmuch as it is often in the public interest to extend public capital
improvements or infrastructure to undeveloped areas in the town, or for one
development to size certain public capital improvements or infrastructure
larger than would otherwise be necessary for the development itself (so as to
better accommodate nearby development), the Town Manager or his or her
designee is hereby authorized to specify that developers either extend
certain improvements off-site to connect with existing improvements or
“upsize” certain on-site or off-site improvements (at developer’s cost)
so as to facilitate connection thereto by other developments.



(Ord. 05-627, passed 10-27-2005)



§ 155.02  AGREEMENTS OPTIONAL.



   In the event the Town Manager or his or her designee specifies such
extensions of off-site improvements or such upsizing of on-site or off-site
improvements, nothing herein shall preclude the town from entering into
agreements with developers to reimburse from buy-in fees charged to other
developers over time some or all of the additional costs involved.  However,
it is expressly understood that nothing herein requires the town to enter
into such agreements where the requirement of such extensions or upsizing at
developer’s sole cost is justified by significant other benefits accruing
to developers, or as a consequence of development agreements, or as
consideration for zoning, development plan, or site approvals or for other
appropriate reasons.  Developers shall pay the costs of the assessment
process to determine the reasonable buy-in fee to charge other developers who
use or connect to the improvement, including, without limitation, consultant
fees to prepare studies, such as traffic, water, and sewer studies.



(Ord. 05-627, passed 10-27-2005)



§ 155.03  FORM OF AGREEMENTS.



   Any agreements to reimburse some or all costs of off-site improvements
extensions or upsizing of on-site or off-site improvements extension shall
address one or more of the following:



   (A)   Whether or not the improvement must be competitively bid in
accordance with A.R.S. § 34-201;



   (B)   When and according to what processes the improvement becomes
the property of the town;



   (C)   Whether and to what extent any improvement district
assessments, in-lieu of assessment fees, connection charges, or development
fees charged to developers will be offset by the extra costs of the
improvement incurred by developers;



   (D)   Whether and to what extent developers shall be reserved a
specific amount of capacity in the improvement;



   (E)   The amount of reimbursable costs, after accounting for any
offsets for the extra costs to developers (and any capacity in the
improvement reserved to developers) and for capacity in the improvement that
will remain available for use or connection by the other developers (for
which developers should be reimbursed).  Engineering costs may be included
as reimbursable costs;



   (F)   The reasonable buy-in fee to charge other developers who use
or connect to the improvement;



   (G)   How such buy-in fees shall be paid to the town and repaid to
developers after deduction of a reasonable administrative fee by the town;



   (H)   That the total of such repayments shall not exceed the amount
established in § 155.03(E) above and may be less if sufficient buy-in fees
are not collected during the term of the agreement;



   (I)   That the term of any such agreement shall not be longer than
10 years or when the amount set forth in § 155.03(E) above is reimbursed
(whichever is earlier);



   (J)   That the town has the option to reimburse developers with a
credit against development fees, connection charges, improvement district
assessments, or in lieu of assessment fees imposed by the town (in which case
the town shall reimburse the appropriate fund accounts with the applicable
buy-in fees collected);



   (K)   How and under what circumstances the agreement may be assigned
to successors-in-interest;



   (L)   That such agreements shall be recorded in the office of the
Yavapai County Recorder.



(Ord. 05-627, passed 10-27-2005)



§ 155.04  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All required extensions of off-site improvements or upsizing of on-site
or off-site improvements shall be constructed in accordance with
specifications approved by the Town Engineer.  Upon approval and acceptance
of said extensions or upsized improvements by the Town Engineer, the same
shall be dedicated by appropriate instrument to the town, and the town shall
exercise exclusive control over who may connect or use the same and the
procedures therefor.



(Ord. 05-627, passed 10-27-2005)



§ 155.05  OFFSET.



   Buy-in fees paid by other developers as a result of such reimbursement
agreements with developers may be offset, in whole or in part, against any
development fees, connection charges, improvement district assessments, or in
lieu of assessment fees charged those other developers for such improvements.



(Ord. 05-627, passed 10-27-2005)



§ 155.06  DEVELOPER.



   A developer is defined as an individual, firm, corporation,
association, syndicate, trust, or other legal entity that files the
application and initiates proceeding for the development or any division of
land, including but not limited to a subdivision, minor division of land,
site development plan, and/or a zone change in accordance with this code.



(Ord. 05-627, passed 10-27-2005)


Chino Valley, AZ Zoning Code


TOWN OF CHINO VALLEY, ARIZONA
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE




2017 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance No. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  http://www.amlegal.com




CHAPTER 154:  UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE



Section



1   Administration and Procedures



   1.1   Short Title



   1.2   Purpose



   1.3   Interpretation and Application



     1.4   Planning and Zoning Commission



      1.4.1   Establishment; Composition; Terms of Members;
Vacancies; Compensation of Members



      1.4.2   Powers and Duties



      1.4.3   Selection of Officers



      1.4.4   Quorum; Voting



      1.4.5   Rules; Regulations; Records; Meetings



      1.4.6   Ethics



   1.5   Board of Adjustment



      1.5.1   Establishment; Composition; Terms of Members;
Vacancies; Compensation of Members



      1.5.2   Powers and Duties



      1.5.3   Application



      1.5.4   Selection of Officers



      1.5.5   Quorum; Voting



      1.5.6   Rules; Regulations; Records; Meetings



      1.5.7   Ex Parte Communications



      1.5.8   Ethics



   1.6   Zoning Administrator and Assistant Zoning Administrator



      1.6.1   Creation



      1.6.2   Powers and Duties



      1.6.3   Zoning Administrator



   1.7   RESERVED



   1.8   RESERVED



   1.9   Review and Approval Processes



      1.9.1   Site Plan Review and Approval Processes



         1.9.1.1   Application Submittal



         1.9.1.2   Application Contents



         1.9.1.3   Application Review



         1.9.1.4   Site Plan Approval



      1.9.2   Amendment



      1.9.3   Conditional Use Permits



      1.9.4   Planned Area Development Overlay District; PAD



         1.9.4.1   Purpose



         1.9.4.2   Permitted Uses



         1.9.4.3   PAD Procedures



      1.9.5   Citizen Review Process



   1.10   Violation and Penalty



      1.10.1   General



      1.10.2   Civil Infractions



      1.10.3   Habitual Offender



      1.10.4   Voluntary Compliance



      1.10.5   Right of Entry



      1.10.6   Civil Infraction



   1.11   Violation and Penalty



      1.11.1   Purpose



      1.11.2   Applicability



      1.11.3   Enforcement Officers



      1.11.4   Civil Citations, Rules, Contents and Records



      1.11.5   Citations - Service



      1.11.6   Citations: Disposition Without Hearing



      1.11.7   Civil Citations: Hearings



      1.11.8   Municipal Court Decision



      1.11.9   Collection of Civil Penalties



      1.11.10   Abatement of Hazards to Public Health and Safety and
Civil Sanctions Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-499



      1.11.11   Civil Penalties



   1.12   Severability



2   Definitions



   2.1   Meanings of Words and Terms



3   Zoning Districts



   3.1   Establishment of Zoning Districts



   3.2   Location and Boundaries of Districts



   3.3   Zoning Descriptions and Requirements



   3.4   “OS”- Open Space Resource Conservation



   3.5   “AR-36”  - Agricultural/Residential



   3.6   “AR-5” - Agricultural/Residential



   3.7   “AR-4” - Agricultural/Residential



   3.8   “SR-2.5” - Single Family Residential



   3.9   “SR-2” - Single Family Residential



   3.10   “SR-1.6” -  Single Family Residential



   3.11   “SR-1” -  Single Family Residential



   3.12   “SR-0.16” - Single Family Residential



   3.13   “MR” - Multiple Family Residential



   3.14   “MHP-4” -  Mobile Home Park



   3.15   “CL” - Light Commercial



   3.16   “CH” - Commercial Heavy



   3.17   “I” - Industrial



   3.18   “PL” - Public Land Designation



4   General Regulations



   4.1   General Provisions



   4.2   Permitted Uses



   4.3   Non-Conforming Lots of Record



   4.4   Re-Dividing of Lots



   4.5   Yard, Lot and Area Requirements



   4.6   Building and Height Requirements



   4.7   Height Limitations on Corner Lots



   4.8   Walls and Fences



   4.9   Outdoor Storage



   4.10   Special Purpose and Temporary Housing



   4.11   Home Occupations



   4.12   Garage Sales, Swap Meets and Outdoor Sales



   4.13   Temporary Festivals, Circuses, Carnivals, Celebrations,
Fiestas, Rallies, Dances, Revival Meetings and Similar Activities



   4.14   Public Service Facilities



   4.15   Structure near Airplane Runways or Landing Strips



   4.16   Schools



   4.17   Prohibited Uses



   4.18   Fees



   4.19   Campgrounds



   4.20   Non-Conforming Uses and Structures



   4.21   Sign Regulations



      4.21.1   Purpose



      4.21.2   Permits Required



      4.21.3   General Sign Regulations



      4.21.4   Measurement of Signs



      4.21.5   Sign Standards



      4.21.6   Temporary Signs



      4.21.7   Prohibited Signs



      4.21.8   Non-ConformingSigns



      4.21.9   Violations; Removal



   4.22   Off-Street Parking and Loading



      4.22.1   General Parking Regulations



      4.22.2   Off-Street Parking Spaces



      4.22.3   Access



      4.22.4   Parking Design Standards



      4.22.5   Parking Standards for Non-Residential or Mixed Uses



      4.22.6   Parking Standards for Residential Uses



      4.22.7   Parking Space Allocation Requirements



      4.22.8   Determination of Required Spaces



      4.22.9   Off-Street Loading



      4.22.10   Spaces Required



      4.22.11   Standards for Off-Street Loading Facilities



   4.23   Public Street System and Public Use Access System



   4.24   Outdoor Lighting



   4.25   Wireless Communications Facilities



   4.26   Landscape Requirements



      4.26.1   Intent



      4.26.2   Landscape Plans: When Required, Unless Modified by
the Zoning Administrator



      4.26.3   Landscaping Requirements, General



      4.26.4   Determination of Requirements Unless Modified by the
Zoning Administrator



      4.26.5   Alternative Landscape Plans



      4.26.6   Preservation of Existing Landscaping



   4.27   Animals and Pets



   4.28   Building Setbacks When Adjacent to a Street



   4.29   Design Concepts



   4.30   CommercialGreenhouse Standards



   4.31   Medical Marijuana Dispensaries, Off-Site Cultivation Sites,
and Infusion Facilities



5   Subdivision Regulations



   5.1   Intent



      5.1.2   Short Title



      5.1.3   Authority



      5.1.4   Jurisdiction



      5.1.5   Administration



   5.2   Subdivision Application Procedures



      5.2.1   General Provisions



      5.2.2   Pre-Application Conference



      5.2.3   Preliminary Plat



      5.2.4   Subdivision Technical Review



      5.2.5   Final Plat



      5.2.6   Land Splits Not Requiring a Subdivision



      5.2.7   Minor Subdivision



   5.3   Design Principles and Development Standards



      5.3.1   Street Location and Arrangement



      5.3.2   Street Design (need Eng. Design Standards!)



      5.3.3   Water Facilities Design



      5.3.4   Sewer Facilities Design



      5.3.5   Drainage Design



      5.3.6   Block Design



      5.3.7   Lot Planning



      5.3.8   Easement Planning



   5.4   Improvement Requirements and Specifications



   5.5   Modifications, Appeals and Enforcement



      5.5.1   Modifications



      5.5.2   Appeals



      5.5.3   Enforcement



   5.6   Floodplain Management



6   Property Maintenance



   6.1   Purpose



   6.2   Scope



   6.3   Definitions



   6.4   All Premises



   6.5   Fences, Screen Walls, and Retaining Walls



   6.6   Landscaping



   6.7   Vacant Land



      6.7.1   Keeping of Inoperable Vehicles



   6.8   Littering



   6.9   Maintaining a Health Hazard



   6.10   Outside Storage of Materials



1  ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES



1.1  SHORT TITLE



This Ordinance shall be known as “The Unified Development Ordinance of the
Town of Chino Valley.”



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)



1.2  PURPOSE



The purposes of this Ordinance are to secure safety from fire, panic, and
other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to lessen congestion in the
streets; to prevent the over crowding of land; to avoid undue concentration
of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewage disposal; schools, parks, and other public requirements; to provide
for the social, physical, and economic advantages resulting from
comprehensive and orderly planned use of land resources; to allow for the
orderly implementation of the General Plan; and to otherwise promote the
health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the citizens of Chino
Valley, Arizona.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



1.3  INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION



In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of General Plan as
adopted by the Council and for the promotion of the public health, safety and
general welfare. It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate,
annul, or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other
laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this Ordinance, or
with restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other agreement
between parties, provided that where this Ordinance imposes a greater
restriction on land, buildings, or structures than is imposed or required by
such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract, or deed, the provisions
of this Ordinance shall control.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



1.4  PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION



1.4.1  ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION; TERMS OF MEMBERS; VACANCIES; COMPENSATION
OF MEMBERS



A.   There is hereby established a Planning and Zoning Commission of the
Town, (“Commission”) to consist of seven (7) regular members and one (1)
alternate member, appointed by the TownCouncil. Members of the Commission
shall be qualified electors of the Town. The term of each regular member
shall be three (3) years, except as hereinafter provided. The term of the
alternate Commissioner shall be one (1) year.



B.   The alternate member of the Commission shall act as a regular member
in the absence of a regular member at any meeting or hearing of the
Commission. The alternate member shall not, however, substitute for a regular
member who is present at a meeting or hearing but has declared a conflict of
interest.



C.   Termination; vacancy.



1.   Planning and Zoning Commissioners serve at the pleasure of the
Council and may be removed by the Council.



2.   A Commission seat shall be deemed vacant if any of the following
occurs:



a.   Death, resignation or removal of a regular member from the
Commission; or



b.   A regular member of the Commission is absent at three (3) consecutive
meetings or a total of four (4) meetings within any one (1) year period; or



c.   At the discretion of the Council, a member of the Commission is
removed.



3.   In the event of a vacancy, the Council shall fill the vacancy for the
remainder of the unexpired term.



D.   All members shall serve without pay. However, members may be
reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their duties.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)



1.4.2  POWERS AND DUTIES



A.   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:



1.   Recommend to the TownCouncil a General Plan and amendments thereto;



2.   Annually review progress towards implementation of the General Plan
and recommend to the TownCouncil changes desired due to new legislation,
development trends and changing economic, social and environmental conditions;



3.   Review and make recommendation to the TownCouncil on proposals to
amend the Town zoning map or the provisions of the Unified Development
Ordinance;



4.   Initiate changes to the Town zoning map or the provisions of the
Unified Development Ordinance;



5.   Review and recommend approval to the TownCouncil of design guidelines
or standards of development.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)



1.4.3  SELECTION OF OFFICERS



The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its
own members, who shall serve for one (1) year and until their successors are
elected and qualified. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and
exercise all the usual rights, duties and prerogatives of the head of any
similar organization. The Vice Chairperson shall perform the duties of the
Chairperson in the latter’s absence or disability. In the event of vacancy
in the Chairmanship of the Commission, the Vice-Chairperson shall become
Chairperson to serve for the remainder of the prior Chairperson’s term, and
an election shall be held at the next meeting to fill the office of
Vice-Chairperson for the remainder of that term.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)



1.4.4  QUORUM; VOTING



A.   Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote a
majority of members voting shall be required for approval or recommendation
to Council of any matter before the Commission.



B.   A member who has, or appears to have, or whose relative has, or
appears to have, a conflict of interest pursuant to Title 38, Chapter 3,
Article 8 of the Arizona Revised Statutes regarding any matter before the
Commission, shall disclose such interest in the official records of the
Commission, and shall refrain from participating in any discussion, vote or
any other manner as a Commission member in such matter.



C.   Each member present shall not abstain from voting on an item unless
he or she has declared a conflict of interest.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)



1.4.5  RULES; REGULATIONS; RECORDS; MEETINGS



A.   The Commission shall make and publish rules and regulations to govern
its proceedings and to provide for its meetings.



B.   All meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Commission may determine. Except
for executive sessions authorized by law, all meetings of the Commission
shall be open to the public.



C.   The minutes and records of all Commission proceedings shall be kept
and filed as public records in the office of the Town Clerk. Minutes of each
meeting shall contain a record of the number of votes cast for and against
each item requiring a vote.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)



1.4.6  ETHICS



Commissioners as appointed officers of the Town are subject to and shall
comply with the ethics provisions set forth in Chapter 35 of the Chino Valley
Town Code.



(Ord. 15-785, passed 4-28-2015)



1.5  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT



1.5.1  ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION; TERMS OF MEMBERS; VACANCIES; COMPENSATION
OF MEMBERS



A.   There is hereby established a Board of Adjustment of the Town to
consist of five (5) regular members and one (1) alternate member, each of
whom shall be appointed by the TownCouncil.



1.   The terms of the regular members of the Board shall be three (3)
years. The term of the alternate member shall be one (1) year.



2.   All members shall serve without pay. However, members of the Board
may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their
duties.



3.   The alternate member shall act as a regular member in the absence of
a regular member at any meeting or hearing of the Board. The alternate member
shall not, however, substitute for a regular member who is present at a
meeting or hearing but has declared a conflict of interest. The term of the
alternate members shall be one (1) year.



4.   Members of the Board of Adjustment serve at the pleasure of the
Council and may be removed by the Council. In the event of a death,
resignation or removal from the Board, the Council shall fill the vacancy for
the unexpired term. A Board seat shall be deemed vacant if a member is absent
at three (3) consecutive meetings or a total of four (4) meetings in any one
(1)-year period.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)



1.5.2  POWERS AND DUTIES



A.   It shall be the duty of the Board of Adjustment to:



1.   Hear and decide appeals from a decision, determination or
interpretation made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of the
Unified Development Ordinance; and to reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
modify the order, requirement or decision of the Zoning Administrator
appealed from, and make such order, requirement, decision or determination as
necessary;



2.   Hear and decide applications for a variance from the terms of this
Ordinance only if, because of special circumstances applicable to the
property, including its size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings,
the strict application of the Unified Development Ordinance will deprive such
property of privileges enjoyed by other property of the same classification
in the same zoning districts. Any variance granted is subject to such
conditions as will assure that the adjustment authorized shall not constitute
a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other
properties in the same zoning district in which such property is located.



B.   The Board of Adjustment shall not:



1.   Make or permit any changes in uses permitted in any zoning
classification or zoning district, or make any changes in the terms of the
Unified Development Ordinance, provided the restrictions in this paragraph
shall not affect the authority of granting variances pursuant to this article.



2.   Grant a variance if the special circumstances applicable to the
property are not self-imposed by the property owner.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)



1.5.3  APPLICATION



Applications for a variance shall be filed on a form provided by the
Development Services Department  and shall be accompanied by the appropriate
fee, together with a site plan of the premises and other data required by the
Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



1.5.4  SELECTION OF OFFICERS



The officers of the Board of Adjustment shall be a Chairperson and
Vice-Chairperson who shall be selected by the Board each year at its first
meeting following July 1st. In the event of vacancy in the Chairmanship of
the Board, the Vice-Chairperson shall become Chairperson for the remainder of
the prior Chairperson’s term, and an election shall be held at the next
meeting to fill the office of Vice-Chairperson for the remainder of the prior
Vice-Chairperson’s term.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)



1.5.5  QUORUM; VOTING



A.   Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of
a majority of members voting shall be required for approval of any matter
before the Board. In the event the matter before the Board is an appeal from
a ruling by the Zoning Administrator, a tie vote shall result in upholding
the original ruling of the Zoning Administrator.



B.   A member who has, or appears to have, or whose relative has, or
appears to have, a conflict of interest pursuant to Title 38, Chapter 3,
Article 8 of the Arizona Revised Statutes regarding any matter before the
Board, shall disclose such interest in the official records of the Board, and
shall refrain from participating in any discussion, vote or any other manner
as a member of the Board in such matter.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)



1.5.6  RULES; REGULATIONS; RECORDS; MEETINGS



A.   The Board shall make and publish rules and regulations to govern its
proceedings and to provide for its meetings.



B.   All meetings of the Board shall be at the call of the Chairperson and
at such other times as the Board may determine. Except for executive sessions
authorized by law, all meetings shall be open to the public.



C.   The minutes and records of all Board proceedings shall be kept and
filed as public records in the office of the Town Clerk. Minutes of each
meeting shall contain a record of the number of votes cast for and against
each item requiring a vote. Each member present shall not abstain from voting
on an item unless he or she has declared a conflict of interest.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)



1.5.7  EX PARTE COMMUNICATIONS



Prohibition of ex parte communications. The Board of Adjustment acts as a
quasi-judicial body. To ensure that the decision-making process is fair and
impartial, members of the Board shall not, directly or indirectly,
participate in any ex parte communication relevant to an application or
appeal pending before that body. Ex parte communications are oral or written
communications related to the matter to be heard by the Board and which is
made to or by a member of the Board, including in person, telephonic or
electronic communications that occur outside of a public meeting of the Board.



(Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)



1.5.8  ETHICS



Boardmembers as appointed officers of the Town are subject to and shall
comply with the ethics provisions set forth in Chapter 35 of the Chino Valley
Town Code.



(Ord. 15-795, passed 4-28-2015)



1.6  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR AND ASSISTANT ZONING ADMINISTRATOR



1.6.1 CREATION



There is created the position of Zoning Administrator who may be hired by the
Town or appointed by TownCouncil. The Town Manager or his/her designee shall
serve as the Zoning Administrator in the absence of the position being
filled. The Zoning Administrator may appoint an Assistant Zoning
Administrator with the approval of TownCouncil. The Assistant Zoning
Administrator shall have the same duties and powers of the Zoning
Administrator.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



1.6.2  POWERS AND DUTIES



The Zoning Administrator and Assistant Zoning Administrator shall perform the
following functions:



1.   Enforce this Ordinance by ensuring that all activities, construction,
and development within the Town are in conformance with the Town zoning
regulations.



2.   Administer the Town’s Property Maintenance Code, which is included
in this Ordinance by reference.



3.   Administer the Town’s Development Guidelines (as may be created and
adopted by the Town), which are included in this Ordinance by reference.



4.   Accomplish all administrative tasks required by this Ordinance
including receiving and processing applications for all persons requesting a
rezone, usepermit, plan review, Zoning Administrator, appeal, or other action
of the Commission, Board of Adjustment, or TownCouncil.



5.   Subject to the policies of the Commission and TownCouncil, interpret
this Ordinance to members of the public, Town departments, and other branches
of government.



6.   Serve as planning staff to Council and Commission, and, as necessary,
attend meetings of these and other organizations and agencies.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



1.6.3  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR



Wherever the term Zoning Administrator appears in the Ordinance, this term is
amended to include both the Zoning Administrator and the Assistant Zoning
Administrator.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



1.7  RESERVED.



1.8  RESERVED.



1.9  REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESSES



The processes set forth in this section shall apply to development within the
Town of Chino Valley: Site Plan Review, Amendments to Zoning, Conditional Use
Permits, Planned Area Development Overlay Zoning District, and Citizen Review
Process.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)



1.9.1  SITE PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESSES



A.   Purpose. Site plan review is intended to provide the Town and
applicants an opportunity to review new development projects to ensure
compliance with adopted codes and ordinances and to harmonize new development
with existing structures.



B.   When required. Site plan review is required for all new construction,
exterior site and structure alterations, signs and subdivisionplats prior to
issuance of a building permit, including Town facilities, with the following
exceptions:



1.   Accessory structures within single family zoning districts;



2.   Single family residences on separate lots within an approved and
platted subdivision;



3.   Minor exterior site and structure alterations that do not materially
affect the design concept or function of the site or structure;



4.   Repairs that do not alter exterior design of a structure;



5.   Approved temporary construction offices;



6.   Changes to the face of an existing approved sign.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)



1.9.1.1  APPLICATION SUBMITTAL



1.   An application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, or
his/her designee on a form approved by the Zoning Administrator.



2.   Applications shall be made by the owner of the property or an agent
authorized in writing by all owners of the property.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)



1.9.1.2  APPLICATION CONTENTS



A Site Plan application shall include, at a minimum, the following
information:



A.   An accurate Site Plan drawn at an appropriate scale showing the
boundaries and dimensions of the site; acreage of the site, and a north arrow;



B.   Proposed and existing structures with dimensions and dimensions
between structures and from property boundaries to new and existing
structures;



C.   Location and name(s) of adjacent and abuttingstreets, alleys,
rights-of-way and any required dedications thereof;



D.   Off-street parking in compliance with UDO Section 4.22 Off-Street
Parking and Loading;



E.   Landscaping in compliance with UDO Section 4.26 Landscape
Requirements;



F.   Screening in compliance with Section 4.8 Walls and Fences;



G.   Outdoor lighting in compliance with Section 4.24 Outdoor Lighting;



H.   Locations of all signage in compliance with Section 4.21 Sign
Regulations;



I.   Outdoor storage and related activities/uses in compliance with
Section 4.9Outdoor Storage;



J.   Pedestrian, vehicle, and service vehicle access; onsite circulation
plans;



K.   Location of water lines, sewer lines, fire hydrants, and other
utilities;



L.   Compliance with Section 4.29 Design Concepts;



M.   Other information as deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator or
his/her designee.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)



1.9.1.3  APPLICATION REVIEW



After submittal, the site plan shall be reviewed for compliance with the
Town’s regulations. The review procedure may be applied in a flexible
manner to allow for creative designs, varying development concepts, locations
and innovative response to requirements. In addition to compliance with the
Town’s regulations, the Zoning Administrator may consider the following
criteria and principles of development:



A.   The proposed development complies with all provisions of this
Ordinance and all other ordinances, master plans, General Plans, goals,
objectives and standards of the Town.



B.   The proposed site plan promotes a desirable relationship of
structures to one another, to open spaces, and to topography both on the site
and in the surrounding neighborhood.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 15-798,
passed 6-23-2015)



1.9.1.4  SITE PLAN APPROVAL



A.   Upon determination that the site plan is in compliance with all
development standards and any conditions of development set forth in the
zoning ordinance pertaining to the property, the site plan shall be approved
by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee.



B.   Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, all site development
standards set forth in Section 1.9.2 shall be constructed or installed in
compliance with the approved site plan. In lieu of such installation or where
weather conditions necessitate a delay, upon approval by the Town Engineer, a
cash deposit, bond, or letter of credit, in the Town’s discretion, in an
amount that guarantees complete installation of site plan requirements,
naming the Town of Chino Valley as beneficiary, shall be filed with the Town.



(Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)



1.9.2  AMENDMENT



A.   Intent.  Regulations set forth in this Ordinance and boundaries of
Zoning Districts established by the Town may be amended, supplemented,
changed, modified or repealed when deemed necessary to best serve the public
interest, health, comfort, convenience, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the Town.



B.   Review. Upon receipt of an application for an amendment, including
requests for Planned Area Development Overlay Zoning Districts, UsePermits
and Conditional Use Permits, the Development Services Director, or his/her
designee, shall review the application for completeness and applicability to
this Ordinance and the General Plan, comment on the proposal, and shall
adhere to the posting and publication requirements required by Arizona law,
including compliance with the Citizen Review Process provided in Section
1.9.5, prior to the public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission
. Requests for amendments or change of zoning shall be considered by the
Planning and Zoning Commission for the purpose of making a written
recommendation, which shall, after holding a public hearing at which parties
of interest and citizens have been heard, include the reasons for such
recommendations, to the Mayor and Council. Council may adopt the
recommendation of the Commission without holding a second public hearing if
there is no objection, request for public hearing, or other protest.



1.   Council shall hold a public hearing if requested in writing by the
applicant, or by any person appearing in opposition at the Commission
hearing, or by any person who has filed a written protest, in accordance with
Arizona law.



2.   If an application for amendment is denied by Council, or the
application is withdrawn after Commission hearing, the Commission shall not
consider an application for the same amendment within one (1) year from the
date of the original hearing.



C.   Adoption. Adoption of an amendment may be subject to such conditions
Council deems applicable to enforce this Ordinance. If one condition is a
schedule for development of specific uses for which zoning is requested, and
at expiration of that period the property has not been developed according to
said schedule, it may be reverted to its former zoning classification by the
Council.



D.   Application.  An application for an amendment shall be filed and
signed by:



1.   The owner of the property;



2.   One (1) or more of several joint owners of property whose ownership
constitutes a majority interest in the property;



3.   Seventy five (75) percent, or more, of the owners of property in the
area to be affected, when the application affects more than one (1) property;
or



4.   An agent of any property owner(s) authorized to sign as above, when
the authority of the agent is in writing and filed with the application.



In addition to other requirements that the Town may adopt, any application
for amendment shall include a statement of purpose for the amendment, a
statement regarding access and utility availability, and a statement
demonstrating conformance with the Town’s General Plan



E.   Protests.  If the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the area
of the lands included in a proposed ordinance or zoning map change, or those
immediately adjacent in the rear or any side extending one hundred fifty
(150) feet therefrom, or those directly opposite extending one hundred fifty
(150) feet from the street frontage of opposite lots, file a protest in
writing against a proposed ordinance amendment, such amendment shall not
become effective except by favorable vote of three fourths (3/4) of the
Council. If any member of Council is unable to vote because of a conflict of
interest, then the required number of votes shall be three-fourths (3/4) of
the remaining Council members (provided that required number of votes shall
not be less than a majority of the full Council). Written protests must be
filed with and received by the Town Clerk at least three (3) business days
prior to the date of the public hearing at which the Ordinance or zoning map
change will be heard by the Council.



F.   Annexation.  Areas, when annexed to the Town of Chino Valley, shall,
until officially zoned by the Council, be considered to be zoned to match
comparable County  zoning designations as shown on the Official Zoning Map
of Yavapai County  at the time of annexation. Such County  zoning shall
apply for not more than six (6) months.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 14-786, passed 7-22-2014; Ord. 15-797,
passed 6-23-2015)



1.9.3  Conditional Use Permits



A.   Conditional Use Permits may be granted only when expressly permitted
by this Ordinance, and only after the Commission has made recommendation, and
Council has approved the request by motion based upon a finding that the
authorizing of the UsePermit: (1) will not be materially detrimental to
persons residing or working in the vicinity adjacent to the property, to the
neighborhood, or to the public welfare; and (2) that the proposed use is
reasonably compatible with uses permitted in the surrounding area. The burden
of proof satisfying these requirements rests with the applicant.



B.   Applications for Conditional Use Permit approval shall be filed on a
form provided by the Development Services Department  and shall be
accompanied by the appropriate fee, together with a Site Plan of the premises
and other data required by the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee.



C.   The Commission shall conduct a public hearing prior to forwarding its
written recommendation to the Council. A notice of the time and place of the
public hearing shall be posted on the property at least five (5) days prior
to the Commission meeting. A notice of the public hearing shall be published
in an official newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the scheduled hearing date. Notice shall be provided by
first class mail to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet at
least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing.



D.   The Commission may recommend and the Council may impose specific
conditions or requirements pertaining to the site or operation of the
requested use.



1.   A UsePermit may be granted for a designated period with a date of
expiration stated therein or may be granted for an indefinite period. Should
the use not be established as proposed within one (1) year, the Use Permit
approval shall become null and void.



2.   Additional conditions that may be considered, include, but are not
limited to the following:



a.   Mitigation of potential impacts on surrounding properties such as,
but not limited to, noise, lighting, odor, or placement of trash receptacles.



b.   Assurance of adequate parking, ingress and egress so as not to
increase traffic congestion.



c.   Hours of operation.



d.   Maintenance of a positive appearance, with appropriate screening,
landscaping and buffering to preserve reasonable use and enjoyment of
adjacent properties.



E.   After the hearing, the Commission shall render its decision in the
form of a written recommendation to Council. The recommendation shall include
the reasons for the recommendation and be transmitted to Council in such form
and manner as may be specified by Council.



The Council may adopt the recommendations of Commission without holding a
second public hearing if there is no objection, request for public hearing,
or protest. The Council shall hold a public hearing if requested in writing
by the applicant, or any person who has filed a written protest, or requested
by any member of Council. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall
be given in the time and manner provided for the giving of notice of the
hearing by the Commission. In addition, the municipality may give notice of
the hearing in such other manner, as it may deem necessary or desirable.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



1.9.4  PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT: PAD



1.9.4.1  PURPOSE



The purposes of the Planned Area Development overlay district (“PAD OVERLAY
DISTRICT”) are:



A.   Provide for the orderly development of land consistent with the
Unified Development Ordinance of the Town of Chino Valley to permit
flexibility in the design of residential, commercial and/or industrial
developments in conformity with the intent and purpose of the General Plan
and Unified Development Ordinance.



B.   Modify underlying zoning district regulations to permit flexibility
and innovation in developmental design and provide opportunities for unique
or mixed-use development.



C.   Promote economical construction and maintenance of streets and
utilities without compromising public safety and welfare.



D.   Preserve and utilize open space and offer recreational opportunities
close to residential use.



E.   Encourage the preservation of community character and stabilization
of surrounding neighborhoods.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-742, passed 11-9-2010; Ord. 14-786,
passed 7-22-14)



1.9.4.2  PERMITTED USES



A.   A single PAD overlay district may overlay one or more underlying
zoning districts.



B.   Use and development of land within a PAD overlay district shall
conform to and comply with the underlying zoning district(s) regulations and
other requirements set forth in the Unified Development Ordinance, except as
modified by the PAD Zoning Ordinance.



C.   A PAD overlay district may allow for onsite density transfer within a
residential development, permitting the density regulations of the underlying
zoning districts to be applied to the total area of the PAD overlay district
rather than separately to individual lots or underlying zoning districts.



D.   Applications for changes in the underlying zoning district(s) may be
submitted and processed concurrently with an application requesting approval
of a Planned Area Development overlay district.



E.   The minimum area for a pad overlay district shall be two (2) acres.



F.   Pad overlay district modifications to uses permitted in the
underlying zoning district(s) shall be reasonably compatible with and not
averse to the uses permitted in the underlying zoning district(s).



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-742, passed 11-9-2010; Ord. 14-786,
passed 7-22-14)



1.9.4.3  PAD PROCEDURES



A.   Creation of a PAD overlay district shall be considered and treated as
a change in zoning and shall be subject to the procedures required for
changes in zoning, including citizen review, public hearing by the Planning
Commission and approval by the TownCouncil.



B.   Development plan requirements.



1.   Development plan. A PAD application and approval shall include a
development plan consisting, at a minimum, of a site plan showing the
locations of buildings and street layout plans. Where a modification of the
underlying zoning regulations related to building setbacks, height, design,
open space or other site regulation is requested, the applicant shall provide
building elevations, building heights, design guidelines, residential lot
layout, and any additional information relevant to the request and as
determined by the Planning Department.



2.   Use and development of the property located within the PAD overlay
district shall substantially conform to the development plan which shall be
approved by the TownCouncil as an exhibit to the PAD overlay district zoning
ordinance.



C.   Zoning conditions. The Planning Commission may recommend and the
TownCouncil may impose conditions of approval including, but not limited to,
the following:



1.   Timing or phasing of development;



2.   Off-site improvements to mitigate the impacts of the proposed
development;



3.   Development standards;



4.   Design guidelines;



5.   Conditions of use;



6.   Dedication of land for public purposes;



7.   Dedication to the Town of rights-of-way as streets, alleys, public
ways, drainage and public utilities as are reasonably required by or related
to the effect of the rezoning;



8.   Dedication of easements for public use of trails and open space areas;



9.   Establishment by the developer of a homeowners or property owners
association to assure continued maintenance and ownership of open space and
landscaped areas within the PAD overlay district;



10.   Reservation of land for future public acquisition.



D.   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the PAD
overlay district and rezoning request pursuant to the requirements of the
Unified Development Ordinance and Arizona State Law.



E.   After the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a
written recommendation to the TownCouncil that the Council approve, approve
with modifications and/or conditions, or deny the proposed change in zoning
and creation of a PAD overlay district. The recommendation shall include the
reasons for the recommendation and shall be transmitted to the TownCouncil in
such form and manner as may be specified by the Council.



F.   The Planning Commission shall recommend approval only after making
the following findings:



1.   That the rezoning as proposed or modified is consistent with and
conforms to the General Plan; and



2.   That all properties within the proposed PAD overlay district will
have adequate access to public or private streets appropriate to their use.



G.   The Council may approve the rezoning and creation of a PAD overlay
district without a public hearing if there is no objection, request for a
public hearing, or other protest. If an objection, request for a
publichearing or other protest is received, the Council shall hold a public
hearing. The Council may adopt the recommendations of the Planning Commission
or it may approve with modifications or deny the requested change in zoning
and pad overlay district.



H.   Amendments to the PAD overlay zoning district. Amendments to a PAD
overlay zoning district are changes in zoning and shall be treated as such
for all purposes including but not limited to submission of applications,
fees, public notice requirements, citizen review, public hearings, Planning
Commission recommendation and approval by the TownCouncil.



I.   Modifications to the approved development plan.



1.   Notwithstanding subsection H., above, the following modifications to
the approved development plan are not considered to be amendments to the PAD
and may be administratively approved by the Development Services Director
upon submission of a complete application and if, in the discretion of the
Development Services Director, the modifications are consistent with the
approved development plan, the purposes of the PAD, and are the minimum
required to implement the purposes of the UDO and improve the quality of
development:



a.   Less than ten (10) percent change in the number of square feet of a
building or number of units permitted to be developed; or



b.   Less than ten (10) percent change in building height or permitted
number of stories; or



c.   Rearrangement of the proposed structures as long as there is no
change in height, square feet, or number of units to be developed; or



d.   Less than 10% increase or decrease in setback or open space
requirements within the PAD.



2.   Appeals from decisions of the Development Services Director pursuant
to this section shall be heard by the Planning Commission at a public hearing
after notice, as set forth above for changes in zoning.



(Ord. 14-786, passed 7-22-2014)



1.9.5  CITIZEN REVIEW PROCESS



Prior to any public hearing, as required under this Ordinance, on any
application for any ordinance that changes any property from one zoning
district to another, a use or Conditional Use Permit application that imposes
any regulation not previously imposed, or that removes or modifies any such
regulation previously imposed, the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee,
shall require the applicant to conduct a neighborhood meeting or an
acceptable alternative prior to a public hearing to consider the proposal. A
written notice of the application shall be mailed to all landowners of
property within three hundred (300) feet of the property that is subject to a
rezone, Use or Conditional Use Permit application and to such other persons
as the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, reasonably determines to be
other potentially affected citizens. In determining the number of potentially
affected citizens, the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, shall
review the density and intensity of residential development in the general
vicinity, the existing street system, and other factors that may be related
to the zoning or UsePermit’s impact on the character of the neighborhood.



The written notice shall also include a general explanation of the substance
of the proposed Rezoning, UsePermit application and shall state the date,
time and place scheduled for a neighborhood meeting, at which any adjacent
landowner(s) or those other potentially affected citizens, will be provided a
reasonable opportunity to express any issues or concerns that the landowner
or citizen may have with the proposed zoning or usepermit application before
any required public hearing.



The written notice shall be given at least fifteen (15) days before the
neighborhood meeting in the following manner:



The notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation
published or circulated in the Town.



The notice shall be posted upon the sign required in this Ordinance, unless
waived by the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee.



The notice shall be mailed in accordance with the same procedures as required
in, and delivered in accordance with the provisions of the Ordinance.



The applicant, upon consultation with the Zoning Administrator, shall
establish a time, date and place for the neighborhood meeting that provides a
reasonable opportunity for the applicant to inform adjacent landowners and
other potentially affected citizens of the substance of the proposed action
and adjacent landowners and other potentially affected citizens will be
provided an opportunity to express any issues or concerns that they may have
with the proposed zoning or change of zoning or Use Permit proposed by the
application before the public hearing. The citizen review meeting shall be
held not less than five days prior to the public hearing on the application.
The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, may attend the meeting, but is
not required to conduct the meeting. The applicant, or his/her designee,
shall submit a written report of the outcomes of the meeting, to the Zoning
Administrator, who shall include them in reports to Commission and Town
Council at such time as they take action on the application.



At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, an
alternative citizen review process may be used that does not involve a
neighborhood meeting. The alternative process shall consist, at a minimum, of
the following:



Written notice as described above, except that the notice shall only indicate
the name, address and phone number of the member of the planning staff to
whom adjacent landowners within three hundred (300) feet or other potentially
affected citizen, may contact to express any issues or concerns that the
landowner or citizen may have with the proposed rezoning.



A staff report summarizing any issues or concerns expressed by adjacent
landowners shall be presented to the Commission and Mayor and Council at such
time as they take action on the application.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 16-812, passed 3-22-2016)



1.10  VIOLATION AND PENALTY



1.10.1  GENERAL



The Zoning Administrator/Designee is authorized and directed to enforce all
of the provisions of this Ordinance as set forth in this Ordinance.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



1.10.2  CIVIL INFRACTIONS



A violation of this Ordinance shall be charged, filed and prosecuted as a
civil infraction.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



1.10.3  HABITUAL OFFENDER



Any person who commits a violation of this Ordinance after previously having
been found responsible for committing two (2) or more civil infractions of
this Ordinance within any thirty-six (36) month period, whether by admission,
by payment of the fine, by default, or by judgment after hearing, shall be
guilty of a criminal misdemeanor punishable as set forth in this Ordinance.
The Town Prosecutor is authorized to file a criminal misdemeanor complaint in
the Chino Valley Municipal Court against such habitual offenders who violate
this Ordinance. For purposes of calculating the thirty-six (36) month period
under this paragraph, the dates of the Commission of the offenses are the
determining factor.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



1.10.4  VOLUNTARY COMPLIANCE



Nothing in this Ordinance shall preclude the Zoning Administrator/Designee
from seeking voluntary compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, or
from enforcing this Ordinance proactively or reactively, through warnings,
notices to comply, or other such devices designed to achieve compliance in
the most efficient and effective manner under the circumstances.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



1.10.5  RIGHT OF ENTRY



The Zoning Administrator/Designee may enter in and upon any premises within
the Town at all reasonable times to inspect premises or to perform any duty
imposed upon the Zoning Administrator/Designee regarding the enforcement of
this Ordinance, provided that if such premises be occupied or enclosed in
such a manner that there is an expectation of privacy within such enclosure,
he or she shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If entry
is denied or cannot be obtained, the Zoning Administrator/Designee shall not
enter in or upon such premises without the proper execution of an inspection
warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to A.R.S. §
13-3912.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



1.10.6  CIVIL INFRACTION



Any Responsible Person who violates any provision of this Ordinance is guilty
of a civil infraction punishable as set forth in this Ordinance, unless such
violation causes such person to meet the definition of a “Habitual
Offender” set forth in this Ordinance, in which case the person shall be
guilty of a criminal misdemeanor punishable as set forth in this Ordinance.
Any continuing violation of this Ordinance may be abated by the Town as set
forth in this Ordinance. Imposition of a fine or penalty assessment shall not
relieve the owner of the responsibility for abatement of the violation(s) or
excuse him/her from liability for any and all costs incurred by the Town for
abatement.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



1.11  VIOLATION AND PENALTY



1.11.1  PURPOSE



The purposes of this Section are to create a procedure for Ordinance
enforcement, including specialized civil citations, and to provide a timely,
efficient means to address Ordinance violations.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)



1.11.2  APPLICABILITY



This Chapter provides for consent orders and civil citations, which are in
addition to all other legal remedies that may be pursued by the Town of Chino
Valley to address violations of this Ordinance. The use of this Chapter
neither limits nor precludes the Town of Chino Valley from pursuing any other
type of enforcement allowed by law.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)



1.11.3  ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS



The Town Manager or Zoning Administrator shall designate those Town employees
who may issue civil citations under this Chapter.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)



1.11.4  CIVIL CITATIONS, RULES, CONTENTS AND RECORDS



A.   Procedure.  Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the
Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic Cases shall apply to civil citations,
subject to violations hereunder being titled as Civil UDO violations,
including said title being deemed substituted where appropriate in said rules
and forms.



B.   The civil citation shall include the following to the extent
applicable:



1.   State the date of the violation or, if the date of the violation is
unknown, then the date the violation was identified;



2.   State the address or a definite description of where the violation
occurred;



3.   Notify the Defendant with a written description or Ordinance
designation of the violation;



4.   State the action required to correct the violation, if applicable;



5.   Show the name and signature of the enforcement officer;



6.   List the phone number of the Chino Valley Municipal Court to contact
for questions concerning the hearing process;



7.   Direct the Defendant to correct the violation to the satisfaction of
the Zoning Administrator/Designee and/or to appear in Chino Valley Municipal
Court, at the time and date specified in the citation;



8.   Notify the Defendant that if the Defendant fails to correct the
violation to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator/Designee or appear
on the date specified in the citation, the Municipal Court shall issue a
written decision of default against the Defendant, enforce prior orders and
sanctions against Defendant and/or impose a civil penalty as set forth in
this Ordinance;



9.   The Defendant shall provide all information as required in accordance
to the Office of Court Administrator's policies and procedures;



10.   If applicable and available, the signature of the cited Defendant
reflecting that party's receipt of a copy of the citation.



C.   Record of Citations.  All citations shall bear sequential “serial
number and/or codes” (including letters as a citation issuing department
may determine to include) to provide for tracking the citation. The issuing
department shall maintain a record of civil citations issued for a period of
not to exceed three (3) years unless a longer period is required by law.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)



1.11.5  CITATIONS - SERVICE



The Zoning Administrator/Designee issuing the citation may serve it on the
Defendant by hand delivering the civil citation to the person accused of
violating this Ordinance. The citation may also be served in the same manner
as a summons in a civil action by any means allowed by the Arizona Rules of
Civil Procedure. In addition a citation may be served by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested.



The citation is deemed served on the date it is hand delivered or, if mailed,
on the date it is deposited in the United States mail.



Failure to receive any notice specified in this Ordinance does not affect the
validity of the proceedings conducted under this Ordinance.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)



1.11.6  CITATIONS: DISPOSITION WITHOUT HEARING



If the Defendant corrects the violation to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator/Designee on or before the court appearance date, no hearing
shall be held.



If the Defendant fails to correct the violation to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Administrator/Designee on or before the court appearance date, and
fails to appear in Municipal Court on the date and time set, the Defendant
has failed to exhaust administrative remedies. The Municipal Court may issue
a written decision of default against the Defendant (thus, finding the person
responsible), impose a civil penalty as set forth in this Ordinance and may
include, if applicable, an order of abatement pursuant to Section 1.11.10.
The Municipal Court shall mail a copy of the default decision and notice of
the right to set aside the default decision to the Defendant. If a bond or
civil penalty for non-appearance and admission of responsibility has been
provided in the citation, the civil penalty will be that amount.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)



1.11.7  CIVIL CITATIONS: HEARINGS



A Municipal Court judge or hearing officer shall hear and dispose of civil
violations, and make such orders as may be necessary and proper to dispose of
such cases. Cases shall be heard without a jury.



The Municipal Court may not grant variances nor modify the provisions of this
Ordinance, the Town Code, or the Unified Development Ordinance.



The Municipal Court may continue the date set for the hearing and may
continue any hearing, for cause.



If the Defendant appears before the Municipal Court and admits the
allegations, the Municipal Court shall issue a decision, finding against the
Defendant, may impose a civil penalty and may issue an abatement order.



If the Defendant appears and denies the allegation, the Municipal Court shall
set the matter for hearing as soon as possible as the interests of justice
will allow, but not more than thirty (30) days.



The Arizona Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic Violation Cases shall be
followed by the Municipal Court for civil citations issued pursuant to this
Ordinance except where inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance or
as modified or established for use by the Chino Valley Municipal Court or the
Arizona Supreme Court.



The Zoning Administrator/Designee who issued the citation may appear in
Municipal Court and be the Town’s representative. No person may be examined
except by the Court, an attorney for a party, or the Defendant.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007; Ord. 07-694,
passed 9-13-2007)



1.11.8  MUNICIPAL COURT DECISION



The Municipal Court shall find the Defendant responsible, not responsible or
may dismiss the civil citation. If the Defendant is found responsible, the
order shall include:



A.   The amount of any civil penalty imposed;



B.   The date by when the Defendant shall correct the violation (if
applicable), which date shall not be less than thirty (30) days after the
order and, the Court, in its discretion, may reduce/suspend all or part of
the civil penalty upon timely proof of correction of the violation, which
shall include an inspection letter/report from a person responsible for Code
enforcement for the Town;



C.   Notice that if the Defendant does not pay the civil penalty or
correct the violation within the time ordered, the Town may take any lawful
action to collect the civil penalty, including representatives for the Town
taking action to impose a lien on the Defendant's land; and



D.   Notice that if the Defendant fails to correct the violation within
the time period ordered by the Court, the Defendant may be cited for the same
violation again after the corrective period has expired.



A party aggrieved by the Municipal Court's decision with regards to any civil
penalty may appeal to Superior Court pursuant to A.R.S. § 12-124. An appeal
shall be taken within time set forth in the Rules of Procedure for Civil
Traffic Cases.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)



1.11.9  COLLECTION OF CIVIL PENALTIES



Civil penalties may be collected in any manner provided by law and, if
determined appropriate by the Municipal Court, to include the manner
applicable to civil traffic citations.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)



1.11.10  ABATEMENT OF HAZARDS TO PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY AND CIVIL
SANCTIONS PURSUANT TO A.R.S. § 9-499



A.   Court Ordered and Administrative Abatement Authorized.  Abatement as
defined in this Section may proceed via order of the Municipal Court or
determination of the Town's enforcement designee as set forth below.



B.   Judicial Abatement. If a properly filed and noticed pleading alleges
that an order of abatement is sought; provides with reasonable specificity
the hazard to be abated; and provides the estimated cost of removal/abatement
of the hazard then, if the Municipal Court determines by an entry of an order
that rubbish, trash, weeds or other accumulation of filth, debris or
dilapidated structures on a property constitute a hazard to public health and
safety from buildings, grounds, lots, contiguous sidewalks, streets and/or
alleys, the owner, lessee or occupant of the same shall be required to remove
or abate the hazard such that it is no longer a hazard. Such an order entered
by the court shall include an applicable determination and provide notice as
set forth in section D.1 below and instruct regarding the Defendant's appeal
rights under section D.2.a. below. In the event a Defendant fails to appear,
then, among other relief as may be provided in this Code, the Court shall
order the abatement as sought in the above referenced pleading.



C.   Administrative Abatement. If the Zoning Administrator, Town Manager
or Enforcement Officer determines that rubbish, trash, weeds or other
accumulation of filth, debris or dilapidated structures on a property
constitute a hazard to public health and safety from buildings, grounds,
lots, contiguous sidewalks, streets and/or alleys, the owner, lessee or
occupant of the same shall be required to remove or abate the hazard such
that it is no longer a hazard upon notice as provided in Section D.1. below.



D.   Notice Assessment and Appeal.



1.   The Municipal Court via its order or the Town via its administrative
employees/designee shall provide written notice to the owner, the owner's
authorized agent or the owner's statutory agent and to the occupant or
lessee. The notice shall describe the hazard to be abated. The notice shall
be served either by personal service or by certified mail. If notice is
served by certified mail, the notice shall be mailed to the last known
address of the owner, the owner's authorized agent or the owner's statutory
agent and to the address to which the tax bill for the property was last
mailed. The notice shall be given not less than thirty (30) days before the
day set for compliance and shall include the legal description of the
property and the estimated cost of such removal if performed by the Town if
the owner, occupant or lessee does not comply. The owner shall have until the
later of thirty (30) days from the date notice is given or such longer period
as specified in the notice in which to comply. The Town may record the notice
in the Yavapai County Recorder’s Office. If the notice is recorded and
compliance with the notice is subsequently satisfied, the Town shall record a
release of the notice.



2.   Any person aggrieved by the notice may appeal either or both the
notice and the assessment as follows:



a.   If the notice was via or pursuant to determination and order of the
Municipal Court, the appeal shall be the Superior Court of Yavapai County,
Arizona and shall be made pursuant to the Rules of Civil Traffic Procedure,
by filing a notice of appeal with the Municipal Court within fourteen (14)
calendar days of the Court's entry of an appealable order or final judgment
pursuant to the Rules of Civil Traffic Procedures.



b.   If the notice was issued administratively, any person aggrieved by
the notice may appeal to the Town Council, except that where the Council has
delegated the duty of hearing such appeals to an existing board or a new
board appointed by the Town Council, such appeal will be made to such board.
The appeal shall be made by filing a notice of appeal with the Town Clerk
within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date notice was given by the Town,
which notice of appeal shall identify the notice being appealed, the name and
mailing address of the appealing party and the interest of the appealing
party in the property. The Town Clerk shall provide written notice to the
appealing party of the date and time of the hearing before the TownCouncil or
a board appointed by the Council which is delegated by the authority to hear
the appeal at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing
by certified mail to the address the appealing party provides in the notice
of appeal and if no address is provided, to the address applicable for the
giving of notice set forth in Section D.1, above.



E.   Any person, firm or corporation that places any rubbish, trash, filth
or debris upon any private or public property not owned or under the control
of that person, firm or corporation is guilty of a civil violation of this
Ordinance as referenced in Section 1.10.2 and, in addition to any fine or
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of any provision of this
section, is liable for all costs which may be assessed pursuant to this
section for removing, abating or enjoining the weeds, rubbish, trash, filth,
debris or dilapidated structures.



F.   If any person with an interest in the property, including an owner,
lienholder, lessee or occupant, after notice as required by this Section
1.11.10 does not remove such rubbish, trash, weeds, filth, debris or
dilapidated structures and abate the condition which constitutes a hazard to
public health and safety, the Town may remove, abate, enjoin or cause their
removal. The Town may utilize Town employees, contractors or other persons
allowed by law to remove or abate the trash, weeds, rubbish, filth, debris or
dilapidated structures and the costs will be those incurred by the Town for
payment of contractors or persons or the actual costs to the Town for
utilizing Town employees, plus the additional actual costs of inspection and
incidental costs, including if the Town determines to record an assessment as
provided below, the costs of preparing and recording an assessment.



G.   If the Town determines to assess property for the cost of removal,
abatement or injunction of such rubbish, trash, weeds, filth, debris or
dilapidated structures from any lot or tract of land, buildings, grounds,
contiguous sidewalks, streets and/or alleys, and associated legal costs for
abatement or injunctions, then the costs shall be assessed on the property
from which the rubbish, trash, weeds, filth or dilapidated structures are
removed, abated or enjoined. The Town may record the assessment in the
Yavapai County Recorder's Office, including the date and amount of the
assessment, the legal description of the property and the name of the Town.
Any assessment recorded after July 15, 1996 is prior and superior to all
other liens, obligations, mortgages or other encumbrances, except liens for
general taxes. A sale of the property to satisfy an assessment obtained under
the provisions of this section shall be made upon judgment of foreclosure and
order of sale. The Town shall have the right to bring an action to enforce
the assessment in the Superior Court in the county in which the property is
located at any time after the recording of the assessment, but failure to
enforce the assessment by such action shall not affect its validity. The
recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters
recited in the assessment and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to
the recording of the assessment.



H.   Assessments imposed against the property are subject to the terms of
A.R.S. § 9-499.E.



I.   For purpose of this section:



1.   "Property" includes buildings, grounds, lots and tracts of land.



2.   "Structures" includes buildings, improvements and other structures
that are constructed or placed on land.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)



1.11.11  CIVIL PENALTIES



Any person who violates any section of this Ordinance is subject to a civil
sanction or penalty and shall be punished by imposition of a civil sanction
not to exceed a base of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus all applicable
surcharges and fees, unless another penalty is specified.



Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense/violation.



Any person who commits a violation of any section of this Ordinance generally
punishable as a civil infraction, having previously been found responsible
for committing two (2) or more civil infractions of this Ordinance within any
thirty-six (36) month period, whether by admission, by payment of the fine,
by default, or by judgment after hearing, shall be guilty of a class 1
misdemeanor punishable as set forth in A. R. S. §§ 13-707, 13-802, and
13-902.



A bond schedule/civil penalty schedule may be recommended from time to time
by the Zoning Administrator and may be adopted by the TownCouncil in such
amounts and form as it determines.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007; Ord. 07-694,
passed 9-13-2007)



1.12  SEVERABILITY



If any part of the “The Unified Development Ordinance of the Town” is
found to be invalid or unconstitutional by any Court, such action shall not
apply to the Ordinance as a whole, but to that specific part, and it is
intended and declared that all parts of the “Unified Development Ordinance
of the Town” not expressly declared to be invalid or unconstitutional shall
continue in full force and effect notwithstanding so much thereof as may be
declared to be invalid or unconstitutional.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



2  DEFINITIONS



2.1  MEANINGS OF WORDS AND TERMS



For this Ordinance, certain terms and words are herein defined.



Present tense shall include future tense; singular number shall include
plural, and plural shall include singular; “shall” is mandatory and
“may” is permissive; “persons” include individuals, partnerships,
corporations, clubs or associations; reference to one gender shall include
the other.



The following terms may be used interchangeably; lot, parcel, plot, or
premises; used, arranged, occupied or maintained; building or structure; sold
or dispensed; zone or district.



“Town” shall mean the Town of Chino Valley including the departments and
employees of the Town authorized to enforce the regulations set forth in this
Ordinance; “Board” shall mean the Board of Adjustment;



“Commission” shall mean the Planning and Zoning Commission ;
“Council” shall mean the Town Council; Committee shall mean the Site Plan
Review Committee.



Defined words appear in bold throughout the text.



ABUTTING (See also adjacent/adjoining). The condition of two adjoining
properties having a common property line or boundary, including cases where
two or more lots adjoin only a corner of corners.



ACCESS. The place, means, or way by which pedestrians and standard passenger
vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress  to a
property or use as required by the Ordinance.



ACCESS DRIVE.  Any vehicular access—by easement , deed, public
dedication  less than fifty (50) feet in width, or any means other than
right-of-way or public street to one or more parcels or lots of land—which
exists at the date of the adoption of this Ordinance.



ACCESS, DIRECT. A deeded right-of-way providing ingress and egress  to a
dedicated public street.



ACCESS STREET OR SERVICE ROAD.  This definition is the same as that for
frontage street.



ACRE.  An area of land containing 43,560 square feet.



ADJACENT.  Directly abutting or in the absence of publicright-of-way would
be directly abutting.



ADJACENT, ADJOINING. Nearby, but not necessarily touching.



AGRICULTURE. The tilling of the soil, raising of crops, horticulture,
viticulture, silviculture; including uses customarily incidental thereto
including the raising of animals.



AGRICULTURE BUSINESS.  Any business use allowed within the Town limits of
Chino Valley, providing the operation of such use has a Chino Valley business
license, and/or proof of filing IRS Form “F.”



AIRPORT.  Any area which is used or is intended to be used primarily for the
taking off and landing of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are used
or intended to be used for airportbuildings or facilities including open
spaces, taxiways and tie-down areas, hangars, transition and clear zones, and
other accessory buildings.



ALLEY. A right-of-way dedicated to public use affording a secondary means of
access to abutting property and intended for general traffic circulation.



AMENDMENT.  A change in the wording, context, or substance of this
Ordinance, or an addition or deletion or a change in the zone district
boundaries or classification of the zoning map.



ANIMAL HOSPITAL  shall mean a place where animals are given medical or
surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use
of the facility for boarding shall be a permitted accessory use and limited
to indoor care only. Animal hospital shall mean the same as veterinary clinic.



ANIMATION.  As pertains to signs, the presentation of pictorials and
graphics on signs displayed in a progression of frames which give the
illusion of movement of any part of the sign structure, design or pictorial
segment, including but not limited to the illusion of moving objects, moving
patterns or bands of light, or expanding or contracting shapes.



APPEAL.  An action which permits anyone to arrange for a hearing from other
than the individual or group from whose decision the appellant seeks redress.



ARENA, PRIVATE.  An indoor or outdoor facility for activities relating to
livestock including, but not limited to, equestrian, cattle, etc. for the
sole use of the property owner and guests.



ARENA, PUBLIC.  An indoor or outdoor facility for activities relating to
livestock including, but not limited to, equestrian, cattle etc. and for the
general use by the public.



ARTERIAL STREET.  Means a street with the principal function to serve as a
part of a major network for the through traffic flow separate from local
traffic, to and from areas of principal traffic generation, of adequate
design, capacity and construction to provide for the safe and rapid
distribution and collection of through traffic and to provide limited ingress
and egress  to and from collector and local streets. (See Section 4.28 for a
list of arterial streets.)



ASSISTANT ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator may appoint an
Assistant Zoning Administrator with the approval of Town Council. The
Assistant Zoning Administrator shall have the same duties and powers of the
Zoning Administrator.



ASSISTED LIVING CENTER.  A residential care institution that provides or
contracts to provide supervisory care services, personal care services, or
directed care services on a continuous basis for eleven (11) or more people.



ASSISTED LIVING HOME.  A residential care institution that provides or
contracts to provide supervisory care services, personal care services, or
directed care services on a continuous basis for up to ten (10) people.



AUTOMOBILE REPAIR.  All aspects of the repair of motor vehicles including,
but not limited to, lubrication, tune-up and preventive.



AUTOMOBILE SALES, NEW.  A franchised agency selling new motor vehicles and
providing services commonly associated with motor vehicle sales. A new
automobile dealership may include the sale of used motor vehicles.



AUTOMOBILE SALES, USED.  An agency selling used motor vehicles not in
conjunction with and on the same site as a new motor vehicle franchise and
providing services commonly associated with motor vehicle sales.



AWNING. A sheet of canvas or other material stretched on a frame and used to
keep the sun or rain off a storefront, window, doorway, or deck.



BAR.  An establishment whose primary business is the serving of alcoholic
beverages to the public for consumption on the premises.



BLOCK.  An area of land that is entirely bound on all sides by streets or
the exterior boundaries of a subdivision.



BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The Town’s Board of Adjustment.



BUILDING.  A structure having one or more stories and a roof, designed
primarily for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or
property of any kind. This shall not include doghouses, play houses, or
similar structures.



BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A building or structure which is subordinate to, and the
use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building,
structure, or use on the same lot or parcel.  The accessory building shall
not be permitted prior to the issuance of a building permit for the primary
residences or commercialbuilding.



BUILDING, ATTACHED.  A building which has at least part of a wall in common
with another building, or which is connected to another building by a roof.



BUILDING, DETACHED.  A building, which is separated from another building or
buildings on the same lot.



BUILDING, HEIGHT OF.  The vertical distance measured from the average grade
level to the highest level of the roof surface of flat roofs, to the deck
line of mansard roofs, or to the mean height between eaves and ridges for
gable, gambrel, shed or hip roofs. In the event that terrain problems prevent
an accurate determination of height, the Zoning Administrator shall rule as
to height and appeal from that decision shall be to the Board of Adjustment.



BUILDING PERMIT.  A permit required for the erection, construction,
modification, addition to or moving of any building, structure or use in the
incorporated area of the Town.



BUILDING, PRIMARY.  A building or buildings in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential
district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be the primary building of the lot
on which the same is situated.



BUILDING SETBACK.  The minimum distance as prescribed by this Ordinance
between any property line and the closest point of the foundation or any
supporting post or pillar of any building or structure related thereto. (see
Yard, Required Front, Required Side and Required Rear)



CAMPGROUND. Any lot, parcel, or tract of land used, designed, maintained, and
intended for rent of plots or sites to accommodate temporary camping by the
traveling public whether or not a charge is made for the use of the park and
its facilities.



CANOPY. A structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or
outdoor service area.



CEMETERY.  Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead, and
dedicated for such purposes, including columbaria, crematoriums, mausoleums
and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of
such premises.



CHURCH OR PLACE OF WORSHIP.  Institutions that people regularly attend to
participate in or hold religious services, meetings, and other activities.
The term “church” shall not carry a secular connotation and shall include
buildings in which the religious services of any denomination are held. 



CLINIC.  A place for the provision of health services, not involving
overnight housing of patients.



COLLECTOR STREET.  Means a street, which carries traffic from local streets
to arterial streets, including the principal entrance streets of a
residential development and streets for circulation within such a
development. (See Section 4.28 for a list of collector streets.)



COMMERCIAL.  Any activity, which is conducted primarily for compensation or
profit.



COMMISSION or PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION means the Planning and Zoning
Commission  of the Town.



CONCEPTUAL LAND USE PLAN.  A generalized/conceptual plan often referred to
as a bubble plan indicating the boundaries of a tract or tracts under common
ownership, and identifying proposed land uses, land-use intensities, and
thoroughfare alignment.



CONTIGUOUS.  In actual contact.



CONVALESCENT HOME.  (see Nursing home)



COUNCIL.  Chino Valley TownCouncil.



COUNTY. Yavapai County.



COVENANTS.  A privately prepared recorded document designed to govern the
use of parcels within subdivisions.



CUL-DE-SAC.  A street having a traffic outlet on one end only and having at
the other end facilities for the turning around of vehicular traffic.



DAY CARE.  (See School, Nursery)



DEAD END STREET means a street having a traffic outlet on one end only.



DEDICATION. A process whereby private land is transferred for public use.



DENSITY TRANSFER, ONSITE.  A portion of the density for areas having natural
resource lands that remain undeveloped may be transferred to other areas of
the development site if clustering concepts are used and the project retains
acceptable open space.



DESIGN, SUBDIVISION. Street alignment, grades and widths, alignment and
widths of easements and right-of-way for drainage and sanitary sewers and the
arrangement and orientation of lots.



DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN (DMP).  A land-use plan focused on one or more sites
within an area that identifies site access and general improvements and is
intended to guide a specific development over a number of years, and/or in
several phases.



DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT.  The Development Services Department and
Planning Department of the Town are synonymous and all such terms shall mean
the Development Services Department.



DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT means a lot having street frontage on both the front and
rear property lines.



DRIVE-IN THEATER.  An open-air theater where the performance is viewed by
all, or part of the audience from motor vehicles.



DUPLEX.  A building designed exclusively for occupancy by or occupied by two
(2) families living independently of each other.



DWELLING UNIT.  A room or group of rooms within a dwelling containing one
(1) cooking accommodation occupied exclusively by one or more persons living
as a single non-profit family housekeeping unit.



DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.  A building designed exclusively for occupancy by
or occupied by three (3) or more families living independently of each other.



DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.  A building designed exclusively for occupancy by
or occupied by one (1) family for residential purposes.



EASEMENT.  A space on a lot or parcel of land reserved or used for location
and/or access to utilities, drainage or other physical access purposes.



EGRESS.  The movement of traffic from abutting properties to streets and the
movement from residential streets to collector streets or arterial streets.



ERECT. The word “erect” includes built, built upon, added to, altered,
constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the
land required for a building.



FAMILY.  An individual, or two or more persons related by blood or marriage,
or a group of persons not related by blood or marriage living together as
single housekeeping group in a dwelling unit.



FARMING. (See Agriculture)



FEED  LOT.  A structure or parcel of land in which livestock, including
cattle, horses, goats, swine, sheep, fowl, or any other animals kept for the
purpose of feeding or fattening for subsequent sale at market.



FENCE. Any device built to enclose a parcel of land, to separate two parcels
of land, or to separate a parcel of land into different areas.



FINAL PLAT. A map of all or part of a subdivision essentially conforming to
an approved preliminary plat, prepared in accordance with the provisions of
these regulations.



FLOOR AREA, NET USEABLE.  That portion of a building or structure directly
used for the purpose of the building. Useable floor area does not include;
halls, kitchens, bathrooms, etc.



FRONTAGE STREET. A street which is nearby and parallel to a major arterial or
collector street and provides a means of direct ingress and egress to
abutting property and protection from through traffic on such major arterial
or collector street.



FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right-of-way needed for the establishment of a
planned roadway as designated by Ordinance No. 08-707, specifically in
Subsection 4.28 of the UDO.



GARAGE, PRIVATE. A building, or portion thereof, used for the shelter or
storage of self-propelled vehicles, and owned and operated by the occupants
of a main building wherein there is no service or storage for compensation.



GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any building, except one herein defined as a private garage,
used for the storage, care, or repair of self-propelled vehicles or where any
such vehicles are equipped for operation or kept for hire.



GENERAL PLAN. A statement of land development policies, which may include
maps, charts, graphs and texts which set forth the objectives, principles and
standards for growth and redevelopment of the Town enacted by the Council
pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6.



GREENHOUSE.  A greenhouse structure, in which temperature and humidity can
be controlled for the cultivation or protection of plants.



GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL.  A commercial greenhouse is a commercial enterprise
that grows plants or parts of plants by the application of water to plants
that reside within movable containers, raised beds or lined beds that are
disconnected from the lands and are not deemed to be “irrigated lands” as
set forth in Arizona Revised Statutes.



GROUP HOME.  A residential facility for six (6) or more unrelated persons
providing living facilities, sleeping rooms, and meals, and which shall have
a permit issued by the Yavapai County Health Department as a boarding home.



GUESTHOUSE. Living or sleeping quarters for the sole use of occupants of the
premises, guests of such occupants or persons employed on the premises. Such
quarters shall not be rented and/or otherwise listed for income purposes.



HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation, profession, activity, or use which is clearly
a customary, incidental, and secondary use of a residential dwelling unit and
which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential
character of the neighborhood.



HOSPITAL. A facility for the reception, care and medical treatment for the
sick or injured.



HOTEL. A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for
compensation and which is open to transient guests.



HOUSEHOLD PET.  The keeping of “pets” such as dogs and cats are allowed
in all zoning districts. This provision also allows for the keeping of indoor
birds (such as parrots, parakeets and canaries), fish and other indoor pets
which must be at all times kept within a fully enclosed dwelling or accessory
building provided there are not odors, noise, insects, or other nuisances
caused by the keeping of such animals which would affect the health and
welfare of the occupants of surrounding properties.



INTERSECTION.  Means the point of crossing or meeting of two (2) or more
streets.



ILLUMINATED.  As to signs, artificially lighted by an electrical source,
either internally or externally, except where the light source is
specifically and clearly operated for the purpose of lighting the general
area in which the sign is located rather than the sign itself.



IMPROVEMENTS.  Required installations, pursuant to these regulations,
including but not limited to, sewer and water facilities, including fire
hydrants and manholes, streets, grading, base, paving, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, street name signs, street lights and street trees, bridges,
courts, public utilities, drainage, storm water system, survey monuments and
markers, lot grading, easements, and traffic control devices, as a condition
to approvals under Section 1.9 and Section 5.



INDUSTRIAL.  The production and/or manufacture of goods.



INGRESS.  The movement of traffic from streets to abutting properties and
the movement from arterial streets or collector streets to residential
streets.



KENNEL, INDOOR. A facility for the commercial boarding, breeding and training
of dogs and/or cats in which all animals are confined indoors.



KENNEL, INDOOR/OUTDOOR.  A facility for the commercial boarding, breeding,
and training of dogs and/or cats in which all animals are confined indoors
with the exception of the use of daytime exercise runs.



KENNEL, OUTDOOR.  A facility for the commercial boarding, breeding and
training of dogs and/or cats in which the animals may be worked or housed in
outdoor runs.



LAND SPLIT. The division of improved or unimproved land whose area is 2 1/2
acres or less, whether immediate or future, into two or three tracts of
parcels of land for the purpose of sale or lease.



LIGHT MANUFACTURING.  Fabrication and assembly of finished products, or
subassemblies thereof, so long as the primary use of the property is not the
basic processing or compounding of raw materials or food products.



LIGHTING, CLASS I.  All outdoor lighting used for but not limited to outdoor
sales or eating areas, assembly or repair areas, advertising and other signs,
recreational facilities and other similar applications where color rendition
is important.



LIGHTING, CLASS II.  All outdoor lighting used for but not limited to
illumination for walkways, roadways, equipment yards, parking lots and
outdoor security where general illumination of the grounds is the primary
concern.



LIGHTING, CLASS III.  Any outdoor lighting used for decorative effects,
including but not limited to architectural illumination, flag monument
lighting, and illumination of trees, bushes, etc.



LIGHTING, MULTI-CLASS.  Any outdoor lighting used for more than one purpose,
such as security and decoration, when those purposes fall under the
definitions for two (2) or more lighting classes as defined for Class 1, 2
and 3 Lighting above.



LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT shall be construed to mean the department, board or
agency furnishing health services within the incorporated area of the Town.



LOCAL STREET. Means a street, with or without parking facilities used
primarily for direct access to and from residential, commercial and
industrial areas having major service functions of loading and unloading, and
direct access to and from abutting property, controlled in such manner as to
discourage through traffic and to maintain relatively slow speed.



LOT. A piece or parcel of land legally created, whether by subdivision plat,
land split or otherwise, as permitted by law to be used or occupied by one or
more structures or uses, including therewith, open spaces, access, area, 
shape and frontage as required by this Code.



LOT AREA. The horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.



LOT COVERAGE. That portion of a lot or building site, which is occupied by
any building or



structure, excepting paved areas, walks, and swimming pools.



LOT DEPTH.  The horizontal length of a straight line connecting the front
and rear lot lines along the greatest length.



LOT, FLAG.  A lot as defined and depicted in this Code and created in a land
split.



LOT FRONTAGE. The length at the front line of a lot which borders upon a
street or public way measured at the wider of said front lot line in
accordance with the definition of average lot width but which shall not be
less than 25 feet at the front lot line/border with said street or public way.



LOT LINE.  The line bounding a lot.



LOT LINE, FRONT.  In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot
from the street, and in the case of a corner lot, the line separating the
narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street. In the case of a lot
served by a private driveway, the side of the lot nearest to the street which
abuts the driveway.



LOT LINE, REAR.  A lot line, which is opposite and most distant from the
front lot line.



LOT LINE, SIDE.  Those lot lines connecting the front and rear lines.



LOT WIDTH, AVERAGE.  The distance between side lot lines measured thirty
(30) feet behind the required minimum front yard line parallel to the street
or street chord.



MANUFACTURED HOMES.  A movable or portable dwelling of at least four hundred
(400) square feet of gross living area (based on external dimensions) and
twelve (12) feet or more in width; constructed to be towed on its own chassis
and designed so as to be installed with or without a permanent foundation;
for human occupancy as a residence containing complete toilet, shower and
cooking facilities; which may include one or more components that can be
retracted for towing purposes and subsequently expanded for additional
capacity, or two or more units separately towable which can be joined to form
a single unit, and constructed on or after June 15, 1976. Does not include
recreational vehicle or travel trailer as defined in this article. The
removal of the wheels and running gear shall not change the meaning of this
term. The “manufactured home” shall not include ‘”modular home” or
“prefabricated home” both of which are considered “single family” or
“multiple family” dwellings when constructed to conform with the building
ordinances of the Town.



MARQUEE. A canopy constructed of rigid materials which projects over a window
or entrance to a building.



MEDICAL MARIJUANA.  All parts of the genus cannabis whether growing or not,
and the seed of such plants that may be administered and used by a registered
qualifying patient, as that term is defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801, solely to
treat or alleviate the patient’s debilitating medical condition or symptoms
associated with the patient’s debilitating medical condition.



MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION.  The process by which a person grows a
marijuana plant for use as medical marijuana.



MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY, OFF-SITE.  A building, structure, or
other enclosed, locked facility used for the cultivation or storage of
medical marijuana that is physically separate and not located on the same
real property as the medical marijuana dispensary with which it is affiliated
pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-2806(e).



MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY, ON-SITE. A medical marijuana facility
that is located on the same property as the medical marijuana dispensary with
which it is affiliated pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-2806(e), whether attached or
not.



MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A not-for-profit facility that, pursuant to
A.R.S. § 36-2801(11),  is registerred with and certified  by the Arizona
Department of Health Services to acquire, posses, cultivate, manufacture or
infuse, deliver, transfer, transport, supply, sell, or dispense medical
marijuana to qualifying patients and cardholders, as that term is defined in
A.R.S. § 36-2801.



MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITIES. Medical marijuana dispensaries, medical
marijuana cultivation facilities (on or off-site), and medical marijuana
infusion facilities.



MEDICAL MARIJUANA INFUSION FACILITY. A facility that incorporates medical
marijuana by the means of cooking, blending, infusing, or otherwise combining
medical marijuana into consumable, ingestible, or edible goods.



MOBILE HOMES. (See Manufactured homes)



MOTEL. A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms or apartments,
each of which maintains a separate outside entrance, used primarily for the
accommodation of motorists and providing automobile parking space on the
premises.



NON-CONFORMING SIGN.  A sign that was lawfully established prior to the
effective date of this chapter or amendments therto; or was lawfully
established in another political jurisdiction prior to annexation to the
Town; and that does not conform to the regulations for signs for the district
in which it is located.



NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure which was lawfully erected prior to the
adoption of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto or any annexation to the
Town, which does not conform with the standards of lot coverage, yard spaces,
height structures, distance between structures or other standards prescribed
in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located.



NON-CONFORMING USE.  A structure or land which was lawfully established and
maintained prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto
or any annexation to the Town, which does not conform to the use regulations
for the district in which it is located.



NON-HOUSEHOLD ANIMALS. The keeping of non-household animals such as horses,
cattle, sheep, goats, swine, or any breed, strain, or crossbreed thereof,
bees, poultry and other non-household birds shall be prohibited except in
those zoning districts in which they are specifically allowed. A minimum lot
size of one acre is required except as approved for project animals.



NOTICES, PUBLIC.  As required for public notice of zoning change, or
proposed subdivision change.



NUISANCE.  Any thing, condition, or use of property that endangers life or
health, gives offense to the senses, and/or obstructs the reasonable and
comfortable use of other property.



NURSERY. A commercial operation for the growth and sale of plants, storage of
equipment for landscaping, and the wholesale or retail sale of commercial
gardening supplies.



NURSING HOME.  A health care institution other than a hospital or personal
care home that is licensed by the State Department of Health Services as a
skilled nursing facility for two (2) or more unrelated persons.



OFFICE.  A room or rooms and accessory facilities for the managing or
conducting of a business.



OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.  A site or a portion of a site
devoted to the off-street parking of motor vehicles including parking spaces,
aisles, and access drives.



OPEN HOUSE DIRECTIONAL SIGN.  A sign used to advertise the sale of a house
and direct traffic to the house for sale.



ORDINANCE.  Means the Ordinance, unless the context or commonly understood
usage implies otherwise, and shall include “the Ordinance” or “this
Ordinance” or “UDO”.



OUTDOOR STORAGE.  The location of any goods, services, wares, merchandise,
commodities, junk, debris, vehicles, or any other item outside of a
completely enclosed building for a continuous period longer than seventy-two
(72) hours.



PARK.  A public or private parcel of land developed and used for passive or
active recreation.



PARKING AREA.  An area designed and constructed and used exclusively for the
parking, storage, and maneuvering of vehicles.



PERMIT.  A document issued by the Town granting permission to perform an act
or service which is regulated by the Town.



PETITION. All forms, applications, documents, and papers required by this
Ordinance when requesting action by the Commission, Council or any other
public body. 



PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT.  “Planned Area Development” is a development
approach allowed under the Ordinance and the General Plan in which dwelling
units are clustered in order to maximize economy, infrastructure, and open
space. For the purposes of this title, “Cluster Zoning” or
“Clustering” shall mean the same as a “Planned Area Development.”



PLAT means a map of a subdivision and associated required information which
provides for changes in land use or ownership or which describes existing
uses.



PRELIMINARY PLAT.  A preliminary map including supporting data, indicating a
proposed subdivision design and prepared in accordance with these regulations.



PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.  A deeded portion of a lot or parcel, which is not less
than twenty-five (25) feet in width providing access to the public street
system.



PRIVATE STREETS means a street within a subdivision that has not been
dedicated for public use and is reserved for the use of lot owners within the
subdivision and their guests and invitees.



PROFESSIONAL OFFICE.  Any building, structure, or portion thereof used or
intended to be used as an office for a lawyer, architect, engineer, surveyor,
planner, optometrist, accountant, doctor, dentist, or other similar
professions.



PROPERTY LINE(S) means those lines defining the boundaries of lots.



PUBLIC.  Ownership is held by the Town.



PUBLIC BUILDING. Facilities for conducting public business by various public
agencies, including all federal, state, County, and Town offices and
buildings.



PUBLIC HEARING.  Hearings held as required by law.



PUBLIC NUISANCE means anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and
welfare of the inhabitants of the Town; or any act or thing repugnant to, or
creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of
another person or to the community.



PUBLIC STREET. A right-of-way containing a roadway accepted for maintenance
by the Town and part of the public street system.



PUBLIC STREET SYSTEM. The system of public streets designated by the Town.



PUBLIC USE does NOT imply ownership by the Town, but has been used by the
public for an undetermined amount of time.



PUBLIC USE ACCESS SYSTEM.  A system being part of the future right-of-way
map designating rights-of-way and access ways being used for vehicular access
by local residents and which exist as such at the date of the adoption of
this amendment.



PUBLIC UTILITY.  Private or public facilities for distribution of various
services, such as water, power, gas, communications, etc., to the public.



PUBLIC WAY.  An easement for ingress, egress and public utilities
established by deed or as part of a land split or other legal division of
land other than a platted subdivision which is not less than fifty feet (50)
in width; provides permanent legal access from privately owned property or
properties to an existing public street or a public way or a private street
created in a properly recorded plat; includes a perpetual easement of not
less than fifty feet (50) in width and along its entire length for public
utilities and for general ingress and egressuse to the public; and includes a
perpetual offer of dedication of such easement to the Town, but which public
way shall remain private property and the Town will have no duty of
maintenance unless and until the Town formally accepts the offer of
dedication by Town Council approved Resolution or Ordinance. The area
included within a public way shall be included in computing the gross square
footage of a contiguous lot where owned by the same person (common ownership)
or where the public way was owned by the owner of such lot prior to
dedication as accepted by Town and as provided above.



QUID PRO QUO.  Something given or received for something else; also: a deal
arranging a quid pro quo. PRONUNCIATION: \,KWID-,PR-'KW\



QUORUM.  A majority of the members of a Committee, Board, Commission,
Council or other authorized elected or appointed entity of the Town.



RADIAL.  A line forming right angles with the tangent of any given arc.



RECORDED PLAT.  A final plat bearing all of the certificates of approval
required by these regulations and any other applicable statutes.



RECOVERY RESIDENCE.  A dwelling unit or building used to provide a stable,
clean and sober environment for individuals recovering from substance abuse.
Individual residents do not live together as a single housekeeping unit and
every person residing in the residence (excluding the house manager) is an
“individual with a disability”, as that term is used in the federal and
state fair housing laws.



RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. Includes buildings, structures or areas built or
developed for purposes of entertaining, exercising, or observing various
activities participated in either actively or passively by individuals or
organized groups other than the immediate families of the owners or
proprietors and their personal guests; or any such facility which involves
twenty-five (25) or more attendees and participants, more often than twice in
any one calendar month. This excludes churches and schools.



RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV).  A vehicular type unit primarily designed as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which
either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle.
This includes motor homes, travel trailers, fifth wheel trailers and campers.



RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK.  Facilities for the temporary storage, parking
and maneuvering of recreational vehicles (motor homes, travel trailers,
campers, etc.) with adequate roads and stall sites, including sanitary and
water facilities. Does not constitute a mobile home park.



RESTAURANT.  An establishment that serves food or beverages. This includes
cafes, tearooms, drive-ins and similar establishments.



RETAIL STORE.  A commercial business for selling goods, services, wares, or
merchandise directly to the customer.



RIGHT-OF-WAY means any public or private right-of-way including any area
required for public use pursuant to any general or specific plan enacted by
the Council pursuant to Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6, Arizona Revised
Statutes.



ROADWAY.  The actual surface area of any public street, right-of-way, or
access way utilized for vehicular travel on any street.



SALE, PROPERTY. Any transfer or conveyance of a lot or parcel of real estate,
or an interest therein which is or may become a fee interest.



SALVAGE YARD. Any land or building used for the abandonment, storage,
keeping, collecting, or bailing of paper, rags, scrap metals, other scrap or
discarded materials, or for the abandonment, demolition, dismantling,
storage, or salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles not in running
condition, or machinery, or parts thereof for commercial purposes.



SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY, JUNIOR HIGH, HIGH SCHOOL.  Public and other nonprofit
institutions, conducting regular academic instruction at kindergarten,
elementary, and secondary levels. 



SCHOOL, NURSERY.  A school or the use of a site or a portion of a site for
an organized program devoted to the education or day care  of five (5) or
more children of elementary school age or younger, other than those residents
on the site. Includes day care center.



SCHOOL, TRADE.  Schools offering instruction in the technical, commercial,
or trade skills, such as real estate schools, business colleges, electronics
schools, automotive and aircraft technicians’ schools, and similar
commercial establishments.



SCREENING FENCE.  A wooden, masonry or slatted chain-link fence, which is at
least ninety (90) percent opaque or is otherwise approved by the Zoning
Administrator. 



SERVICE STATION. An occupancy engaged in the retail sales of gasoline, oil,
tires, batteries, and new accessories and which provides for the servicing of
motor vehicles and operations incidental thereto, including: automobile
washing, washing, waxing and polishing, tire changing and repairing, but not
including recapping. May also include battery service, radiator cleaning,
flushing and repair, installation of minor accessories, lubrication of motor
vehicles, rental of utility trailers, testing, adjustment and replacement of
motor parts and accessories.



SHOPPING CENTER.  A group of three (3) or more commercial establishments
associated by common agreement or under common ownership, which comprises
contiguous  land parcel unit with common parking facilities.



SIDEWALK.  That paved portion of a right-of-way between the curb lines or
lateral lines of the street bed and the boundary line of such right-of-way
designed and intended for the movement and use of pedestrian traffic.



SIGN.  Any name, identification, description, illustration, display, symbol
or device which is affixed to, painted, or represented directly or indirectly
upon the exterior of a building, or other outdoor surface which directs
attention to or is designed or intended to direct attention to the signface
or to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization
or business. Signs do not include such items when located within an enclosed
structure or an enclosed patio.



SIGN, AWNING.  A sign painted, installed, mounted, attached or otherwise
applied to or located directly on an awning, canopy, marquee, or other
covering structure attached to a building storefront, window, doorway, or
deck.



SIGN, BANNER. A temporary sign of fabric, plastic, paper, or other light
pliable material not enclosed in a rigid frame.



SIGN, BILLBOARD. Same as sign, off-site or off-premise.



SIGN COPY. Any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs, or other symbolic
representations incorporated onto the face of a sign.



SIGN, ELECTRONIC. A sign that is static and changes messages by any
electronic process or remote control.



SIGN FACE. The area or display surface used for the message.



SIGN, FIGURATIVE.  A sign using graphics, crafted symbols, or sculpted
materials to present the message of the sign.  Figurative signs may be
incorporated into any of the allowable sign types identified in this
Ordinance.



SIGN, FREESTANDING.  A sign erected and maintained on a frame, mast, pole,
or other structure which is not attached to any building.



SIGN, MONUMENT.  A freestanding ground-mounted sign with an aggregate width
of at least fifty percent (50%) of the width of the sign and with supports
that complement the materials and colors used in the architecture on-site.



SIGN, OFF-SITE OR OFF-PREMISE.  A sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, entertainment, product or attraction sold, offered, or
existing elsewhere than upon the property where the sign is located.



SIGN, PARAPET. A sign attached to that portion of a building's exterior wall
that projects above the plane line of the building.



SIGN, PORTABLE. A temporary sign not affixed to a structure or ground-mounted
on a site.



SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign attached to a building or other structure and
extending in whole or in part not more than twelve inches (12") beyond the
building or other structure to which it is attached.



SIGN, READER PANEL.  A sign which is designed to permit immediate change of
copy.



SIGN, ROOF.  A sign erected on, above, or over the roof so that it projects
above the highest point of the roofline, parapet, or fascia.



SIGN, SHINGLE.  A sign suspended from, and located entirely under a covered
porch, covered walkway, or an awning and is anchored or rigidly hung to
prevent the sign from swinging due to wind movement.



SIGN, VEHICLE. A sign mounted, painted or otherwise placed on a truck, bus,
car, boat, trailer or other vehicle or equipment and used in such a manner
that the sign is visible from a public street or right-of-way where the
primary purpose of the vehicle or equipment is to display the signage.  The
primary purpose of the vehicle or equipment shall be presumed to be to
display such signage if (a) the vehicle or equipment is not in operating
condition, currently registered or licensed to operate on public streets or
actively used in the daily function of the business to which the signs
relate; or (b) is used primarily as a static display for the display of the
signage.  Vehicles and equipment engaged in active construction projects and
on-premise storage of equipment and vehicles offered to the general public
for rent or lease shall not be considered to be vehicle signs.



SIGN, WALL. A sign fastened to or painted on the exterior wall of a building
or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure
for, or forms the background surface of the sign.



SIGN, WINDOW. Any poster, cut-out letters, painted text or graphic, or other
text or visual presentation affixed to the interior or exterior of a window,
or placed within six (6) feet behind a window pane that is placed to be read
from the exterior of a building.  This does not include any item of
merchandise normally displayed within a store window of a merchant.



SIGHT VISIBILITY TRIANGLE.  The area of a corner lot bounded by the
right-of-way lines and a line connecting the two points on the property lines
twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of the property lines.



SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT.  An interactive group of persons occupying a
residential unit where all of the following are true:



a.   The residents share use of and responsibility for common areas,
household activities, and responsibilities such as meals, chores, household
maintenance, and expenses; and



b.   If the residents are renters, all adult residents have chosen to
occupy the entire premises of the dwelling unit together under a single
written lease with joint use and responsibility for the premises; and



c.   The makeup of the household occupying the unit is determined by the
residents of the unit rather than the landlord or property manager.



SITE PLAN.  A plan prepared to scale showing the boundaries of a site and
the proposed location of all buildings and structures, circulation,
landscaping, improvements and open space areas, all in compliance with the
provisions of this code.



SLAUGHTERHOUSE.  A structure or parcel of land in which livestock, including
cattle, horses, goats, swine, sheep, fowl, or any other animals are killed,
skinned, gutted, or otherwise prepared for subsequent sale as food. This
shall not include retail butcher shops when operated within a completely
enclosed building in which no livestock is killed, skinned, or gutted.



SPECIFIC PLAN.  A detailed element of the General Plan enacted under the
provisions of Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6, Arizona Revised Statutes.



STABLE, COMMERCIAL.  A structure including, but not limited to a corral or
paddock for the keeping of horses for remuneration, hire, or sale.



STABLE, PRIVATE.  A detached accessory structure including, but not limited
to, a corral or paddock for the keeping of one or more horses owned or leased
by the occupants of the premises and which are not kept for remuneration or
hire.



STORM SEWER.  A channel or conduit, open or closed, necessary, useful or
convenient for the collection and carrying of surface waters to a drainage
course.



STREET.  Any existing or proposed parkway, avenue, boulevard, road, lane,
parkway, place, bridge, viaduct or easement for public vehicular access or a
street shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or a street in a
plat duly filed and recorded in the Yavapai County  Recorder's office. A
street includes all land within the street right-of-way whether improved or
unimproved, and includes such improvements as pavement, shoulders, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, parking space, bridges and viaducts.



STREET LINES.  The boundary line between street right-of-way and abutting
property.



STREET, NEW.  Any addition or extension of the public use access system.



STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected which requires a fixed location
on the ground, including building but not including a fence or wall used as a
fence.



STUB STREET  means a short dead end street  no more than one lot deep in
length formed at the boundaries of a subdivision to provide access to
abutting property.



SUBDIVIDER.  A person, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
syndicate, trust or other legal entity that files application and initiates
proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the provisions of
these regulations or any other applicable ordinance or state statute, except
that an individual serving as an agent for such legal entity is not a
subdivider.



SUBDIVISION. Improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the purpose of
financing, sale, or lease, whether immediate or future, into four or more
lots, tracts, or parcels of land, or, if a new street is involved, any such
property which is divided into two or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land,
or any such property, the boundaries of which have been fixed by a recorded
plat, which is divided into more than two parts. “Subdivision” also
includes any condominium, cooperative, community apartment, Townhouse or
similar project containing four or more parcels, in which an undivided
interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any
unit located thereon, but plats of such projects need not show the buildings
or the manner in which the buildings or airspace above the property shown on
the plat are to be divided.



SUBDIVISION, MAJOR means improved- or unimproved land or lands divided for
the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into
more than ten (10) lots, tracts, or parcels of land, or, if a new street is
involved, any such property which is divided into two (2) or more lots,
tracts or parcels of land, or any such property, the boundaries of which have
been fixed by a recorded plat, which is divided into more than two (2) parts.
Subdivision also includes any condominium, cooperative, community apartment,
Townhouse or similar project containing four or more parcels, in which an
undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive
occupancy of any unit located thereon, but plats of such projects need not
show the buildings or the manner in which the buildings or airspace above the
property shown on the plat are to be divided.



SUBDIVISION, MINOR means improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the
purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into
between four (4) and ten (10) lots, tracts, or parcels of land, or, if a new
street is involved, any such property which is divided into two (2) or more
lots, tracts or parcels of land, or any such property, the boundaries of
which have been fixed by a recorded plat, which is divided into more than two
(2) parts.  Subdivision also includes any condominium, cooperative,
community apartment, townhouse or similar project containing four (4) or more
parcels, in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right
of exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon, but plats of such
projects need not show the buildings or the manner in which the buildings or
airspace above the property shown on the plat are to be divided.



SWIMMING POOL.  Any structure, containing or intended to contain water for
recreational uses.



TOWN ENGINEER means the individual hired by the Town Manager, pursuant to the
provisions of A.R.S. § 9-238, to serve as Town Engineer.



TRADITIONAL DEVELOPMENT. “Traditional Development” shall mean a
residential development approach where lots are relatively uniform in size
and dispersed consistently throughout the development and streets are
generally laid out in a standard grid pattern.



TRAVEL TRAILER.  A portable structure, without motive power, with wheels
built on a chassis, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation,
and vacation purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight (8) feet.



UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE means that Ordinance enacted by the Council
regulating the use of land or structures or both.



USE.  The purpose for which a site or structure is arranged, designed,
intended, constructed, moved, erected, altered, or enlarged, or for which
either a site or structure is or may be occupied and maintained.



USE, ACCESSORY.  A subordinate use of a building, other structure, or use of
land:



1.   Accessory uses shall not be established prior to the issuance of a
building permit for the primary residence or commercialbuilding.



2.   Which is clearly incidental to the use of the main building, other
structure, or use of land, and



3.   Which is customarily in connection with the main building, other
structure, or use of land, and



4.   Which is located on the same zoned lot with the main building, other
structure, or use of land.



USE, CONDITIONAL.  A use, which is listed as a “conditional use” in any
given zone district. Such use shall require a “Conditional Use Permit” in
order to establish within that zone district, and shall be subject to all
conditions and requirements imposed by the Commission in connection with the
“Conditional Use Permit.”



USE, PERMITTED.  A use, which is listed as a “Permitted use” in any
given zone district. Such use shall be allowed to establish within that zone
district, subject to the specific requirements of this Ordinance.



USE, TEMPORARY.  Unless otherwise previously approved by Council, a use that
does not exceed fifteen (15) consecutive days.



UTILITY AREA.  An area located external to the primary building or use
including, but not limited to, refuse containers/dumpsters; storage; display
of materials or merchandise; loading or unloading goods, production assembly,
and processing or demolition of goods.



VARIANCE. A dispensation permitted on individual parcels of property as a
method of alleviating unnecessary hardship by allowing a reasonable use of
the building, structure, or property, which, because of unusual or unique
circumstances, is denied by the terms of the Unified Development Ordinance.



WAREHOUSE.  A building or buildings used for the storage of goods.



WEED.  An unwanted, useless, troublesome, invasive, or injurious herbaceous
or woody plant, excluding flowers and vegetable gardens, grain plots, and
pastures used for feed.



WHOLESALE. The sale of goods or materials for the purposes of resale.



YARD. An open space on a lot required by this Ordinance, which is unoccupied
and unobstructed with buildings, structures or portions thereof from the
ground upward. Trees, shrubbery, fences, and non-commercial stables as
allowed in this Ordinance shall not be considered obstructions.



YARD, REQUIRED FRONT. A yard, the width of which is the minimum horizontal
distance, between the front lot line and the setback line that is parallel to
the front lot line and extends the full width of the lot. Any portion of a
private drive which is between the street and the front setback line shall
also be considered a required yard for building and storage purposes, but is
not used in calculating distances for average lot width or required yards.



YARD, REQUIRED REAR.  A yard the width of which is the minimum horizontal
distance between the rear lot line and the setback line that is parallel to
the rear lot line and extends the full width of the lot. 



YARD, REQUIRED SIDE.  A yard the width of which is the minimum horizontal
distance between the side lot line and the setback line that is parallel to
the side lot line and extends the full length of the lot.



ZONE. A district classification established by this Ordinance, which limits
or permits various and specific uses.



ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.  The individual hired by the Town or appointed by the
TownCouncil to enforce this Ordinance, and perform the functions described in
Subsection 1.6.2 Powers and Duties.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007; Ord. 08-707,
passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed
1-11-2011; Ord. 13-779, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014; Ord.
15-798, passed 6-23-2015; Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017)



3   ZONING DISTRICTS



3.1  ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS



In order to carry out the purpose of this Ordinance, the Town is hereby
divided into the following zoning districts:



“OS”       Open Space/Resource Conservation



“AR-36”      Agricultural/Residential - 36 Acre Minimum



“AR-5”      Agricultural/Residential - 5 Acre Minimum



“AR-4”      Agricultural/Residential - 4 Acre Minimum



“SR-2.5”    Single Family Residential - 2.5 Acre Minimum



“SR-2”      Single Family Residential - 2 Acre Minimum



“SR-1.6”   Single Family Residential - 1.6 Acre Minimum



“SR-1”      Single Family Residential - 1 Acre Minimum



“SR-0.16”   Single Family Residential - 7,000 Square Foot Minimum Lot
area



         (Provided that all lots less than 1 acre in size must be
served by a water and sewage disposal system approved by the Town.)



“MR-1”   Multiple Family Residential - 1 acre Minimum



“MHP-4”    Mobile Home Parks - Residential - 4 acre Minimum



“CL”       Light Commercial



“CH”       Heavy Commercial



“I”       Industrial



“PL”      Public Land.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-742, passed 11-9-2010)



3.2  LOCATION AND BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS



A.   The locations and boundaries of the zoning districts are established
as they are shown on the map entitled “The Zoning map of the Town of Chino
Valley” which is hereby incorporated by reference into this Ordinance.



B.   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any zoning
districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:



1.   Where district boundaries are shown as approximately following
streets, alleys, or right-of-way lines, such streets, alleys, or right-of-way
lines shall be deemed to be such boundaries.



2.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be deemed to be the boundaries.



3.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the streets, alleys, or right-of-way lines, such
district’s boundaries shall be deemed as being parallel hereto and at such
distance there from as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given,
such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the
zoning map.



4.   Where the application of the above rules does not clarify the zone
boundary location, then the Board of Adjustment shall determine the location.



C.   Within newly annexed areas, the Town shall initially adopt zoning
classifications that permit densities and uses no greater than those
permitted by Yavapai County immediately before annexation. Areas, when
annexed to the Town, shall, until officially zoned by Council, be considered
to be zoned to Town classification closest to that shown on the official
zoning map of Yavapai County  at the time of annexation. Such County 
Zoning shall apply for not more than six (6) months. Subsequent changes in
zoning of the annexed territory shall be made according to procedures
established by this Ordinance.



After annexation, and before expiration of six months from the date of
annexation, the Town shall adopt zoning classifications, which permit
densities and uses no greater than those permitted by the County 
immediately before annexation. Subsequent changes in zoning of the annexed
territory shall be made according to existing procedures established by the
Town for the rezoning of the land.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



3.3  ZONING DESCRIPTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS



This subsection will describe each of the individual Zoning districts and
will contain the following information on each respective Zoning district:



A.   Purpose



B.   Permitted uses



C.   Conditional uses (if applicable)



D.   Property Development Standards



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



3.4  “OS”- OPEN SPACE RESOURCE CONSERVATION



A.   PURPOSE



The purpose of the (OS) Open Space/Resource Conservation designation is to
preserve lands as open space and to promote resource conservation. Lands so
designated shall be limited to exclusive use as trail and path systems and
other strictly prescribed recreational uses and for the preservation of
historical sites, historic agricultural uses and natural plant and animal
habitats.



B. APPLICABILITY



The (OS) Open Space/Resource Conservation Designation may be applied where
the Town wishes to strictly limit the uses of the land for the preservation
of open space and resource conservation.



C.   PERMITTED USES



Permitted uses in the OS zone shall be limited strictly to open space uses
such as public parks and play areas, trails and paths for non-motorized use,
and other recreational or commercialuses which do not adversely impact the
preservation of open space and resource conservation, such as:



1.   Agriculture, cultivation and ranching.



2.   Historical sites.



3.   Public parks and play areas.



4.   Horse trails, bike paths, walking trails and other similar
non-motorized recreational trails or paths.



D.   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



No structures, either permanent or temporary, shall be permitted except for
accessory buildings that relate directly to the designated open
space/resource conservation use (such as restrooms, ramadas, historical
buildings). Such accessory buildings are permitted only subject to plan
review by Commission and approval by Council.



Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may
be allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted
use shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010)



3.5  “AR-36” - AGRICULTURAL/RESIDENTIAL



A.   PURPOSE



This district is intended to preserve agricultural land and the agricultural
heritage and aesthetic of the area. Land use is composed of farming,
agriculture, and the raising of livestock together with a single family
residence and customary accessory uses and buildings.



B.   PERMITTED USES



1.   One (1) single-family dwelling as the principal residence on lots of
at least thirty-six (36) acres in size.



2.   One (1) guesthouse, not to exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet total under one (1) roof, in addition to the principal residence.



3.   Farming and agriculture including the keeping of cattle, horses,
swine (limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats, fowl, but not feed lots,
slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the reduction of animal
matter.



4.   Customary accessory structures such as barns, nurseries, corrals,
private arenas, training tracks, coops, non-commercialgreenhouses up to 600
sq. ft., and storage sheds for the care and keeping of non-household animals,
fowl, produce, farm machinery and equipment. Accessory structures shall not
be permitted prior to the issuance of a building permit for the primary
residence.



5.   Home occupations.



6.   Stands for sale of farm produce.



7.   Churches or similar places of worship.



8.   Schools and public/governmental facilities.



9.   Commercialgreenhouses and accessory uses. See Subsection
4.30CommercialGreenhouse Development Standards.



C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)



1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation facilities.



2.   Colleges and universities.



3.   Golf, rod and gun, tennis and country clubs.



4.   Rodeos, livestock auctions, fair grounds, riding academies.



5.   Cemeteries.



6.   Public utilitybuildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for
public service use. Extension of public lines in public or private
right-of-way is exempt from this requirement.



7.   Indoor and outdoor kennels.



8.   The operation of feed lots, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or
plants for the reduction of animal matter.



9.   Outdoor sales and storage of firewood for sale provided a residence
has been established.



10.   Feed Stores.



11.   Commercialstables.



12.   Bed and Breakfast operations with the limitation that no guest may
stay for more than seven (7) days during any consecutive thirty (30) day
period.



13.   Workers quarters and worker housing.



14.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described
in A.R.S. §§ 36-481 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of
Economic Security.



15.   Recovery residences.



16.   Assisted living homes.



Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may
be allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted
use shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.



D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



1.   Minimum Lot Area:                36 acres



2.   Minimum Average Lot width:             200 feet



3.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                200 feet



4.   Minimum Front Yard Set Back:             See Section 4.28



5.   Minimum Side Yard Set Back:             20 feet



6.   Minimum Street Side Yard Set Back:       See Section 4.28



7.   Minimum Rear Yard Set Back:             20 feet



8.   Maximum Building Height:                35 feet



9.   Accessory Building shall be setback 10 feet from side and rear
property lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard setback



10. Maximum Lot Coverage:               50%



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 13-779, passed
12-10-2013; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 16-811, passed 1-26-2016)



3.6  “AR-5” - AGRICULTURAL/RESIDENTIAL



A.   PURPOSE



This district is intended to promote and preserve low-density single-family
residential and agricultural development. Regulations and property
development standards are designed to protect the single-family residential
and agricultural character of the district and to prohibit all incompatible
activities.



B.   PERMITTED USES



1.   One (1) single-family dwelling.



2.   One (1) guesthouse, not to exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet of gross area, in addition to the principal residence.



3.   Farming and agriculture including the keeping of cattle, horses,
swine (limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats, fowl, but not feed lots,
slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the reduction of animal
matter.



4.   Customary accessory structures such as barns, corrals, private
arenas, training tracks, coops, non- commercialgreenhouses up to 600 sq. ft.,
and storage sheds for the care and keeping of non-household animals, fowl,
produce, farm machinery and equipment. Accessory structures shall not be
permitted prior to the issuance of a building permit for the primary
residence.



5.   Home occupations.



6.   Stands for the sale of farm produce when primarily grown on site.



7.   Churches or similar places of worship.



8.   Schools and public/governmental facilities.



9.   Commercialgreenhouses with a minimum of ten (10) contiguous  acres.
See Subsection 4.30Commercial Greenhouse Development Standards.



C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)



1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation facilities.



2.   Colleges and universities.



3.   Golf, rod and gun, tennis and country clubs.



4.   Rodeos, livestock auctions, fairgrounds, riding academies.



5.   Cemeteries.



6.   Public utilitybuildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for
public service use. Extension of public lines in public or private
right-of-way is exempt from this requirement.



7.   Indoor and outdoor kennels.



8.   Outdoor sales and storage of firewood for sale provided a residence
has been established.



9.   Feed Stores.



10.   Commercialstables.



11.    Bed and Breakfast operations with the limitation that no guest may
stay for more than seven (7) days during any consecutive thirty (30) day
period.



12.   Stands for the sale of farm produce when not primarily grown on site.



13.    Workers quarters and worker housing.



14.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described
in A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of
Economic Security.



15.   Recovery residences.



16.   Assisted living homes.



Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may
be allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted
use shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.



D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   



1.   Minimum Lot Area:                   5 acres



2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                200 feet



3.   Minimum Front Yard Set Back:             See Section 4.28



4.   Minimum Interior Side Yard set Back:       20 feet



5.   Minimum Street Side Yard Set Back:       See Section 4.28



6.   Minimum Rear Yard Set Back:             20 feet



7.   Maximum Building Height:                35 feet



8.   Accessory Building shall be setback 10 feet from side and rear
property lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard
setback.



9.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                50%



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 13-779, passed
12-10-2013; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 16-811, passed 1-26-2016)



3.7  “AR-4” - AGRICULTURAL/RESIDENTIAL



A.   PURPOSE



This district is intended to promote and preserve low-density single-family
residential and agricultural development. Regulations and property
development standards are designed to protect the single-family residential
and agricultural character of the district and to prohibit all incompatible
activities.



B. PERMITTED USES



1.   One (1) single-family dwelling.



2.   One (1) guesthouse, not to exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet of gross area, in addition to the principal residence.



3.   Farming and agriculture including the keeping of cattle, horses,
swine (limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats, fowl, but not feed lots,
slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the reduction of animal
matter.



4.   Customary accessory structures such as barns, corrals, private
arenas, training tracks, coops, non- commercialgreenhouses up to six hundred
(600) square feet, and storage sheds for the care and keeping of
non-household animals, fowl, produce, farm machinery and equipment. Accessory
structures shall not be permitted prior to the issuance of a building permit
for the primary residence.



5.   Home occupations.



6.   Stands for the sale of farm produce when primarily grown on site.



7.   Churches or similar places of worship.



8.   Schools and public/governmental facilities.



9.   Commercialgreenhouses with a minimum of ten (10) contiguous  acres.
See Section 4.30Commercial Greenhouse Development Standards.



C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)



1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation facilities.



2.   Colleges and universities.



3.   Golf, rod and gun, tennis and country clubs.



4.   Rodeos, livestock auctions, fairgrounds, riding academies.



5.   Cemeteries.



6.   Public utilitybuildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for
public service use. Extension of public lines in public or private
right-of-way is exempt from this requirement.



7.   Indoor and outdoor kennels.



8.   Outdoor sales and storage of firewood for sale provided a residence
has been established.



9.   Feed Stores.



10.   Commercialstables.



11.    Bed and Breakfast operations with the limitation that no guest may
stay for more than seven (7) days during any consecutive thirty (30) day
period.



12.   Stands for the sale of farm produce when not primarily grown on site.



13.   Workers quarters and worker housing.



14.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described
in A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of
Economic Security.



15.   Recovery residences.



16.   Assisted living homes.



Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may
be allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted
use shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.



D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



1.   Minimum Lot area:                4 acres



2.   Minimum lot frontage:                200 feet



3.   Minimum Front yard Set Back:          See Section 4.28



4.   Minimum Interior Side yard Set Back:    20 feet



5.   Minimum Street Side yard Set Back:    See Section 4.28



6.   Minimum Rear yard Set Back:          20 feet



7.   Maximum building height:             35 feet



8.   Accessory building shall be setback 10 feet from side and rear
property lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard
setback.



9.   Maximum Lot coverage:             50%



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 13-779, passed
12-10-2013; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 16-811, passed 1-26-2016)



3.8  “SR-2.5” - SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL



A.   PURPOSE



This district is intended to promote and preserve low-density single-family
residential development and to serve as a transition to the agricultural (AR)
districts. Regulations and property development standards are designed to
protect the single-family residential character of the district and to
prohibit all incompatible activities.



B.   PERMITTED USES



1.   One (1) single-family dwelling.



2.   One (1) guest home of no more than 800 square feet of gross area, but
in no case larger than the principle residence, in addition to the principle
residence.



3.   Home occupations.



4.   Churches or other similar places of worship.



5.   Customary accessory structures such as barns, corrals, private
arenas, training tracks, coops, non- commercialgreenhouses up to 600 sq. ft.,
and storage sheds for the care and keeping of non-household animals, fowl,
produce, farm machinery and equipment. Accessory structures shall not be
permitted prior to the issuance of a building permit for the primary
residence.



6.   Farming and agriculture including, if primarily non-commercial, the
keeping of cattle, horses, swine (limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats,
fowl, but not feed lots, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the
reduction of animal matter.



7.   Schools and public/governmental facilities.



C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)



1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation facilities.



2.   Temporary home and land sale offices, provided they are located
within the same subdivision as that land and homes which are offered for sale.



3.   Public utilitybuildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for
public service use. Extension of public service lines in public or private
right-of-way is ex-empt from this requirement.



4.   Mixed usesubdivisions when public water and wastewater is available
and when developing under the PAD process guidelines.



5.   Bed and Breakfast operations with the limitation that no guest may
stay for more than seven (7) days during any consecutive thirty (30) day
period.



6.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described
in A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of
Economic Security.



7.   Recovery residences.



8.   Assisted living homes.



Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may
be allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted
use shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.



D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



1.   Minimum Lot Area:                   2.5 Acres



2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                100 Feet



3.   Minimum Front Yard Set Back:             See Section 4.28



4.   Minimum Side Yard Set Back:             10 Feet



5.   Minimum Street Side Yard Set Back:      See Section 4.28



6.   Minimum Rear Yard Set Back:             20 Feet



7.   Maximum Building Height:                35 Feet



8.   Accessory Building shall be setback 10 feet from side and rear
property lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard
setback.



9.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                40%



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014)



3.9  “SR-2” - SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL



A.   PURPOSE



This district is intended to promote and preserve low-density single-family
residential development and to serve as a transition to the agricultural (AR)
districts. Regulations and property development standards are designed to
protect the single-family residential character of the district and to
prohibit all incompatible activities.



B.   PERMITTED USES



1.   One (1) single-family dwelling.



2.   One (1) guest home of no more than eight hundred (800) square feet of
gross area, but in no case larger than the principle residence, in addition
to the principle residence.



3.   Home occupations.



4.   Churches or other similar places of worship.



5.   Customary accessory structures such as barns, corrals, private
arenas, training tracks, coops, non- commercialgreenhouses up to six hundred
(600) square feet, and storage sheds for the care and keeping of
non-household animals, fowl, produce, farm machinery and equipment. Accessory
structures shall not be permitted prior to the issuance of a building permit
for the primary residence.



6.   Farming and agriculture including, if primarily non-commercial, the
keeping of cattle, horses, swine (limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats,
fowl, but not feed lots, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the
reduction of animal matter.



7.   Schools and public/governmental facilities.



C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)



1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation facilities.



2.   Temporary home and land sale offices, provided they are located
within the same subdivision as that land and homes which are offered for sale.



3.   Public utilitybuildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for
public service use. Extension of public service lines in public or private
right-of-way is exempt from this requirement.



4.   Mixed usesubdivisions when public water and wastewater is available
and when developing under the PAD process guidelines.



5.   Bed and Breakfast operations with the limitation that no guest may
stay for more than seven (7) days during any consecutive thirty (30) day
period.



6.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described
in A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of
Economic Security.



7.   Recovery residences.



8.   Assisted living homes.



Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may
be allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted
use shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.



D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



1.   Minimum Lot Area:                   2 acres



2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                100 feet



3.   Minimum Front Yard Set Back:             See Section 4.28



4.   Minimum Side Yard Set Back:             10 feet



5.   Minimum Street Side Yard Set Back:       See Section 4.28



6.   Minimum Rear Yard Set Back:             20 feet



7.   Maximum Building Height:                35 feet



8.   Accessory Building Shall Be Setback 10 Feet from Side and Rear
Property Lines and must Conform to the Front Yard and Street Side Yard
Setback.



9.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                40% 



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014)



3.10  “SR-1.6” -  SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL



A.   PURPOSE



This district is intended to promote and preserve medium-density
single-family residential development. Regulations and property development
standards are designed to protect the single-family residential character of
the district and to prohibit all incompatible activities.



B.   PERMITTED USES



1.   One (1) single-family dwelling.



2.   One (1) guest home of no more than eight hundred (800) square feet in
total area under one roof, but in no case larger than the primary residence,
in addition to the primary residence.



3.   Churches or other similar places of worship.



4.   Home occupations.



5.   Schools and public/governmental facilities.



6.   Customary accessory structures such as barns, corrals, private
arenas, training tracks, coops, non- commercial greenhouses up to six hundred
(600) square feet, and storage sheds for the care and keeping of
non-household animals, fowl, produce, farm machinery and equipment. Accessory
structures shall not be permitted prior to the issuance of a building permit
for the primary residence.



7.   Farming and agriculture including, if primarily non-commercial, the
keeping of cattle, horses, swine (limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats,
fowl, but not feed lots, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the
reduction of animal matter.



C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)



1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation facilities.



2.   Temporary home and land sale offices, provided they are located
within the same subdivision as that land and homes which are offered for sale.



3.   Public utilitybuildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for
public service use. Extension of public service lines in public or private
right-of-way is ex-empt from this requirement.



4.   Mixed Usesubdivisions when public water and wastewater is available
and when developing under the PAD process guidelines.



5.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described
in A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of
Economic Security.



6.   Bed and Breakfast operations with the limitation that no guest may
stay for more than seven (7) days during any consecutive thirty (30) day
period.



7.   Recovery residences.



8.   Assisted living homes.



Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may
be allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted
use shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.



D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



1.   Minimum Lot Area:                   1.6 acres



2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                100 feet



3.   Minimum Front Yard Set Back:             See Section 4.28



4.   Minimum Side Yard Set Back:             10 feet



5.   Minimum Street Side Yard Set Back:       See Section 4.28



6.   Minimum Rear Yard Set Back:             20 feet



7.   Maximum Building Height:                35 feet



8.   Accessory Building shall be setback 10 feet from side and rear
property lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard
setback.



9.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                50% 



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014)



3.11  “SR-1” -  SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL



A.   PURPOSE



This district is intended to promote and preserve medium-density
single-family residential development. Regulations and property development
standards are designed to protect the single-family residential character of
the district and to prohibit all incompatible activities.



B.   PERMITTED USES



1.   One (1) single-family dwelling.



2.   One (1) guest home of no more than eight hundred (800) square feet in
total area under one (1) roof, but in no case larger than the primary
residence, in addition to the primary residence.



3.   Churches or other similar places of worship.



4.   Home occupations.



5.   Schools and public/governmental facilities.



6.   Customary accessory structures such as barns, corrals, private
arenas, training tracks, coops, non- commercial greenhouses up to six hundred
(600) square feet, and storage sheds for the care and keeping of
non-household animals, fowl, produce, farm machinery and equipment. Accessory
structures shall not be permitted prior to the issuance of a building permit
for the primary residence.



7.   Farming and agriculture including, if primarily non-commercial, the
keeping of cattle, horses, swine (limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats,
fowl, but not feed lots, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the
reduction of animal matter.



C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)



1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation facilities.



2.   Temporary home and land sale offices, provided they are located
within the same subdivision as that land and homes which are offered for sale.



3.   Public utilitybuildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for
public service use. Extension of public service lines in public or private
right-of-way is exempt from this requirement.



4.   Mixed Usesubdivisions when public water and wastewater is available
and when developing under the PAD process guidelines.



5.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described
in A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of
Economic Security.



6.   Bed and Breakfast operations with the limitation that no guest may
stay for more than seven (7) days during any consecutive thirty (30) day
period.



7.   Recovery residences.



8.   Assisted living homes.



Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may
be allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted
use shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.



D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



1.   Minimum Lot Area:                   1 acre



2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                100 feet



3.   Minimum Front Yard Set Back:             See Section 4.28



4.   Minimum Side Yard Set Back:             10 feet



5.   Minimum Street Side Yard set Back:      See Section 4.28



6.   Minimum Rear Yard Set Back:            20 feet



7.   Maximum Building Height:                35 feet



8.   Accessory Building shall be setback 10 feet from side and rear
property lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard
setback.



9.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                50% 



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014)



3.12  SR-0.16 - SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL



A.   PURPOSE



The purpose of this district is to allow for the regulation, development and
redevelopment of existing 7,000 square foot residential lots. It is not the
intention of the Town to create any new SR-0.16 zoned property. 



B.   PERMITTED USES



1.   One (1) single-family dwelling.



2.   Customary accessory building provided such uses are incidental to the
principal use. Accessory structures shall not be permitted prior to the
issuance of a building permit for the primary residence.



3.   Home occupations.



4.   Churches or similar places or worship.



C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)



1.   Public/governmental facilities. 



2.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation areas and centers.



3.   Temporary home and land sale offices, provided they are located
within the same subdivision as that land and homes which are offered for sale.



4.   Public utilitybuildings, structures or appurtenances thereto for
public service use. The extension of public service lines in public or
private right-of-way is exempt from this requirement.



5.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described
in A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of
Economic Security.



6.   Bed and Breakfast operations with the limitation that no guest may
stay for more than seven (7) days during any consecutive thirty (30) day
period.



7.   Recovery residences.



8.   Assisted living homes.



Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may
be allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted
use shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.



D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



1.   Minimum Lot Area:                   7000 sq. ft



   All lots less than one (1) acre in size must be served by a water
and/or sewage disposal system approved by the Town of Chino Valley.



2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                50 feet



3.   Minimum Front Yard Set Back:             See Section 4.28



4.   Minimum Side Yard Set Back:             10 feet



5.   Minimum StreetYard Set Back:          See Section 4.28



6.   Minimum Rear Yard Set Back:             10 feet



7.   Maximum Building Height:                25 feet



8.   Accessory Building shall be setback 5 feet from side and rear
property lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard
setback.



9.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                50%



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014)



3.13  “MR” - MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL



A.   PURPOSE



This district is intended to fulfill the need for high density multiple
family residential development. Regulations and property development
standards are designed to allow maximum flexibility and variety in
residential development while prohibiting all incompatible activities.



B.   PERMITTED USES



1.   Multiple family dwellings. Each unit shall have minimum of 3,000 sq.
ft. of land area.



2.   Customary accessory buildings, provided such uses are incidental to
the principal use.



3.   Churches or similar places of worship.



4.   Recovery residences.



5.   Assisted living homes.



C.   CONDITIONAL USES



1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation areas and centers.



2.   Group homes.



3.   Nursing homes and convalescent homes.



4.   Temporary home and land sale offices, provided they are located
within the same subdivision as that land and homes which are offered for sale.



5.   Public utilitybuildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for
public or private right-of-way is exempt from this requirement.



6.   Schools.



7.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described
in A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of
Economic Security.



Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may
be allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted
use shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.



D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



1.   Minimum Lot area:                   N/A



   All lots less than one (1) acre in size must be served by a water
and/or sewage disposal system approved by the Town of Chino Valley.



2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                   75 feet



3.   Minimum Front yard Set Back:             See Section 4.28



4.   Minimum Side Yard Set Back:             10 feet



5.   Minimum Street Side Yard Set Back       See Section 4.28



6.   Minimum Rear Yard Set Back:             20 feet



7.   Maximum Building Height:                35 feet



8.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                40%



9.   Accessory Building shall be setback 10 feet from side and rear
property lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard
setback.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014)



3.14  “MHP-4” -  MOBILE HOME PARK



A.   PURPOSE



This district is intended to fulfill the need for mobile home parks.
Regulations and property development standards are designed to allow maximum
flexibility and variety in residential development while prohibiting all
incompatible activities.



B.   PERMITTED USES



1.   Mobile home parks. Maximum density, six (6) sites per acre.



2.   Customary accessory buildings provided such uses are incidental to
the principal use. Accessory structures shall not be permitted prior to the
issuance of a building permit for the primary residence.



3.   Churches or similar places of worship.



C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)



1.   Privately owned and operated parks and recreation areas and centers.



2.   Group homes.



3.   Nursing homes and convalescent homes.



4.   Temporary home and land sale offices and model homes, provided they
are located within the same subdivision as that land and homes which are
offered for sale.



5.   Public utilitybuildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for
public or private right-of-way is exempt from this requirement.



6.   Schools.



7.   Residential facilities for the developmentally disabled as described
in A.R.S. §§ 36-581 and 36-582, which are licensed by the Department of
Economic Security.



Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may
be allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted
use shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.



D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



1.   Minimum Mobile Home Park Size:             N/A



2.   Minimum Gross Site Area per Mobile Home:    7260 sq. ft.



3.   Minimum Park Frontage:                   100 feet



4.   Minimum Setback of any Building or Mobile/Manufactured Home from any
public street property line:             See Section 4.28



Between a side and an opposing end:             25 feet



5.   Minimum Setback of any Building or Mobile



Home from Mobile Home Park Boundary:          15 feet



6.   Placement of Mobile Home or Building on



Individual Building Site:



a.   Minimum Setback from Private Access Street:    10 feet



b.   Minimum Distance Between Mobile Homes:      25 feet



7.   Minimum Mobile Home Size:                12 feet in
Width



                              40 ft. in Length



8.   Maximum Building Height:                   25 feet



9.   Accessory Building shall be setback 3 feet from side and rear
property lines and must conform to the front yard and street side yard
setback.



10.   Driveways and Vehicular Access:



a.   Mobile home parks shall be located on or have two (2) direct accesses
to public street, of which no more than one (1) may be onto Highway 89. No
individual mobile home space within the mobile home park may have direct
access to a public street.



b.   Any driveway shall have a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet,
except when a driveway is located between parking spaces, it shall have a
minimum width of thirty (30) feet.



c.   All driveways and interior streets shall be surfaced in a manner
acceptable to Planning and Zoning.



d.   All plans and traffic engineering shall be subject to approval of
Planning and Zoning and shall be based upon the spacing and maneuverability
requirements for seventy (70) foot long trailers.



11.   Utilities. Each mobile home shall include cooking facilities, toilet
facilities, and bathing or shower facilities, and shall be permanently
connected to electric power, water supply and sewage disposal. All utility
distribution and service lines shall be installed underground.



12.   Skirting. All mobile homes shall be skirted with fire resistant
material that is not susceptible to rapid weathering.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010)



3.15  “CL” - LIGHT COMMERCIAL



A.   PURPOSE



This district is intended to provide for neighborhood amenity and some
general commercialuses. Land use is composed chiefly of retail and service
businesses, offices, and apartments, together with necessary accessory uses.



B.   PERMITTED USES



1.   Retail sales establishments.



2.   Laundries limited to machines not exceeding twenty-five (25) pound
capacity according to manufacturers rating.



3.   Pet shops within a closed building.



4.   Repair services such as, but no more objectionable or intensive in
character than watches, jewelry, shoes, locksmith, and household appliances.



5.   Personal services such as barbers, beauty shops, health clubs,
laundries and cleaners.



6.   Restaurants, cafes and coffee shops.



7.   Second-hand stores, pawnshops and used furniture stores.



8.   Governmental services, public utilityoffices and exchanges, excluding
storage or repair services, provided all antennas that extend above the
building height shall be by Conditional Use Permit.



9.   Business and professional offices, banks and similar.



10.   Establishments primarily supplemental in character to other
permitted principal uses, such as pharmacy, apothecary shop, sales of
corrective garments, prosthetic devices and optical goods, and medical and
dental laboratories.



11.   Business, trade, dancing, art, music, and other educational
facilities.



12.   Gasoline service stations. (Body shops and paint shops are not
included.)



13.   Small engine repair and similar shops where all work is done inside
enclosed walls of a building.



14.   Indoor and outdoor sales of nursery stock.



15.   Public utilitybuildings, structures, or appurtenances thereto for
public service use.



16.   Hotels and motels.



17.   Hospitals and other medical and dental offices and clinics.



18.   Churches and similar places of worship.



19.   Radio and television studios and all attached commercial
broadcasting and receiving antennas which have a finished height of less than
the height of the highest building on the property.



20.   Indoor commercial recreation establishments, such as bowling alleys,
billiard parlors, shooting ranges and skating rinks.



21.   Indoor theaters, assembly halls, ballrooms and lodges.



22.   Headquarters buildings or charitable, philanthropic and welfare
organizations provided that their primary activities are administrative and
clerical rather than residential in nature.



23.   Customary accessory buildings and structures provided they are
incidental to a permitted use. This shall include a single caretaker
residence in conjunction within or in the same buildings as a commercialuse.
Accessory structures shall not be permitted prior to the issuance of a
building permit for a commercialbuilding.



24.   Mortuaries.



25.   Veterinary clinic and animal hospitals, when in a closed building.



26.   Lumber yards and building supplies where all material is stored
indoors, or outside storage is less than six (6) feet in height and the
outside storage area is surrounded by a six (6) foot high sight-obscuring
fence.



27.   Outdoor commercial recreation establishments such as miniature golf,
ranges, batting cages, and similar uses.



28.   Printing and publishing.



29.   Farming and agriculture including, if primarily non-commercial, the
keeping of cattle, horses, swine (limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats,
fowl, but not feed lots, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the
reduction of animal matter. A minimum lot size of one (1) acre is required.



30.   Commercial greenhouses and accessory uses.



31.   Recovery residences.



32.   Assisted living homes.



C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)



1.   Single-family residences.



2.   New and used automobile sales including light truck, and recreational
vehicle sales.



3.   Commercial broadcasting and receiving antennas that have a finished
height higher than the height of the highest building on the parcel.



4.   Taxi stands, bus stops, and public parking lots and garages.



5.   New and used heavy truck and agricultural equipment sales.



6.   Contractor yards and building supplies with outside storage over six
(6) feet in height. (See Subsection 3.15 E. 7.)



7.   Campgrounds and recreational vehicleparks with twenty-five (25) units
or less.



8.   Drive-in theaters.



9.   Small engine repair and similar shops where any work is done outside
of an enclosed building.



10.   Retail Liquefied Petroleum Gas Dispensing Stations on the premises
and as an accessory use to an allowed retail commercial use subject to the
design requirements of the Arizona State Fire Marshall and the local Fire
Marshall having jurisdiction.



11.   Apartments. Dwelling unit must be at least eight hundred (800)
square feet.



12.   Mini-storage buildings and storage facilities, including the storage
of recreational vehicles, boats and other operable vehicles.



13.   Manufactured and Modular Home Sales.



Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may
be allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted
use shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.



D.   TEMPORARY USES (Temporary UsePermit Required)



1.   Temporary carnivals, circuses, revivals, rodeo, swap meets, outdoor
retail sales, transient merchants, and similar activities as defined and
regulated in Article 8-3 of the Town Code.



Applicability. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to garage sales
or rummage sales.



2.   Temporary Use Permit. A Temporary Use Permit shall be obtained from
the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the following:



a.   The Zoning Administrator shall ensure that health and safety are
considered, and shall obtain the approval of the Yavapai County  Health
Department, the Fire District, and the Police Department prior to issuing the
Temporary Use Permit.



b.   The Zoning Administrator shall ensure that land area is adequate for
the proposed use and consequent parking, and shall ensure that traffic safety
is considered.



c.   The Zoning Administrator shall require any measures necessary to
protect surrounding property.



d.   A time limit shall be established for each use conducted under the
Temporary Use Permit. Unless otherwise previously approved by Council, the
time limit shall not exceed fifteen (15) consecutive days.



e.   Permanent structures shall not be permitted under a Temporary Use
Permit.



E.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



1.   Minimum Lot area:
                        7,500 square feet



   All lots less than one (1) acre in size must be served by a water
and/or sewage disposal system approved by the Town of Chino Valley.



2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                      50
feet



3.   Minimum Rear and Side-Yard Building Setback:



   Side-Yard Setbacks that front a street:            See
Section 4.28



4.   Minimum Front YardBuilding Setbacks:          See Section
4.28



5.   Maximum Building Height:                      50
feet



6.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                      None



7.   Outdoor Storage: All outdoor storage shall be screened with a six (6)
foot screening fence.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 13-779, passed
12-10-2013; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 16-811, passed 1-26-2016)



3.16  “CH” - COMMERCIAL HEAVY



A.   PURPOSE



This district is intended to provide for and encourage commercial and light
manufacturing facilities that are not appropriately located next to
residential zoning.



B.   PERMITTED USES



1.   All “Permitted” and “Conditional uses” allowed in the
“CL” Zone, with the exception of single- family residences and apartments.



2.   Wholesale establishments.



3.   Manufacturing.



4.   Bottling and packaging companies.



5.   Warehouses, minimum-storage, transfer and storage facilities
including the storage of RV's, boats, and other operable vehicles.



6.   The sale and storage of products such as firewood, stone products,
and agricultural commodities.



7.   Welding shops.



8.   Underground liquid petroleum retail and wholesale distribution
facilities subject to the design requirements of the Arizona State Fire
Marshall and the local Fire Marshall having jurisdiction.



9.   Commercialoutdoor kennels.



10.   Antennas and wireless communication towers.



11.   Farming and agriculture including, if primarily non-commercial, the
keeping of cattle, horses, swine (limited to one (1) per acre), sheep, goats,
fowl, but not feed lots, slaughterhouses, fertilizer yards or plants for the
reduction of animal matter. A minimum lot size of one (1) acre is required.



12.   Contractors yards, subject to screening as set forth in Subsection
3.16 D. 9.



13.   Campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks with twenty-six (26) or
more units.



14.   Customary accessory buildings and structures provided they are
incidental to a permitted use. This shall include a single caretaker
residence in conjunction within or in the same buildings as a commercial use.



15.   Commercial greenhouses and accessory uses.



The above uses shall not be permitted prior to the issuance of a building
permit for the primary commercialbuilding, with the exception of Subsection
3.16 B. 12. contractors yards.



C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit Required)



Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may
be allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted
use shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.



D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



1.   Minimum Lot area:                   7,500 square
feet



   All lots less than one (1) acre in size must be served by a water
and/or sewage disposal system approved by the Town of Chino Valley.



2.   Minimum lot Width:                   50 feet



3.   Minimum lot frontage:                   50 feet



4.   Minimum Rear and Side yardbuilding setbacks:



   Side yard setbacks that front a street:      See Section 4.28



Exception: commercialsubdivisions-During a commercialsubdivisionplat process,
Council may approve lot lines without rear and side yard setback
requirements. Each lot line approved in this manner shall be noted so on the
final subdivisionplat.



5.   Minimum Front YardBuilding Setbacks:    See Section 4.28



6.   Minimum Building Size:                None



7.   Maximum Building Height:                50 Feet



8.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                None



Providing the parking and loading, landscaping, buffering and screening, and
setback requirements are met.



9.   Outdoor Storage: All outdoor storage shall be screened with a six (6)
foot screening fence.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 13-779, passed
12-10-2013; Ord. 16-811, passed 1-26-2016)



3.17  “I” - INDUSTRIAL



A.   PURPOSE



This district is intended to provide for and encourage industrial development
within the Town, while insuring that such activities will have minimal
impacts on the surrounding districts. Residential dwellings are prohibited in
the “I” Zoning District.



B.   PERMITTED USES



1.   Manufacturing.



2.   Quarries.



3.   Mines and associated batch plants, concrete plants and similar uses.



4.   Feed lots.



5.   Automobile salvage yards.



6.   Commercialoutdoor kennels.



7.   Customary accessory buildings and structures provided they are
incidental to a permitted use.



8.   Commercialgreenhouses and accessory uses.



9.   Medical marijuana dispensary, subject to the regulations set forth in
Section 4.31.



10.   Medical marijuana off-site cultivation and infusion facilities,
subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.31.



The above uses shall not be permitted prior to the issuance of a building
permit for the primary commercialbuilding.



C.   CONDITIONAL USES



1.   Hot mix.



2.   Heavy manufacturing such as automobile manufacturing plants.



3.   Slaughterhouses.



4.   Refineries.



5.   Outdoor storageyards and junkyards.



6.   Batch plants, concrete plants, and similar uses when not associated
with an on-site mining operation.



7.   Vehicle Motor Sports Facilities.



8.   Airports.



The above uses shall not be permitted prior to the issuance of a building
permit for the primary commercialbuilding.



Because no list of uses can be complete, the interpretation of whether a use
not specified is consistent with the intent of this zoning district and may
be allowed as a conditional use or, where discretion is allowed, a permitted
use shall be rendered by the Zoning Administrator with appeal to the Board of
Adjustment.



D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



1.   Minimum Lot Area:                1 acre



2.   Minimum Average Lot Width:          100 feet



3.   Minimum Lot Frontage:             100 feet



4.   Minimum Setbacks:



   From any Lot Lines               50 feet



5.   Minimum Building Setback



   from any street:                  A minimum setback
of 50 feet or the requirements in Section 4.28, whichever is greater



6.   Minimum Building Size:             None



7.   Maximum Building Height:             35 Feet



8.   Maximum Lot Coverage:             None



9.   All Outdoor Storage shall be screened with a six (6) foot screening
fence.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 10-729,
passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 13-779, passed
12-10-2013)



3.18  “PL” - PUBLIC LAND DESIGNATION



A.   PURPOSE



The principal purpose of the (PL) Public Land designation is to allow those
government uses which are necessary to serve the public in particular
locations of the Town and to distinguish them from private uses.



B.   PERMITTED USES



1.   Public safety and law enforcement facilities.



2.   Public facilities such as hospitals, libraries, museums and similar
public facilities.



3.   Public schools and playgrounds.



4.   Governmental officebuildings and grounds, including service and
maintenance facilities.



5.   Publicrecreational facilities and convention center.



6.   Community parks, recreational facilities, open space and fine arts
center.



7.   Colleges and universities.



8.   Other uses approved by the TownCouncil.



C.   CONDITIONAL USES (Conditional Use Permit required)



Public water production and storage facilities, public sewage treatment
plants, public facilities for the collection, transfer and disposal of solid
wastes.



D.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



1.   Minimum Lot Area:                     None



2.   Minimum Lot Frontage:                   None



3.   Minimum Average Lot Width:                None



4.   Minimum Setbacks:



   from Any Lot Zoned Residential:            50 Feet



   Minimum Building Setback from Any street:    See Section 4.28



5.   Minimum Building Size:                  None



6.   Maximum Building Height:                  35 Feet



7.   Maximum Lot Coverage:                  None



8.   Outdoor Storage: all outdoor storage shall be screened with a six (6)
foot screening fence.



(Ord. 10-742, passed 11-9-2010)



4  GENERAL REGULATIONS



4.1  GENERAL PROVISIONS



4.2  PERMITTED USES



1.   Those uses listed as “permitted uses” shall be allowed to
establish within any zone district in which they are listed, subject to the
specific requirements of this Ordinance. All other uses shall be prohibited
except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.



2.   Conditional uses. Those uses listed as “conditional uses” shall
require a “Conditional Use Permit” in order to establish within the zone
district in which they are listed, and shall be subject to all conditions and
requirements imposed by the Commission or Council in connection with the
“Conditional Use Permit.”



3.   Accessory uses. A use defined in Section 2.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.3   NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD



1.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, a building
may be constructed on any legal lot of record existing before the adoption of
this amendment in any zone in which such buildings are permitted even though
such lot fails to meet the area, width, and public street abutment
requirements within the zone, providing:



a.   Such construction conforms to any lot coverage and yard requirements
of the zone; and



b.   Any existing frontage on an access way which is part of the public
use access system is dedicated to the public according to Section 4.23.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.4  RE-DIVIDING OF LOTS



1.   No lot or parcel shall be divided to create a lot or parcel not in
conformance with these regulations. No lot shall be divided or combined in
any manner other than through subdivision procedures as specified by the
subdivision and Land split Regulations of the Town.



2.   All proposed subdivisions of land and land splits shall be submitted
for review and approval, prior to transfer, sale, lease, or subdivision
recordation, to the Development Services Director. Any parcel subdivision
and/or land split, recorded or unrecorded with the Town, which is reviewed
and considered by the Zoning Administrator to be in violation of the Town
Code, subdivision and land split definitions and/or related Unified
Development Ordinance regulations and/or Arizona Revised Statutes shall be
submitted in written notice of evidence to the Town Attorney and/or the
Arizona Department of Real Estate Commissioner for legal inquiry and
determinations as provided by Section 1.6 and Section 1.8 of this Ordinance
and Arizona Revised Statutes.



3.   Land surveys of land parcels and lots within the Town boundaries
shall comply with Arizona Revised Statutes governing the filing and recording
of land surveys establishing points and property lines.



4.   Owner(s) of land who desire to subdivide land, the whole or part of
which is in an area within three (3) miles of the Town corporate limits, for
the purpose of selling, shall first give written notice to the Town of his
intention to subdivide the land. Notice shall name and describe the land so
that it may be identified upon the ground, and shall submit to the Town a
tentative plat of the land showing the manner in which he/she desires to
subdivide the land. Such submittal shall conform to all requirements of
A.R.S. § 9-474.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.5  YARD, LOT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS



1.   Application. No building shall be erected, nor shall any existing
building be altered, enlarged, moved, or rebuilt, nor shall any open space
surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except
in conformity with the yard, lot, area, and building location regulations
hereinafter designated for the zone in which such building or open space is
located, except as otherwise specifically provided.



2.   Yards. Except as provided herein, every part of a required yard shall
be open to the sky and unobstructed. Trees, shrubbery, etc., and accessory
structures as allowed in this Ordinance shall not be considered obstructions.
No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of these regulations shall be considered as a
yard or open space for any other building; and no yard or other open space on
one lot shall be considered as a yard or open space, for a building on any
other lot.



3.   Projections over and into required yards.



a.   Awnings, open fire escape balconies, fire escape stairs, window-type
refrigeration units, suspended or roof evaporative coolers, and similar
features, may project not more than five (5) feet over any required yard,
provided that they shall be no closer than ten (10) feet from any lot line.



b.   Architectural details such as canopies, cornices, and eaves may
project not more than two (2) feet over any required yard, provided that they
shall be no closer than ten (10) feet from any lot line.



c.   Sills, leaders, belt courses and similar ornamental features may
project not more than six (6) inches over or into any required yard.



d.   Awnings and canopies which are part of the gas station pump island
may project into the required front yard but no closer than ten (10) feet
from the property line.



4.   Patios and steps. Unroofed terraces, patios, steps or similar
features not over three (3) feet in height above grade, may project into any
required yard, provided that they shall be no closer than ten (10) feet from
any lot line.



5.   Accessory buildings (attached). A private automobile garage, carport
or accessory building having any part of a wall in common with a dwelling
shall be considered an integral part of the main building in determining
yard, lot, and area requirements.



6.   Accessory buildings (detached) and swimming pools. Any detached
accessory building or swimming pool in any zone shall not be located in the
required front yard, shall be at least eight (8) feet from the main
structure, shall be at least ten (10) feet from the rear and interior side
lot lines, and shall maintain side yard setbacks from the streetside lot
lines as required for the main structure in that zone.



7.   Solar unit and dish antennas. Solar heating, solar cooling units,
satellite dish antennas, and associated apparatus notwithstanding any other
provisions of this Ordinance shall not be located in any required front yard,
but may be located in a required rear or side yard provided that such
apparatus does not cover more than thirty (30) percent of that side yard and
shall be no closer than ten (10) feet to any lot line.



8.   Service station pumps. No automobile service station pump shall be
located closer than twelve (12) feet to a street property line.



9.   Domestic liquid petroleum gas tanks shall not be placed in required
front yards or street side yards.



10.   Notwithstanding other provisions of this code to the contrary, flag
shaped or panhandle lots ("flag lots") as depicted in the diagram below may
be created by land split in any zone if all of the following requirements are
met:



a.   The lot has at least fifty (50) feet of frontage on a dedicated
public street, a private street established in a final plat or a public way
and, unless the flagpole/panhandle is a public way, which frontage and
flagpole/panhandle may serve as access only to the subject lot or parcel via
the end of the flagpole or panhandle farthest from the main body of the lot;



b.   The entire flagpole/panhandle portion of the lot shall be at least
fifty (50) feet in width;



c.   There shall be a minimum separation between the edges of
flagpoles/panhandles that equals or exceeds the minimum lot width for the
respective zone in which the property is located.



d.   The length of the flagpole or panhandle shall not exceed three
hundred thirty (330) feet as measured from the right-of-way line or street
chord upon which the flagpole/panhandle fronts on a public street or final
platted private street or public way to the front line of the body of the
lot; and



e.   The flagpole or panhandle portion of a flag lot shall be included in
calculating gross square footage of a lot where the flagpole/panhandle is
contiguous to the lot in question and is owned by the owner of the lot in
question or was owned by the owner of the lot in question at the time the
flagpole/panhandle or portion thereof was accepted for ownership by the Town
pursuant to a dedication made by the owner in order to create, using all or
part of the flagpole/panhandle and, if applicable, other property, a public
street.



f.   Existing lots which would otherwise meet the definition of a flag lot
but for the width or length of the flagpole/panhandle used as access to the
lot shall be considered non-conforming flag lots.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007; Ord. 11-738,
passed 1-11-2011)



4.6  BUILDING AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS



1.   Application. No building shall be erected, reconstructed, or
structurally altered to exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for
the zone in which such building is located, except as otherwise specifically
provided.



2.   Exceptions. Height regulations established elsewhere in this
Ordinance shall not apply:



a.   In any district. To church spires, belfries, cupolas, windmills, wind
chargers, and domes not for human occupancy, monuments, water towers,
flagpoles, and light poles, provided, however, that any structure exempted in
this subsection shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) percent of
its height from all property lines.



b.   In industrial districts. To chimneys, smokestacks, derricks,
conveyors, grain elevators, or similar structures wherein the industrial
process involved customarily requires a height greater than otherwise
permitted, provided however, that any structure exempted in this subsection
shall be set back a minimum of one hundred percent (100%) of its height from
all property lines.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.7  HEIGHT LIMITATIONS ON CORNER LOTS



Within a sight visibility triangle formed by the street front and side lot
lines and a line connecting these lot lines at points measured along these
lot lines a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from their intersection, no
fixtures, construction, hedges, shrubbery and other planting shall obstruct
the view of intersecting streets to a degree greater than fifty (50) percent
visibility. In no event shall an obstruction exist which creates a hazard to
passing motorists.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.8  WALLS AND FENCES



1.   Height.



a.   In a Residential or Agricultural Zoning District no wall or fence
shall exceed six (6) feet in height, except that fences in required front
yards shall not exceed five (5) feet in height.



b.   In a commercial or industrial Zoning District no wall or fence shall
exceed eight (8) feet in height. When a fence in a commercial or industrial
zoning district abuts a residential zoning district, the wall or fence in the
commercial or industrial zoning district shall be set back ten (10) feet from
the property boundary and landscaped in accordance with the requirements set
forth in Section 4.26 Landscape Requirements. The finished side of the fence
and the required landscaping shall face the residentially zoned property.



2.   Visibility. In no case shall a fence or wall be designed or
constructed so as to interfere with visibility for traffic safety.



3.   Materials and design. Fences and walls in all Zoning districts shall
be constructed of wood, woven wire, masonry, iron, steel, or other materials
of conventional design.



4.   Electrical fences. Electrical fences shall be allowed only in those
zoning districts where the keeping of livestock is allowed and shall be
clearly posted on all property corners and no more than 200 feet apart on all
lot lines where such fences are erected.



5.   Swimming pools.  Any swimming pool that is eighteen (18) inches or
more in depth and eight (8) feet or more in width or diameter at any point
and is intended for swimming shall be fenced or enclosed as required by and
in compliance with A.R.S. § 36-1681 and the most recently adopted
International Residential Code (IRC) that regulates fencing for pools, spas,
and similar facilities or structures.



6.   Non-conforming fences and walls. Any fence built and approved by the
Town prior to December 12, 2013 and not in conformance with this section
shall be considered a legal non-conforming fence and shall be subject to the
regulations set forth in Section 4.2 Non-conforming Uses and structures.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 13-776, passed 11-12-2013)



4.9  OUTDOOR STORAGE



1.   No travel trailer, motor home, recreational vehicle or boat stored on
residentially zoned parcels or lots shall be made suitable for on-site
occupancy unless permitted in the specific zoning regulation. Evidence of an
on-site residency shall consist of at least three (3) of the following
conditions:



a.   Connection to a source of power.



b.   Connection to a source of water.



c.   Connection to sewer or septic system.



d.   Raising or leveling by means of jacks, stands or blocks.



e.   Having a mailbox.



f.   Having any attached or adjacentstructure or improvement, which
enhances on-site livability and/or decreases the mobility of the vehicle.



g.   Removal of wheels, axles or hitches on a vehicle normally fitted with
wheels, axles and/or hitches. All vehicles shall be kept in reasonable repair
and neatly arranged to resemble a parked position.



2.   Commercial, manufacturing and industrialzone. Outdoor storage of
objects and materials shall be permitted as accessory use when a primary use
has been established in commercial, manufacturing and industrialzones,
providing the following conditions are met:



a.   All outdoor storage must be stored at least thirty-five (35) feet
from the edge of the pavement or other prepared street subject to:



i.   Storage may not occur within ten (10) feet from any street or
property line.



ii.   Any material or objects stored within the required front or street
side yard shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height.



b.   Flammables stored outdoors must be a minimum of ten (10) feet from
any property line or such storage must be previously approved by the local
fire department.



c.   No travel trailer, motor home, recreational vehicle or boat stored on
commercial, manufacturing or industrial zoned parcels or lots shall be made
suitable for on-site occupancy unless permitted in the specific zoning
regulation. Evidence of an on-site residency shall consist of at least three
of the following conditions:



i.   Connection to a source of power.



ii.   Connection to a source of water.



iii.   Connection to sewer or septic or sewer system.



iv.   Raising or leveling by means of jacks, stands or blocks.



v.   Having a mailbox.



vi.   Having any attached or adjacentstructure or improvement, which
enhances on-site livability and/or decreases the mobility of the vehicle.



vii.   Removal of wheels, axles or hitches on a vehicle normally fitted
with wheels, axles and/or hitches.



d.   All outdoor storage shall be arranged in a neat and orderly manner or
screened from the view of neighboring properties.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.10  SPECIAL PURPOSE AND TEMPORARY HOUSING



1.   Temporary construction office or security personnel housing. A
temporary structure, mobile home, or trailer may be allowed in any zone to
conduct business or provide housing for security personnel during the
construction of a permanent building when a valid building permit is in
effect; however, such temporary structures, mobile homes, or trailers shall
also require an additional permit. Such structure, mobile home, or trailer
shall be removed immediately after completion and occupancy of the building,
but in no event longer than one year.



2.   Temporary housing in cases of medical hardship. A trailer/RV may be
allowed in a residential zone for a temporary specific duration when
application for a special permit is obtained through the Zoning
Administrator, provided:



a.   Property owner or representative shall provide a letter of request, a
physician’s statement verifying the existence of a medical condition which
requires temporary full-time care, proof of property ownership, relationship
and names of persons to occupy the temporary dwelling and a sketch plan of
property showing existing home with proposed structure, access, parking and
distances from property lines and other structures.



b.   Permit shall be issued for a 90-day term.



c.   At no time shall a permit exceed 180 days.



d.   Property shall be posted for five (5) days prior to issuance of a
permit to allow neighbors the opportunity to object or, in lieu of posting,
applicant shall submit approvals signed by all residents within (300) three
hundred feet of subject property.



e.   All connections and hook-ups shall meet the health department and
building ordinance requirements. A plan for septic disposal shall be
submitted.



f.   Trailer/RV shall be removed within 14 days after the intended purpose
no longer exists or after the permit has expired.



g.   Occupancy of trailer/RV shall consist of caregivers only, with no
more than two (2) occupants.



h.   All property setback requirements for each residential zoning
district shall be complied with.



i.   The Public Works Department or the Planning and Zoning Department may
require additional conditions as deemed necessary to protect surrounding
properties from adverse effects.



j.   In the event a written protest is submitted, the applicant may appeal
to the Board of Adjustment for a hearing.



3.   Recovery residences.



a.   Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to permit persons
recovering from substance abuse to reside in a group setting in residential
neighborhoods in order to facilitate integration and stabilization and to
provide reasonable regulations to maintain the residential character of
neighborhoods and prevent a concentration of such facilities in any
particular area so as to institutionalize that area.



b.   Registration required. Prior to beginning operations, the owner or
operator of a recovery residence shall submit a completed registration form
to the Development Services Department  on a form established by the
Planning and Development Services Manager. The registration shall become
effective upon verification by the Zoning Administrator that the registration
complies with the requirements of the zoning code and that the recovery
residence operator has obtained a Valid Town of Chino Valley business license
for the recovery residence. A registration shall terminate when the recovery
residence use ceases.



c.   Zoning confirmation. Prior to registration, a request for zoning
confirmation may be submitted to the Development Services Department  to
confirm that the proposed location of the recovery residence is permitted
under this section.



d.   Procedures.  In addition to the registration form, the applicant
shall submit an operations and management plan (“O&MP”) to ensure
compliance with state and local laws. O&MP shall include:



(1)   Name and address of the business owner;



(2)   Name, address and telephone number of the property owner and person
in control of the property;



(3)   If the business owner and property owner are not the same person or
entity, applicant shall provide a notarized letter of authorization from the
property owner;



(4)   Emergency contact telephone number;



(5)   The number of persons occupying each bedroom;



(6)   Maximum number of occupants;



(7)   A floor plan;



(8)   Resident screening process; and



(9)   Guest and resident rules of conduct.



e.   Standards. Recovery residences shall be located, developed, and
operated in compliance with the following standards:



(1)   O&MP compliance. The recovery residence shall be operated and
managed in compliance with the O&MP submitted with registration, a copy of
which shall remain on file with the Development Services Department .



(2)   Separation. The minimum separation between recovery residences shall
be 5,280 feet as measured from the closest property lines.



(3)   Occupancy.  The number of residents, including the house manager,
shall not exceed two (2) residents per bedroom with up to three (3) residents
in the largest bedroom in the home and a maximum of eleven (11) residents in
the home.



(4)   Exterior appearance. There shall be no sign or other exterior
indication of a recovery residence visible from the street.



(5)   Parking. Parking for the recovery residence shall be on-site and
comply with Chino Valley Unified Development Ordinance Section 4.22
Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.



(6)   Tenancy. No recovery residence shall house any person whose tenancy
would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other persons or
would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.



f.   Request for accommodation. If a recovery residence owner believes any
requirement of the zoning code prevents the establishment of a recovery
residence in an economically viable manner, the owner shall submit to the
Zoning Administrator a written request for accommodation and the reasons why
the accommodation is required. The written request shall contain sufficient
facts to allow the Zoning Administrator to make an individualized
determination of the recovery residence’s needs, to address the Town’s
safety and welfare concerns, and to assure compliance with this section. The
Zoning Administrator shall review the written request and determine:



(1)   Whether an accommodation should be made pursuant to the requirements
of the federal and state fair housing laws; and



(2)   If so, the nature of the accommodation taking into consideration the
requirements of the federal and state fair housing laws, public safety and
welfare concerns, and the residential character of the neighborhood.



The accommodation shall be made only to the extent necessary to comply with
federal and state fair housing laws.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 14-785, passed 7-8-2014)



4.11  HOME OCCUPATIONS



Home occupations shall be permitted in all residential zones and shall not
alter the residential character of the property and buildings thereon. A home
occupation is that accessory use of the dwelling or outbuilding on a
residential lot that shall constitute either entirely or partly the
livelihood of a person living in the dwelling. A home occupation shall be
subject to the following provisions:



1.   There shall be no employees of the home occupation other than members
of the household working on-site; however, there shall be no restriction on
the number of employees working off-site.



2.   Traffic that is related to the home occupation may be permitted from
7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and shall be what is reasonable and customary to the
neighborhood. The home occupation business owner shall provide adequate
off-street parking.



3.   Signs, displays or any other exterior indications of the home
occupation shall be subject to the applicable provisions of Section 4.21
Signs.



4.   The maximum percentage of the gross floor area of the dwelling that
shall be used for all home occupation activities on any one property,
excluding parking of vehicles, shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent.



5.   Outdoor storage shall not display or create any external evidence of
the operation of the home occupation.



6.   No home occupation shall emit noticeable odor, dust, gas, noise,
vibration, smoke, toxic material or fumes, heat, or glare beyond any boundary
of the lot on which the home occupation is conducted.



7.   A home occupation shall not include, but exclusion shall not be
limited to, the following uses: Barber shops and beauty parlors,
commercialstables, veterinary clinic, on-site dog grooming, real estate
offices, restaurants, animal hospitals and commercialkennels, retail shops,
auto repair shops, wholesale and storage of building material. A home
occupation may include, but is not limited, to the following uses, provided
the uses are not otherwise in violation of the home occupation regulations:
catalog/mail order sales, contractor office, bookkeeping, off-site yard
service, handy-man or similar services, video productions, consulting,
off-site dog grooming. Retail sales incidental to the home occupation are
permitted on site.



8.   Other similar home occupations may be permitted by the Zoning
Administrator providing such home occupations meet all the requirements of
this subsection and providing a determination is made by the Zoning
Administrator that: (a) the proposed use in no way diminishes the use and
enjoyment of adjacent conforming properties (b) the proposed use will not
alter the residential character of the subject property; and (c) the proposed
use will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare.



9.   Prior to issuance of a Town Business License, the applicant for a
Business License must complete and sign a home occupation form acknowledging
receipt of a copy of Section 4.11 of the Unified Development Ordinance and
compliance therewith as well as proof of compliance with all State and local
business license and transaction privilege tax requirements.



10.   Failure to comply fully with the above conditions of the home
occupation regulations shall cause revocation of the home occupation
privilege and the Town Business License. Any appeal shall be pursuant to the
Town Code.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.12  GARAGE SALES, SWAP MEETS AND OUTDOOR SALES



1.   All swap meets and outdoor sales shall be permitted only in
commercial and industrial zoned districts subject to business licensing as
outlined in the Business License provisions of the Town Code.



2.   Garage sales shall require a business license as required by the
Business License provisions of the Town Code; however, all other requirements
of this subsection and any business license fee shall be waived provided such
sales occur no more often than two weekends in a 90-day period.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.13  TEMPORARY FESTIVALS, CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, CELEBRATIONS, FIESTAS,
RALLIES, DANCES, REVIVAL MEETINGS AND SIMILAR ACTIVITIES



All temporary festivals, circuses, carnivals, celebrations, fiestas, rallies,
dances, revival meetings, and other similar activities shall be permitted
only in commercial and industrialzones subject to the restrictions and
license procedures as outlined in the Town Code.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.14  PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITIES



A Conditional Use Permit shall be required by all public service companies in
order to establish or substantially expand utility buildings, structures, or
appurtenances thereto, in any zoning district. Extension of public service
lines in public or private right-of-way is exempt from these requirements.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.15  STRUCTURE NEAR AIRPLANE RUNWAYS OR LANDING STRIPS



No building or structure, or any portion thereof, which exceeds a height of
twenty (20) feet shall be erected or structurally altered within five hundred
(500) feet of the projected center line of an existing or proposed runway or
landing strip for a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet from the end of the
existing or proposed runway or landing strip. No building or structure, or
any portion thereof, shall be erected to exceed a height that would interfere
with the takeoff or landing of a plane with a glide angle of one (1) foot
vertical for every forty (40) feet horizontal, such glide angle to be
computed as beginning at a point on the extended center line of the runway
two hundred (200) feet beyond and at the same elevation as the end of the
runway pavement, or, if runway pavement is not provided, one hundred (100)
feet beyond and at the same elevation as the end of the landing strip.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.16  SCHOOLS



Public and parochial schools and institutions of higher education and private
educational institutions, excluding business, technical and trade schools,
are permitted in each district subject to the following standards:



1.   A lot of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet shall be required for
the first twenty (20) students. An additional ten thousand (10,000) square
feet shall be required for each additional twenty (20) students.



2.   The lot shall have at least one hundred (100) feet of frontage on a
major street or, with Use Permit approval, on a collector street.



3.   A Use Permit shall be required if periods of instruction are prior to
6:00 a.m. or after the hour of 10:00 p.m.



4.   A Site Plan in conformance with Section 1.9 shall be required of any
school located in a residential district. Fund raising events located on the
same lot or contiguous  lots shall be permitted subject to the requirements
of the Town Code and ordinances.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.17  PROHIBITED USES



In all zoned districts, chemicals manufacturing, incineration, and/or
reduction of garbage, sewage and nuclear waste dumping is prohibited.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.18  FEES



Fees required by this Ordinance shall be established by a schedule adopted by
resolution of the Council and filed in the offices of the Town Clerk.



1.   Return of any portion of a fee, or any waiver of fees must be
approved by the Council unless the change or amendment is initiated by the
Council or the Commission or when the petitioner is the Town, County , State
or Federal Government.



In no case shall any error by the Clerk in computing or collecting the amount
of fee(s) specified under this Ordinance prevent the Town from collecting the
correct amount from any person required to pay the fee(s).



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.19  CAMPGROUNDS



A.   Campgrounds shall only be permitted within a Commercial Zoning
district, and shall require a Conditional Use Permit in the Commercial Light
Zoning District in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.



B.   All campgrounds shall comply with the following guidelines:



1.   Site specifications.



a.   Sites must be clearly defined, well drained, and reasonably level.



b.   Each tent site must be no less than nine hundred (900) square feet in
area.



c.   Each recreational vehicle site must be no less than one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square feet in area, and shall be designated to allow a
minimum of fifteen (15) feet between adjoiningrecreational vehicles.



2.   Office and registration facilities. Each campground must provide an
adequate and easily identifiable office or registration area. Registration
facilities must be located so as not to interfere with the normal flow of
traffic in and out of the campground.



3.   Restroom facilities. Each campground must conform to State and
Federal Guidelines and must have the following facilities as a minimum:



a.   One (1) toilet for each ten (10) camping sites, or fraction thereof,
excluding sites with sewer hookups used for self-contained recreational
vehicles. There shall be a minimum of one (1) toilet provided for each men's
and women's restroom regardless of number of campsites. Urinals may be
provided for fifty percent (50%) of the toilet requirement of the men's
restroom. Toilets shall be partitioned for occupant privacy.



b.   One (1) hot water shower shall be provided for each ten (10) camping
sites or fraction thereof. There shall be a minimum of one (1) shower for
each men's and women's restroom regardless of the number of campsites.
Showers shall be partitioned for occupant privacy.



c.   One (1) sink with hot water shall be provided for each ten (10)
camping sites or fraction thereof. There shall be a minimum of one (1) sink
for each men's and women's restroom regardless of the number of campsites.



d.   Each restroom shall contain shelf space and/or hooks adequate for
toilet articles and towels, a good, well lighted mirror directly above each
sink, an electric outlet convenient to the sink, ample general illumination,
wastebaskets, and windows and doors designed for complete privacy.



e. Maintenance. Campgrounds must be well maintained in all areas. This
includes the grounds, restroom facilities, buildings and any recreational
areas and equipment.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-742, passed 11-9-2010)



4.20  NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES



A.   Purpose.  The purpose of this subsection is to regulate the use,
maintenance, alteration, repair, extension and restoration of buildings and
land which lawfully existed at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, but
which do not conform to the regulations for the district in which they are
located.



B.   Continued use.



1.   The lawful use of land, building or structure existing at the time of
the passage of this Ordinance, although such does not conform to the
provisions hereof for the land, may be continued, but if such non-conforming
use is discontinued or inactive for a period of six (6) months it shall be
considered abandoned, and future use of the land or structure shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. An applicant whose use has
been discontinued or inactive for a period of six (6) months may request one
(1) additional six (6) month extension. The Zoning Administrator may
approve/disapprove the extension administratively or refer the request to
Council for their consideration. Any decision of the Zoning Administrator
regarding an extension may be appealed to Council.



2.   Nothing in this article shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing,
or rebuilding of a non-conforming structure or part thereof rendered
necessary by normal wear and tear, deterioration, or depreciation.



3.   Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted as authorization for
approval of the continuance of the use of a building or premises in violation
of regulations in effect at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance.



4.   Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent requiring the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any portion of a structure declared
unsafe by a proper authority.



5.   Nothing in this Ordinance shall require any change in plans,
construction, or designated use of a building or lot for which a building
permit or other official permit has been issued prior to the enactment or
amendment of this Ordinance, provided the construction or use shall be
diligently pursued within six (6) months of the date of this Ordinance, and
the building or use is completed and used according to such plans as filed
within one (1) year from the date of adoption or subsequent amendment of this
Ordinance.



6.   A non-conforming building or portion thereof which was specifically
designed or, beyond a reasonable doubt, intended by the nature of its
arrangement and construction to be used in any way which would be
non-conforming under this Ordinance, but was not so used at the time this
Ordinance became effective, may, if not altered or repaired as prohibited
elsewhere in this Ordinance, be occupied or used for the purpose for which it
was designed, arranged, or intended provided such building is so used within
six (6) months after the effective date of this Ordinance. Otherwise the use
of such building shall conform to the provisions of this Ordinance.



7.   Once a non-conforming use has been voluntarily discontinued or
promised to be discontinued and filed in writing with the Zoning
Administrator in order to secure a rezoning, Conditional Use Permit, or other
approval, such non-conforming use, upon receipt of the requested approval,
shall not be allowed to continue and shall conform to all provisions of this
Ordinance except as specified in the approval.



C.   Reconstruction.



1.   Where any non-conforming use or structure in existence at the
effective date of this Ordinance, which does not conform to the district in
which located, that shall be destroyed to extent of fifty (50) percent of its
value, then, without further action by Council, the building or land shall,
from date of destruction, be subject to this Ordinance.



2.   Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted as authorization for
continuance of the use of a building or land in violation of zoning
regulations in effect prior to adoption of this Ordinance.



3.   Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted to require any changes
in:



a.   An existing building;



b.   A building for which a building permit has been issued and
construction has been diligently pursued within three (3) months of the date
of permit, and ground story framework (including second tier of beams) has
been completed within six (6) months of date of the permit, and the entire
building was completed within one year from date of this Ordinance.



D.   Expansion of a Non-Conforming Use. No non-conforming building, use of
building or use of land shall be expanded on in any way that enlarges or
reinforces the non-conformity.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.21  SIGN REGULATIONS



4.21.1  PURPOSE



The purposes of this Sign Code are to establish reasonable regulations that:



A.   Promote the public welfare and safety through the safe placement and
installation of signs; and



B.   Promote economic vitality for local businesses and services; and



C.   Protect and enhance the Town's aesthetic interests by preventing
over-proliferation of signs and maintaining a high quality of signs
throughout the Town.



(Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017)



4.21.2  PERMITS REQUIRED



A.   Permit Required.  Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful
for any person to construct, install, attach, place, paint, alter, relocate,
or otherwise maintain any non-exempt sign in the Town without first obtaining
a signpermit in conformance with this Sign Code.



B.   Conflicts with other requirements.  If provisions of this Sign Code
are conflict with any other Town Code or Ordinance, the more restrictive
requirement(s) shall apply.  Signs maintained contrary to the provisions of
this Sign Code are declared to be nuisances and may be abated as provided by
law.



C.   Fees.  Sign permit fees shall be as adopted by the Council by
resolution.



D.   Sign Permit Application.  No sign permit application shall be
accepted if not submitted with full payment of all fees required. 
Application for a signpermit shall be made to the Development Services
Department on forms provided by the Town and shall include at a minimum the
following information:



1.   Yavapai County Assessor's parcel number identifying the property
where the sign will be located;



2.   Street address, if any, legal description of the property, and
dimensions thereof.  If the parcel is not within a recorded subdivision, a
metes and bounds legal description shall be submitted with the application;



3.   Name, address and telephone number of the property owner and agent,
if any;



4.   Signature of applicant or agent;



5.   Inventory of all existing signs on the property showing the type,
dimensions, and location of each sign;



6.   Fully dimensioned plans and elevations showing the dimensions,
placement of copy, and location of each proposed sign in relation to the
property line(s) and public right(s)-of-way;



7.   Plans indicating the scope and structural detail of the work to be
done, including all connections, supports, footings, and materials to be used;



8.   Type, placement, and strength of illumination, if any and required
information for an electrical permit for signage illumination;



9.   Such other information as the Zoning Administrator may require for
the purpose of determining whether the application complies with the Sign
Code requirements;



E.   SignPermit Review; Timeframes.



1.   Within ten business days of submission of an application for a
signpermit, staff shall review the application for completeness.  If the
application is not complete, the applicant will be notified of the deficiency
via email, telephone, or first class mail.



2.   Within thirty business days of receipt of a complete application,
Town staff shall review the application for compliance with the regulations
set forth in this Code and in the Town Code, as applicable, and shall issue
the permit or notify the applicant of deficiencies and the need for
corrections.



F.   Temporary SignPermits.  Signs with a limited duration of use, such
as those provided in Section 4.21.6 shall obtain a temporary signpermit. 
The requirements and criteria for such signs are as follows:



1.   Temporary signpermits shall be issued for no more than six months.



2.   Temporary signs shall conform to all other requirements of this Code.



G.   Exempt Signs.  The following types of signs are exempt from the
permitting requirements but shall comply with all other requirements and
standards set forth in this Sign Code.  No business shall have more than two
(2) exempt signs and no more than two (2) exempt signs may be located on any
residential lot, except as provided in the following table:



 


Description

 

Type

 

Number Permitted

 

Maximum Area and Height





Official notices authorized by a court, public body or public safety official
 
 
 
 
 
No limit


Government Signs
 
Wall or ground-mounted standard
 
No limit
 
No limit


Posters
 
 
 
 
 
No limit


A-Frame Signs
 
 
 
2 per frontage
 
12 Square feet total: See Table 4.21.6 for regulations


Signs located within structures in Commercial zoning districts
 
WindowSigns
 
 
 
No limit


Signs on residentially zoned property
 
Wall, window, or ground-mounted
 
 
 
 


Signs required to be relocated by the Town or other governmental agency
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



(Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017)



4.21.3  GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS



A.   The regulations, requirements, and provisions set forth in this
Chapter shall apply to all signserected, placed, or constructed within the
Town.



B.   All signs shall be structurally designed, constructed, erected, and
maintained in conformance with all applicable Technical Codes and regulations.



C.   Signs shall not be constructed or located in a manner that interferes
with pedestrian or vehicular travel, obstructs free and clear vision of
traffic, poses a hazard to either pedestrians or vehicles, or in such a
manner to confuse, distract, or interfere with traffic and/or pedestrians.



D.   Signs shall be located a minimum of six feet (6') from property lines.



E.   All signs and signstructures, conforming and non-conforming, shall be
maintained in good order, repair, and appearance at all times so as not to
constitute a danger or hazard to the public safety or create visual blight as
determined by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee.



F.   All illuminatedsigns shall comply with Section 4.24 Outdoor Lighting
including, but not limited to, Subsection 4.24.4 General Requirements,
Subsection (P).



G.   A non-commercial sign may be located in any location that a
commercialsign is permitted and shall comply with the regulations set forth
in this Chapter for that location.



(Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017)



4.21.4  MEASUREMENT OF SIGNS



A.   Sign Area shall be measured as follows:



1.   Signcopy mounted or painted on a background panel or area
distinctively painted, textured or constructed as a background for the
signcopy shall be measured as that area within the outside dimensions of the
background panel or surface.



2.   Sign copy mounted as individual letters and/or graphics against a
wall or parapet of a building or other structure that has not been painted,
textured, or otherwise altered to provide a distinctive background for the
signcopy shall be measured as a sum of the smallest rectangles that will
enclose each word and each graphic in the total signcopy.



3.   Multi-face signs shall be measured as follows:



a.   A two (2) faced sign shall be considered as one sign when determining
the sign area, provided both faces are parallel or the interior angle between
the two (2) signfaces is sixty degrees (60º) or less.  If the interior
angle is greater than sixty degrees (60º), the sign area shall be the sum of
the area of the two (2) faces.



b.   Where a sign has three (3) or more faces: the area of the sign shall
be calculated as fifty percent (50%) of the sum of the area of all faces.



         Multi-F ace
Signs                           Non-Planar Signs



               



c.   Where a sign is a spherical, free form, sculptural, figurative or
other non-planar sign, the sign area shall be fifty (50%) percent of the sum
of the area of the sides of the smallest polyhedron that will encompass the
signstructure.



B.   Sign Height.



1.   Sign height shall be measured as follows.



a.   Freestandingsign height shall be the vertical distance from the top
of the highest element of the sign or signstructure to ground level.  The
monument base or other structureerected to support or ornament the sign shall
be included as part of the sign height.



b.   When a freestanding sign is located below the average grade of an
adjacentroadway "ground level" shall be measured from the average grade of
the adjacent roadway.



c.   Wall or parapet-mounted sign height shall be the vertical distance to
the top of the sign or signstructure from the base of the wall on which the
sign is located.



(Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017)



4.21.5  SIGN STANDARDS



A.   WallSigns.



 


Zoning District

 

Maximum Area

 

Maximum Height

 

Standards



SR-.16, SR-1, SR-1.6, SR-2.5
 
4 sq. feet
 
 
 
No back light illumination


AR-36, AR-5, AR-4*
 
8 sq. feet
 
 
 
No back light illumination


MR-1, MHP-4 Uses by Right*
 
3 sq. feet
 
6 feet above story floor level
 
May be illuminated.


MR-1, MHP-4 Conditional Uses*
 
As approved in Use Permit
 
As approved in UsePermit
 
As permitted in Use Permit


SR-.16, SR-1, SR-1.6, SR-2, SR-2.5, AR-4, AR-5, AR-36, MR-1, MHP-4
 
16 sq. feet
 
 
 
Institutional facility uses allowed by right within residential zoning
districts.


 

 

 

CL, CH, I, PL and OS
 
 

 

See Speed Limit Table 4.21.5.A-1

Aggregate sq. footage = 200 sq. feet
 
 
 
Horizontal distance no greater than 80% of the width of the building

Wall signs pertaining to any one (1) business within a complex, on a separate
parcel or lot, or on a freestanding PAD shall be permitted on the exterior
walls of the space occupied by the business.

Where a building is situated on a corner of two roadways, the signage shall
be calculated where the wall fronts each roadway.

Where a wall does not face an adjacentroadway, 1 sq. ft. per linear foot of
shall be permitted.



 



*Not applicable to institutional facility uses allowed by right within
residential zoning districts.



 


Speed Limit Table A-1




Speed Limit of Adjacent Roadway




< 35 MPH

 

35 MPH

 

> 35 MPH



1.25 sq. ft. per linear foot
 
1.5 sq. ft. per linear foot
 
2 sq. ft. per linear foot



 



B.   Freestanding Signs.



   



 


Use

 

Zoning District

 

Maximum Area

 

Maximum Height

 

Standards





 

Allowed by Right
 
 

OS, MR-1, MHP-4
 
 

32 sq. feet
 
 

6 feet
 
Maximum of 2 freestanding monument signs may be permitted.

May be illuminated.


Subject to Conditional UsePermit
 
OS, MR-1, MHP-4
 
Per UsePermit
 
Per UsePermit
 
 

Per Use Permit


Institutional facility uses allowed by right in:
 
SR-.16, SR-1, SR-1.6, SR-2, SR-2.5, AR-4, AR-5, AR-36,  MR-1, MHP-4
 
 

32 sq. feet
 
 

6 feet
 
 

May be illuminated.


Single Tenant Building
 
CL, CH, I, PL and OS
 
See Speed Limit Table 4.21.5.B-1
 
May be illuminated.


Multiple Tenant Building
 
CL, CH, I, PL and OS
 
See Speed Limit Table 4.21.5.B-2
 
May be illuminated.


 

 

ShoppingCenters or Commercial Centers
 
 

 

CL, CH, I, PL and OS
 


 

See Speed Limit Table 4.21.5.B-2
 
One sign may be permitted for every 500 ft. of street frontage;

Maximum of 2 signs per street frontage.

Individual buildings within the development and/or the PAD sites within the
commercial center shall not be considered as separate developments for
signage purposes.

May be illuminated.


Drive Through Services
 
CL, CH, I, PL, and OS
 
 

96 sq. feet
 
 

8 feet
 
Sign area to be distributed between up to 3 signs, the faces of which shall
not be visible from the publicright-of-way.




 



 


Speed Limit Table 4.21.5.B-1




Speed Limit of Adjacent Roadway






 

< 35 MPH

 

35 MPH

 

> 35 MPH



Maximum Area
 

.5 sq. ft. per linear ft. of lotfrontage; not to exceed 32 sq. ft.

 

.5 sq. ft. per linear ft. of lot frontage; not to exceed 48 sq. ft.

 

.5 sq. ft. per linear ft. of lot frontage; not to exceed 48 sq. ft.



Maximum Height
 

8 ft.

 

12 ft.

 

12 ft.




 



 


Speed Limit Table 4.21.5.B-2




Speed Limit of Adjacent Roadway






 

< 35 MPH

 

35 MPH

 

> 35 MPH



Maximum Area
 

64 sq. ft.

 

72 sq. ft.

 

96 sq. ft.



Maximum Height
 

8 ft.

 

12 ft.

 

12 ft.




 



C.   ElectronicSigns.



 


Uses

 

Zoning District

 

Maximum Area

 

Maximum Height

 

Standards



Institutional facility uses allowed by right
 
SR-.16, SR-1, SR-1.6, SR-2, SR-2.5, AR-4, AR-5, AR-36, OS, MR-1, MHP-4
 

32 sq. ft.

 

14 feet

 
8 foot minimum height to bottom of sign panel.

No flashing messages permitted.

Minimum message display time: 6 seconds


 
 
CL, CH, I, PL, and OS
 

Electronic Signs: Per UsePermit

 

Electronic Signs: Per UsePermit

 
Electronic Signs: As conditioned in UsePermit.


 
 
CL, CH, I, PL, and OS
 

Reader Panel Signs: 32 sq. ft.

 

Reader Panel Signs: 14 feet

 
8 foot minimum height to bottom of sign panel.



 







 



D.   Awning Signs.



 


Zoning District

 

Maximum Area

 

Standards



CL, CH, I, PL and OS
 
1 sq. ft. per lineal foot of building frontage
 
Copy shall be placed on the valance of the awning.



 



E.   ShingleSigns and Projecting Signs.



 


Sign Type

 

Zoning District

 

Maximum Area

 

Maximum Height

 

Standards



 

ShingleSign
 
 

CL, CH, I, PL, and OS
 
 

6 sq. ft.
 
 
 
8 ft. minimum clearance between bottom of sign and sidewalk.

One sign permitted per business.

Sign shall not encroach into public right-of-way, including sidewalk.


 

ProjectingSign
 
 

CL, CH, I, PL, and OS
 
 

9 sq. ft.
 
 
 
8 ft minimum clearance between bottom of sign and sidewalk.

One sign permitted per business.

Sign shall not encroach into publicright-of-way, including sidewalk.



 



F.   Parapet or Mansard Signs.



 


Sign Type

 

Zoning District

 

Maximum Area

 

Maximum Height

 

Standards



Parapet or Mansard
 
 

CL, CH, I
 
50% of the front face area of the parapet or mansard
 
 
 
 

Shall not project above the top of the parapet or mansard.



 



G.   Aggregate Signage Limits.



1.   The total maximum aggregate signage shall not exceed two-hundred
ninety-six square feet (296 sq. feet) for a single-tenant development.



2.   The total maximum aggregate signage shall not exceed three-hundred
sixty square feet (360 sq. feet) for a multi-tenant development.



3.   Comprehensive Sign Packages may be approved by Planning and Zoning
Commission and TownCouncil for multi-tenant developments with up to a 50%
increase in total aggregate area.



4.   The provisions above shall apply unless such guidelines are addressed
in an approved comprehensive sign package.



5.   Signage whose manner and placement has not been listed herein may be
approved at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee.



(Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017)



4.21.6  TEMPORARY SIGNS



 


Sign Type

 

Zoning District

 

Maximum Area

 

Maximum Height

 

Standards



 

Banner, Pennant
 
 

CL, CH, I, Public, Institutional Facility
 
 

48 sq. ft. aggregate
 
 
 
On-site only.

Shall not be located above the roof of any building.

Shall be maintained in good repair.


 

Banner, Pennant
 
 

MR-1, MHP-4
 
 

24 sq. ft.
 
 
 
On-site only.

Shall not be located above the roof of any building.

Shall be maintained in good repair.


 

A-Frame
 
 

CL, CH, I, Public or Institutional Facility
 
Sizes limited to:

24" x 36" or 6 sq. ft. maximum.
 
 
 
May be made of wood, vinyl, metal, or other similar non-pliable material.

Shall be on-site only.

Up to two per frontage, not to exceed 12 sq. ft. total per parcel.

Shall be maintained in good repair.



 







 



(Ord. 17- 819, passe d 3- 14- 2017)



4.21.7  PROHIBITED SIGNS



A.   Any sign not specifically listed as permitted by this Chapter is
prohibited, including, but not limited to the following:



1.   Off-sitecommercialsigns.



2.   Vehiclesigns or signs mounted, attached, or painted on trailers,
boats, or motor vehicles primarily or consistently parked, stored, or
displayed in a manner intended to attract the attention of the public.



3.   Signs attached to any utility pole, or structure, streetlight,
traffic signal, tree, fire hydrant, bridge, park bench or other location on
public property.



4.   Signs that are animated, inflatable, or audible, or rotate or have
intermittent or flashing illumination or emit audible sound or visible
matter; except time and/or temperature units.



5.   Signs displayed in a manner or location that prevents free ingress
and egress from a door, window or other exit.



(Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017)



4.21.8  NON-CONFORMING SIGNS



A.   A non-conforming sign may continue to be utilized in perpetuity only
in the manner and to the extent that it existed prior to the effective date
of this Chapter or any amendments thereto.



B.   A non-conforming sign may not be altered in any manner not in
conformance with the sign regulations in the zoning district in which it is
located that are in effect at the time of the alteration, except for
reasonable repair and maintenance of the sign or to change the copy provided
that does not require structural alterations.



(Ord. 17-819, passed 3-14-2017)



4.21.9  VIOLATIONS; REMOVAL



A.   Notice of Violation:  Notice of violation of this Chapter shall be
provided by a Code Compliance Officer to the property owner, person in
control, or authorized agent of the property. The time periods provided for
correction of the violation shall be:



1.   Permanent Signs.  A ten calendar day written notice shall be
provided.



2.   Temporary Signs.  A two calendar day written notice shall be
provided.



3.   PortableSigns.



a.   A two calendar day written notice shall be provided for PortableSigns
other than those placed within the right-of-way.



b.   A written notice is not required for Portable Signs placed within the
right-of-way.



B.   Authority to Remove.



1.   The Code Compliance Officer is authorized to require removal of any
sign installed in violation of this Chapter. The Code Compliance Officer may
remove or cause to be removed any Temporary Sign which is not removed by the
owner.



2.   The Building Official is authorized to remove or require the
immediate removal or repair without written notice of any unsafe sign that
creates an immediate hazard to persons or property.



C.   Removal by Town.  In the case of a sign code violation where the
offending sign has been removed by the Code Compliance Officer, the notice
provided pursuant to Section 4.21.9(A) shall state the reason for its removal.



D.   Recovery of Costs.  The costs of removal or repair of a sign by the
Town shall be borne by the person who installed the sign, and, if unknown,
the owner or lessee of the sign and of the property on which the sign is
located.  If the Town incurs costs in the removal of repair of a sign, the
Town may bring an action in Municipal Court or Superior Court to recover its
costs.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 13-778, passed 11-12-2013; Ord. 14-784,
passed 6-10-2014; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015; Ord. 17-819, passed
3-14-2017)



Editor’s Note:



   The provisions of amending Ordinance 14-784 are set to expire on
January 1, 2016



4.22  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



Parking and loading regulations are established to provide standards to
accommodate the vehicular storage and delivery access needs of the various
land uses permitted by this Ordinance. It is the intent of this Ordinance to
require the minimum number of on-site parking and loading space with
maneuvering areas, driveways and surface materials for the efficient movement
of vehicular traffic.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.22.1  GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS



Permitted land uses are required to provide for and maintain adequate parking
to prevent traffic congestion and unsightly vehicular storage.



Regulations pertaining to required parking spaces and access thereto in the
Town are established.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.22.2  OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES



Paved and drained space shall be provided.



A.   For all uses except single-family residential uses, vehicular parking
for a standard vehicle shall be in the form of a rectangle not less than ten
(10) feet by twenty (20) feet, excluding driveways or aisles, with access to
a public thoroughfare. Drive aisles/backup areas shall be a minimum of
twenty-four (24) feet.



1.   All such spaces shall be connected with a public or private street by
an improved driveway not less than twenty (20) feet in length.



2.   Off-street parking spaces for single-family detached residences may
also be connected with a public street by an alley.



B.   BOAT OR RECREATION VEHICLE SPACE.  Spaces shall be provided in the
form of a rectangle not less than ten (10) feet by twenty-four (24) feet, or
larger as may be required to accommodate the unit, subject to the screening
requirements of this Ordinance, or otherwise designated through Site Plan
Review or Zoning approval.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008)



4.22.3  ACCESS



An improved private access way shall be provided between a public or private
street and parking areas, garages, carports and/or R.V. parking space.



A.   DRIVEWAYS.



Driveway spacing - No access driveway shall be located closer than one
hundred (100) feet from a collector and arterial streetintersection.



No access driveway shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from a local
streetintersection.



Commercial and industrial driveways shall have a minimum separation of two
hundred (200) feet centerline to centerline (shared driveways and cross
access are encouraged).



A reduction in spacing may be granted by the Town Engineer.



B.   FRONT YARD.



Any vehicle that is not otherwise prohibited by the provisions of this
Ordinance from being parked in the front yard of a single-family or
two-family residence lot may be parked upon a driveway. (Ord. 06-678, passed
11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008)



4.22.4  PARKING DESIGN STANDARDS



Parking areas, required herein, shall be provided, improved and maintained in
accord with the following specifications.



Parking Standards Pertaining to All Districts



A.   PERMITS.



No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has presented
satisfactory evidence to the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, that
he owns or has otherwise available for their use, sufficient property to
provide required parking.



B.   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SPACES.



1.   All vehicular egress  from parking lots to publicright-of-way shall
be by forward motion only, except in the case of single-family and two-family
residences fronting on a local street or a primary or secondary collector
street.



2.   New construction and conversion of a residence to a commercialuse:
subject to the provisions contained in this subsection B., all required
parking and loading spaces, maneuvering areas, driveways, and fire lanes
shall be paved with asphaltic concrete over an A.B. base, concrete or masonry
to a thickness and structure that will support the type and intensity of
vehicular traffic generated by the proposed use. As the requirements may vary
the paving cross section will require approval by the Town Engineer. The Town
Engineer may also approve alternative surfacing such as “chip seal”.



3.   Additions to existing structures: whenever an addition to an existing
structure is proposed that enlarges the existing structure by fifty (50)
percent or more then the above requirements in paragraph 2. above shall apply.



4.   Change of use in an existing commercial  building: the applicant
shall provide a site plan indicating that the parking area is of sufficient
size and adequate dimension to provide any additional parking that the new
use may be required to provide in accordance with the requirements of this
code. Whenever a change of use occurs the owner is encouraged to provide a
dust free surface such as decomposed granite over the entire area that is
dedicated to the required parking and maneuvering area and driveways.



5.   Site development: when a site is to be developed for a commercial 
purpose allowed by the Unified Development Ordinance that does not include a
building, the primary traffic lanes and any required parking area shall be
surfaced in a manner and extent that is approved by the Town Engineer.



6.   All areas of the parking lot must be at least ten (10) feet from
front property lines and five (5) feet from rear and side property lines.



7.   Tandem arrangement of required parking spaces is prohibited, except
for handicapped parking spaces, and as otherwise permitted by this Ordinance.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008; Ord. 11-738,
passed 1-11-2011)



4.22.5  PARKING STANDARDS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL OR MIXED USES



In case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking space
shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately.



A.   MAINTENANCE.



It shall be the joint and separate responsibility of the lessee and owner of
the principal use, uses or building to maintain in a neat and adequate
manner, the parking space, access ways, striping, landscaping, and required
fences or screening.



B.   PARKING AREAIMPROVEMENTS.



For multiple-family residential, commercial , industrial and PAD districts,
the following shall apply:



1.   Parking areas shall be screened from street view and residential
development by a berm and/or wall (minimum of three (3) feet in height), with
landscaping.



2.   Except where a wall is required, a minimum six (6) inch high curb or
permanently attached or affixed bumper guard shall be constructed so that no
part of a vehicle extends beyond the property line.



C.   ACCESS.



Off-street parking space shall be connected with a public street by a paved
driveway that affords safe and reasonably convenient ingress and egress. The
minimum width of driveways shall be forty (40) feet if ingress and egress are
the same. If ingress and egress are by separate drives, then the minimum
width of each drive shall be twenty (20) feet.



D.   PARKING SPACE LOCATION.



All required parking spaces for non-residential or mixed uses shall be
located on the lot upon which the use is located or on an adjacentlot.
Required parking spaces for multiple-family, commercial  or industrialuse
may be located on an adjacentlot in another district (other than in a
single-family residential district).



E.   JOINT USE PARKING FOR PAD.



If an applicant for a mixed use PAD can demonstrate through a parking study
supplied by the applicant and approved by the Development Services Director,
or his/her designee, that the peak parking demand for the mixed uses will be
less than the sum of the parking spaces required for each use served, a
reduction in spaces may be allowed.



1.   The approved joint use parking plan shall specify the typical hours
of operation with anticipated periods of greatest parking demand for all uses
within the development; and shall indicate the number, location and
convenience of pedestrian access of all spaces available to serve each use.



2.   The joint use parking plan shall remain on file with the Development
Services Department for the purpose of monitoring the continuing adequacy of
available parking.



3.   At the time of joint use parking plan approval, or at any subsequent
time when uses, intensities of use or hours of operation, may be expanded or
otherwise change, or upon findings that the parking facilities are
inadequate, the Development Services Director, or his/her designee, may
require additional site area to be provided, and as necessary improved, to
supply additional parking facilities.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.22.6  PARKING STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES



A.   PARKING SPACE LOCATION.



No part of any vehicle parked in the front yard of a single-family or
two-family residence lot shall extend over the publicright-of-way or
sidewalk, pavement edge, or street curb where no sidewalk exists; nor shall
any such vehicle be parked within the area formed by a ten-foot by ten-foot
(10 x 10) triangle as measured from the point of intersection of the back of
the sidewalk, or street curb where no sidewalk exists, and a side property
line extended to the back of the sidewalk, or street curb where no sidewalk
exists, when such side property line is within five (5) feet of a driveway or
an improved parking surface located on an adjacentlot.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.22.7  PARKING SPACE ALLOCATION REQUIREMENTS



Requirements and directions for the allocation of parking spaces in all
Districts are described for various land uses.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.22.8  DETERMINATION OF REQUIRED SPACES



Calculations to determine the required number of parking spaces, and the
design of the space shall consider:



A.   Minimum standards for parking space allocation shall be subject to
the requirements of this Ordinance.



B.   The maximum number of parking spaces provided shall not exceed the
minimum number of spaces and an additional twenty (20) percent of parking
spaces, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.



C.   Parking lots shall be designed with a clear hierarchy of circulation
with major access drives providing access from the major street, major
circulation drives forming circulation through the parking area, and parking
aisles whose purpose is to provide access to parking spaces.



D.   Reciprocal access between adjacentcommercial  developments is
required.



E.   Large parking lots shall be divided into a series of smaller lots of
approximately one hundred-fifty (150) spaces each, using raised landscape
island(s) at least ten (10) feet in width, and at least five hundred (500)
square feet in total area, located along the sides of the parking areas to
separate large parking areas. Walkways should be considered as part of these
landscape areas. Raised landscape strips at least five (5) feet wide and at
least ninety-five (95) square feet in total area, should be located on the
ends of parking rows, extending the full length of parking spaces. Additional
landscape islands should be considered in the interior of the individual
parking areas to provide shade and break up large expanses of parking area.







F.   Parking areas may be combined and share the required landscape
buffers.







G.   Parking lots shall be separated from the sides of buildings by a
raised walkway (with a minimum width of six (6) feet).



H.    Alternative Design Standards: To provide flexibility in design and
development of projects, alternative design standards are provided. The total
number of parking spaces may be increased by ten (10) percent, above the
maximum, however in no case may the total number of parking spaces be
increased by more than forty (40) percent above the base maximum allowed.



I.   In the case of fractional results in calculating parking
requirements, the required number shall be rounded up to the nearest whole
number if the fraction is 0.5 or greater.



J.   All uses not specifically designated, or similar to a specified use,
shall have parking space requirements determined by the Zoning Administrator.



K.   Handicapped parking spaces: in multiple-family, commercial 
(excluding health care uses), and industrial districts, handicapped parking
spaces shall be provided at the ratio of one (1) space for the first twenty
(20) parking spaces provided, and one (1) space every twenty five (25)
thereafter.



L.   Handicapped parking spaces ratio for health care uses shall be as
following:



 


1 - 10 Spaces

 
Require 1 HC Space


11 - 20 Spaces
 
Require 2 HC Spaces


21 - 30 Spaces
 
Require 3 HC Spaces


31 - 50 Spaces
 
Require 4 HC Spaces


51 - 75 Spaces
 
Require 5 HC Spaces


1 HC Space
 
Each 25 thereafter



 



M.   Handicapped Parking Spaces shall use the “Universal Parkin g
Space” dimensions for all new handicapped spaces within the Town.



   DIMENSIONS: 11 X 20 WITH A 5-FOOT AISLE.
               THIS SIZE WILL ACCOMMODATE BOTH CARS AND VANS.



Parking Space Allocation Requirements



 


USE

 
MINIMUM STANDARDS




Residential:
 



Single residences, duplexes, detached dwellings
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit


Mobile home
 
1 space per unit


Multiple residence, apartments:
 



Efficiencies, studios
 
1 space per dwelling unit


One-two bedroom unit
 
1.5 spaces per dwelling unit


Two + bedroom unit
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit


All apartment developments with 5 or more units shall also provide guest
parking and recreational vehicle parking
 
1 space per 10 dwelling unit s


Condominium, Townhomes
 
2 spaces per unit plus 1 guest space for each additional and 1 recreational
vehicle space for each 10 units


Boarding house or similar facility
 
2 spaces per unit plus 1 guest space for each additional and 1 recreational
vehicle space for each 10 units



Public Assembly and Schools:

 



Churches and clubs, lodges and fraternal buildings, assembly halls, funeral
homes, community centers, libraries, auditoriums and theaters
 
1 space for each 75 sq. ft. of net useable floor area used for public assembly


Schools, kindergarten through ninth grade
 
1 space per 375 sq. ft. net useable floor area


High schools, academies, colleges, universities, trade or vocational schools
 
1 space per 200 sq. ft. net useable floor area


Health Care:
 



Medical or dental offices and out-patient
 
1 space per 150 sq. ft. net useable floor area clinics


Hospitals and nursing and convalescent homes
 
1 space per 400 sq. ft. net useable floor area


Day care center/nurseries
 
1 space per 375 sq. ft. net useable floor area, but not less than 5


Retail and Other Commercial Developments:
 



Retail and other commercial  developments
 
1 space per 300 sq. ft. net useable floor area


Independent CommercialBuildings and Uses
 



General offices/retail and services
 
1 space per 300 sq. ft. net useable floor area


General auto repair - garage, service station, car wash and drive-through
lubrication shops
 
1 space per 300 sq. ft. net useable floor area, including service bays, wash
tunnels and retail areas


Hotel and motel
 
1 space per room or suite or rooms plus 1 space for each 25 rooms for truck
trailers and recreational vehicles, such space of to be 10 x 75 feet


Restaurant, bar
 
1 space per 50 sq. ft. net useable floor area and outdoor seating area


Outdoor sales and service areas (car lots, plant nurseries, building
supplies, and the like)
 
1 space per 375 sq. ft. net useable floor area, of sales and service
building, but not less than 4 spaces per use



Commercial  greenhouses

 
1 space per 900 sq. ft. net useable floor area


Recreation:
 



Bowling alleys
 
5 spaces per lane plus ancillary use requirements


Theaters
 
1 space for every 3 patron seats


Golf course
 
1 space per 2 practice tees in driving range plus 4 spaces per green plus
ancillary use requirements


Miniature golf, amusement parks and water slides
 
1 space per 500 sq. ft. outside recreation area


Health spas/clubs, gyms & tennis, handball, racquetball courts/clubs
 
1 space per 100 sq. ft. net useable floor area, excluding courts, which
require 2 spaces per court


Skating rinks, dance halls
 
1 space per 75 ft. net useable floor area used for recreational activities
and ancillary use requirements


Industrialbuildings and Uses:
 



Industrial buildings and uses
 
2 spaces for every 3 employees on the shift with the greatest number of
employees


Independent Industrial buildings and Uses:
 



Warehouses
 
1 space per 900 sq. ft. net useable floor area


Manufacturing
 
1 space per 600 sq. ft. net useable floor area


Mini storage buildings
 
5% of the number of units




 



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 11-738,
passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)



4.22.9  OFF-STREET LOADING



Commercial and industrial uses requiring delivery shall observe minimum
loading space accommodation.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.22.10  SPACES REQUIRED



Every hotel, restaurant, department store, freight terminal, or railroad
yard, hospital or sanitarium, industrial plant, manufacturing establishments,
retail establishment, storage warehouse or wholesale establishment, and all
other structures devoted to similar mercantile or industrial pursuits, which
has an aggregate gross floor area of 15,000 square feet or more shall provide
off-street truck loading or unloading berths in accordance with Table 4.4.4
below:



 




Table 4.4.4A
Loading Space Requirements




Square feet of Aggregate Gross Floor area
Devoted to Such Use

 

Required No. of Berths



Building greater than 15,000 sq. ft. up to & including 40,000 sq. ft.
 

1



40,001 sq. ft. up to & including 100,000 sq. ft.
 

2



100,001 sq. ft. up to & including 160,000 sq. ft.
 

3



160,001 sq. ft. up to & including 240,000 sq. ft.
 

4



240,001 sq. ft. up to & including 320,000 sq. ft.
 

5



320,001 sq. ft. up to & including 400,000 sq. ft.
 

6



400,001 sq. ft. up to & including 499,000 sq. ft.
 

7



for each additional 100,000 sq. ft.
 

1 additional





 



Any officebuilding 100,000 sq. ft. or larger shall have at least one (1)
off-street loading berth.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.22.11  STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES



All off-street loading facilities shall conform to the following standards:



A.   DIMENSIONS.



Unless otherwise specified in these zoning regulations, berths required shall
be at least forty-five (45) feet in length and all loading berths shall be at
least twelve (12) feet in width and fourteen (14) feet in height, exclusive
of aisle and maneuvering space.



B.   LOCATIONS.



Such space may occupy all or any part of any required yard space, except
front and side yards, and shall not be located closer than fifty (50) feet to
any lot in any residential zone unless separated from such zone by a
screening wall with a height of eight (8) feet, a twenty (20) foot landscape
buffer with at least fifty (50) percent of the view obscured by evergreen
plant material, or a combination of the above as ap-proved by the Zoning
Administrator or the Commission.



1.   Sufficient room for turning and maneuvering vehicles shall be
provided on the site so that vehicles shall cross a property line only by
driving forward. Driving over curbs or pavement rails is prohibited.



2.   Each loading berth shall be accessible from a street or alley or from
an aisle or drive connecting with a street or alley, without traversing a
residential district.



3.   Off-street loading facilities for a single use shall not be
considered as providing required off-street loading facilities for any other
use.



a.   If more than one use is located on a site, the number of loading
berths provided shall be equal to the sum of the requirements prescribed in
this Ordinance for each use.



b.   If more than one use is located on a site and the gross floor area of
each use is less than the minimum for which loading berths are required but
the aggregate gross floor area is greater than the minimum for which loading
berths are required, off-street loading berths shall be provided as if the
aggregate gross floor area were used for the use requiring the greatest
number of loading berths.



C.   IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.



The loading area, aisles, and access drives shall be paved and maintained so
as to provide a durable, dustless surface and shall be so graded and drained
so as to dispose of surface water without damage to private or public
properties, streets, or alleys.



1.   Bumper rails shall be provided, and maintained in a useable
condition, at locations where needed for safety or to protect property.



2.   The loading area is to be illuminated and lighting shall be deflected
away from abutting residential site so as not to cause glare.



D.   COMPLIANCE.



1.   Off-street loading facilities shall be located on the same site with
the use for which the berths are required.



2.   At the time of initial occupancy, major alterations or enlargement of
a site, or of completion of construction of a structure or of a major
alteration or enlargement of a structure, there shall be provided by the
owner a report of off-street loading berth requirements. The number of
loading berths provided for a major alteration or enlargement of a site or
structure shall be in addition to the number existing prior to the alteration
or enlargement.



3.   Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall not be used to
satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facility.



4.   No regular repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be conducted in
a loading area.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.23  PUBLIC STREET SYSTEM AND PUBLIC USE ACCESS SYSTEM



A.   PURPOSE



The purpose of this subsection is to regulate the dedication  and
classification of public streets, rights-of-way and access ways, and to
ensure the orderly growth of the public street system of Chino Valley.



B. STREET CLASSIFICATION



All streets within the corporate limits of the Town are designated as
arterial, collector, or residential streets.



1.   Street classifications.



a.   Arterial streets shall generally carry through traffic and, unless
part of the state highway system, shall be the responsibility of the Town to
maintain.



b.   Collector streets shall generally carry traffic from residential
neighborhoods to arterial streets or major destination points such as
industrial or commercial  centers. Except as required by a subdivisionplat,
collector streets shall be the responsibility of the Town to maintain.



c.   Residential streets shall carry traffic from residential lots to
collector streets. The Town bears no responsibility to construct residential
streets, or maintain such streets unless they have been built to Town
standards and formally accepted for maintenance.



2.   Street classification amendment procedure.



a.   All petitions for street classification amendment shall be presented
to the Zoning Administrator and Road Department Supervisor for their
evaluation and recommendation.



b.   The recommendations of the Zoning Administrator and Road Department
Supervisor, together with the petition, shall be forwarded to the Planning
and Zoning Commission.



Thereafter, the procedures set forth in the Chino Valley Unified Development
Ordinance shall be followed.



3.   No new residential street shall be added to the public street system
except as governed by the Subdivision Ordinance of the Town.



C.   INCLUSION IN THE PUBLIC USE ACCESS SYSTEM FOR PRE-EXISTING ACCESS
WAYS AND INCLUSION IN THE PUBLIC STREET SYSTEM



Any person may petition for inclusion of a pre-existing access way into the
public use access system. Any person may also petition for inclusion of a
right-of-way or non-conforming right-of-way into the public street system.
The Council or Commission may petition for inclusion of a new collector or
arterial street into the public street system.



D.   INCLUSION IN THE PUBLIC STREET SYSTEM FOR NEW COLLECTOR OR ARTERIAL
STREETS



E.   RIGHT-OF-WAYDEDICATION



1.   Right-of-waydedication s as required by this Ordinance, or otherwise
offered to or solicited by the Town, are for the purpose of acquiring full
public ownership for the public street system. Recording of such
right-of-waydedication s in no way implies acceptance of any roadway for
maintenance.



2.   All right-of-waydedication s shall be offered to the Zoning
Administrator on forms specified by the Town.



3.   The Zoning Administrator and Public Works Director shall, within five
(5) working days from the date of the application, determine the correctness
of the proposed dedication  as to size and alignment.



4.   Upon a favorable ruling the proposed dedication  shall be recorded
with the Town and the County  Recorder.



5.   In no case shall right-of-way or public street of the public use
access system, as required by this UDO, be considered as creating
non-conforming lots or prevent such lots from legally being split as
otherwise governed in this UDO due to loss of area as a result of such
requirements.



F.   APPLICATIONS FOR MAINTENANCE



1.   Upon construction of a roadway on any residential right-of-way to
Town standards as specified in the Town Code. Whether by improvement district
or through subdivision regulations, the governing body of the improvement
district or developer for the subdivision may apply to the Town for
acceptance of the roadway for maintenance and the acceptance of the dedicated
right-of-way.



2.   All such applications for maintenance shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator on forms specified by the Town and accompanied by a filing fee.



3.   The application shall be placed on the TownCouncil agenda within
fifteen (15) working days of the application, accompanied by the
recommendations of the Zoning Administrator and Road Department Supervisor.



4.   Upon favorable vote of the TownCouncil, the roadway, along with all
dedications recorded according to this Ordinance, shall be accepted by
resolution for maintenance as a public street. The acceptance of the
dedicated right-of-way shall be accomplished by the appropriate legal party
signing the recording of the required document.



5.   No street shall be accepted for maintenance that does not have a
minimum of fifty (50) feet of dedicated right-of-way unless the Zoning
Administrator has made a finding that the right-of-way should be declared
non-conforming.



G.   NON-CONFORMING RIGHT-OF-WAY



1.   The Zoning Administrator may determine from time to time the
infeasibility of requiring full dedications as required under this Ordinance,
due to pre-existing structures or other improvements such as wells, fences,
or landscaping.



2.   In such a case the Zoning Administrator may determine a lesser
right-of-way requirement, although in no case less than thirty-five (35)
feet, and declare the right-of-way non-conforming.



3.   The Zoning Administrator shall make no such determination without a
written recommendation from the Road Department Supervisor.



4.   Any appeals of the Zoning Administrator’s decision shall be
governed by Section 5.5.2.



H.   FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY



Town Council shall adopt a map of future rights-of-way desired by the Town.
This map shall depict the roads which are not dedicated rights-of-way and
which are commonly used for access to lots or subdivisions, as well as
dedicated rights-of-way not accepted for maintenance. These are known as the
public use access system. The map shall also show additions to the
rights-of-way the Town currently owns which may be needed for future
street/widening or other purposes. The Future right-of-way Map shall be used
to implement this Ordinance.



I.   PUBLIC USE ACCESS SYSTEM



The map adopted by the Town shall depict the public use access system of the
Town as of the effective date of the adoption of this amendment.



1.   The public use access system designates all existing right-of-way
being used for vehicular access by local residents but which do not conform
to all the public street requirements including, but not limited to,
conformance with this Ordinance.



2.   The public use access system includes all existing access ways being
used for vehicular access by local residents but which do not conform to all
the public street requirements including, but not limited to, lack of
right-of-way and conformance with this Ordinance.



3.   It is the intent of this Ordinance to perfect the public use access
system and ensure the future development of a public street system.



4.   The public use access system is part of the Future right-of-way
System. The Town does not represent the streets of this system as necessarily
public or accepted for maintenance at the date of this amendment, but
recognizes that they exist as vehicular access for general public use.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-734, passed 7-8-2010)



4.24  OUTDOOR LIGHTING



INTENT AND PURPOSE:



It is the intent of these regulations to encourage lighting practices and
systems which will: minimize light pollution, glare, light trespass; conserve
energy and resources while maintaining night time safety, utility, security,
and productivity; and curtail the degradation of the night time visual
environment.



APPLICABILITY



A.   NEW USES, BUILDINGS AND ADDITIONS:  All proposed new land uses,
developments, buildings, structures, or building additions of twenty-five
(25) percent or more in terms of additional dwelling unit s, gross floor
area, seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein,
either with a single addition or cumulative additions subsequent to the
effective date of this Ordinance, shall meet the requirements herein for the
entire property. This includes additions, which increase the total number of
required parking spaces by twenty-five (25) percent or more. For all building
additions of less than twenty- five (25) percent cumulative, the applicant
shall only have to meet the requirements of this Ordinance for any new
outdoor lighting provided.



B.   CHANGE OF USE/INTENSITY:  Except as provided in Paragraph C. below,
whenever the use of any existing building, structure, or premises is changed
to a new use, or the intensity of use is increased through the incorporation
of additional dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other
units of measurement specified herein, and which change of use or
intensification of use creates a need for an increase in the total number of
parking spaces of twenty-five (25) percent or more, either with a single
change or cumulative changes subsequent to the effective date of this
Ordinance, then all outdoor lighting facilities shall meet the requirements
herein for the entire property, to the maximum extent possible as determined
by the Zoning Administrator. For changes of use or intensity which require an
increase in parking of less than twenty-five (25) percent cumulative, the
applicant shall only have to meet the requirements of this Ordinance for any
new outdoor lighting provided.



C.   NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES OR LOTS:  Whenever a non-conforming
use, structure or lot is abandoned for a period of six (6) months and then
changed to a new use according to the requirements of this Ordinance, then
any existing outdoor lighting shall be reviewed and brought into compliance
as necessary for the entire building, structure or premises, to the maximum
extent possible as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 



APPROVED MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION OR INSTALLATION/OPERATION:



A.   Preferred Source - Low-pressure Sodium (LPS) lamps are the preferred
illumination source throughout the Town; their use is to be encouraged, when
not required, for outdoor illumination whenever its use would not be
detrimental to the use of the property.



B.   The provisions of this Ordinance are not intended to prevent the use
of any design, material, or method of installation or operation not
specifically pre-scribed herein, provided any such alternate has been
approved by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may approve
any such proposed alternate provided he/she finds that it:



1.   Provides at least approximate equivalence to the applicable specific
requirements of this Ordinance; and



2.   Is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this
Ordinance.



GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:



A.   Outdoor floodlighting by flood light projection above the horizontal
plane is prohibited.



B.   All light fixtures that are required to be shielded shall be
installed in such a manner that the shielding is effective.



C.   All light fixtures, except streetlights, shall be located, aimed, or
shielded so as to minimize stray light trespassing across property boundaries.



D.   The installation, sale, offering for sale, lease, or purchase of any
mercury vapor light fixture or lamp for use as outdoor lighting is prohibited.



E.   Search lights, laser source lights, or any similar high-intensity
light shall not be permitted, except in emergencies by police and fire
personnel or at their direction or for meteorological data gathering purposes.



F.   Class I lighting may continue only until 9:00 p.m. or for as long as
the area is in active use.



G.   Illumination for outdoor recreation facilities must conform to the
shielding requirements of Table 4.24A below, except when such shielding would
interfere with the intended activity. For such facilities, partially shielded
luminaries are permitted. Examples of activities where partially shielded
luminaries are permitted include, but are not limited to, baseball, softball,
and football.  Specifically, tennis, volleyball, racquetball and handball
courts, and swimming pools must utilize fully shielded luminaries. Where
fully shielded luminaries are required, the light fixtures must also conform
to the requirements of Paragraph C. above regarding light trespass.



H.   Multi-class lighting must either conform to the lamp-type and
shielding requirements of the most strict Class, as shown in Table 4.24A, or
conform to the time limitations of the least strict Class.



I.   External illumination for signs shall conform to the provisions of
these regulations.



J.   On projects where an engineer or architect is required, the developer
shall verify in writing to the Development Services Department  that all
outdoor lighting was installed in accordance with the approved plans.



K.   Outdoor Light Output, Total.  The maximum total amount of light,
measured in lumens, from all outdoor light fixtures. For lamp types that vary
in their output as they age (such as high pressure sodium), the initial
output, as defined by the manufacturer, is the value to be considered. For
determining compliance with this Ordinance, the light emitted from outdoor
light fixtures is to be included in the total output as follows:



1.   Outdoor light fixtures installed on poles (such as parking lot
luminaries) and light fixtures installed on the sides of the buildings or
other structures, when not shielded from above by the structure itself as
defined in Paragraphs 2 and 3 below, are to be included in the total outdoor
light output by simply adding the lumen outputs of the lamps used.



2.   Outdoor light fixtures installed under canopies, building overhangs,
or roof eaves where the center of the lamp or luminaries is located at least
five (5) feet, but less than ten (10) feet from the nearest edge of the
canopy or overhang are to be included in the total outdoor light output as
though they produced only one-quarter (1/4) of the lamp’s rated lumen
output.



3.   Outdoor light fixtures located under the canopy and ten (10) or more
feet from the nearest edge of a canopy, building overhang, or eave are to be
included in the total outdoor light output as though they produced only
one-tenth (1/10) of the lamp's rated lumen output.



L.   Service station Canopy Lighting. In addition to the calculations for
paragraph K.2. and K.3. above, the following requirements apply to service
station canopies:



1.   All luminaries mounted on the under surface of service station
canopies shall be fully shielded and utilize flat glass or flat plastic
(acrylic or polycarbonate) covers.



2.   The total light output used for illuminating service station
canopies, defined as the sum of all under-canopy initial bare-lamp outputs in
lumens, shall not exceed forty (40) lumens per square foot of canopy. All
lighting mounted under the canopy, including but not limited to luminaries
mounted on the lower surface of the canopy and auxiliary lighting within
signage or panels over the pumps, is to be included toward the total.



M.   Neon lighting is permitted, so long as lumen calculations from such
lighting are included in the total lumen calculations for the site, required
by this subsection. Lumens are calculated on a per foot basis, rather than
per “fixture”. Such lighting shall also be subject to the shielding
requirements of Section    , unless exempted by Table 4.24A below.



 




TABLE 4.24A
LAMP SOURCE AND SHIELDING STANDARDS




Fixture/Lamp Type   

 

Shielded

 

Filtered




Low Pressure Sodium

 

Partially

 

None




High Pressure Sodium

 

Fully

 

None




Metal Halide

 

Fully

 

Yes




Fluorescent

 

Fully

 

Yes




Quartz

 

Fully

 

None




Incandescent 100W of greater per fixture

 

Fully

 

None




Incandescent less than 100W

 

None

 

None




Mercury Vapor

 

Fully

 

Yes




Fossil Fuel

 

None

 

None




Glass Tubes filled with Neon, Argon or Krypton

 

None

 

None




Other Sources

 

As approved by the Zoning Administrator





 



N.   Total outdoor light output (excluding street lights used for
illumination of public rights-of-way) of any development project shall not
exceed 100,000 lumens per net acre, averaged over the entire project.
Furthermore, no more than 5,500 lumens per net acre may be accounted for by
lamps in unshielded or partially-shielded fixtures permitted in Table 4.24A,
except that lamp(s) emitting no more than 4,720 lumens per
single-familydwelling unit or duplexdwelling unit  for residential outdoor
lighting purposes are exempt from the shielding requirements of Table 4.24A,
though they must conform to all other applicable restrictions. Single-family
attached units (e.g. Townhouses), and multiple-family residential units are
limited to 2360 lumens of unshielded lights per unit.



O.   Outdoor recreational facilities are not subject to the lumens per net
acre limit set, however, no such facility shall be illuminated after 11:00
p.m. except to conclude a scheduled recreational or sporting event in
progress prior to 11:00 p.m.



P.   Outdoor internally-illuminated advertising signs shall either be
constructed with an opaque background and translucent letters and symbols or
with a colored (not white, cream, off-white, or yellow) background and
lighter letters and symbols. Lamps used for internal illumination of such
signs shall not be included in the lumens per net acre limit set in this
subsection. Such signs shall be turned off at 11:00 p.m. or when the business
closes, whichever is later.



AIRPORT LIGHTING:



Airport lighting, which is required for the safe and efficient movement of
aircraft during flight, take off, landing, and taxiing is exempt from the
provisions of this Ordinance. Lighting used for illumination of aircraft
loading, unloading, and servicing areas is exempt from the lumens per acre
limits, although it must conform to all other requirements of this Ordinance.
All other outdoor lighting at airport facilities shall comply with the
provisions of this Ordinance.



APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:



A.   Whenever a person is required to obtain a building permit, electrical
permit for outdoor lighting or signage, a Site Plan or Conditional Use
Permit, or subdivision approval by the Town, including all Town projects, the
applicant shall, as part of the application, submit sufficient information to
enable the Zoning Administrator to determine whether the proposed lighting
will comply with this Ordinance.



B.   The application shall include the following:



1.   A Site Plan indicating the proposed location of all outdoor lighting
fixtures and signs;



2.   A photometric analysis of the proposed lighting;



3.   A description of each illuminating device, fixture, lamp, support,
and shield. This description may include, but is not limited to,
manufacturer's catalog cuts and drawings (including sections where required),
lamp types, and lumen outputs;



4.   Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers, or
similar, showing the angle of cut off of light emissions for the proposed
luminaries(s);



5.   Such other information as the Zoning Administrator may determine is
necessary to ensure compliance with this Ordinance.



C.   If the Zoning Administrator determines that the proposed lighting
does not comply with this Ordinance, the permit shall not be issued or the
plan approved.



TEMPORARY LIGHTING PERMITS:



A.   The Zoning Administrator may grant a permit for temporary lighting,
as defined herein, if he/she finds the following:



1.   The purpose for which the lighting is proposed is not intended to
extend beyond thirty (30) days;



2.   The proposed lighting is designed in such a manner as to minimize
light pollution and trespass as much as is feasible;



3.   The proposed lighting will comply with the general intent of this
Ordinance;



4.   The permit will be in the public interest.



B.   The application for the Temporary lighting permit shall include the
following information:



1.   Name and address of applicant and property owner;



2.   Location of proposed fixtures;



3.   Type, wattage, and lumen output of lamp(s);



4.   Type, shielding of proposed fixtures;



5.   Intended use of the lighting;



6.   Duration of time for requested exemption;



7.   The nature of the exemption;



8.   Such other information as the Zoning Administrator may request.



C.   The Zoning Administrator shall endeavor to rule on the application
within five (5) business days from the date of submission of the request and
notify the applicant in writing of their decision. The Zoning Administrator
may grant one (1) renewal of the permit for an additional thirty (30) days if
he/she finds that, because of an unanticipated change in circumstances, a
renewal would be in the public interest. The Zoning Administrator is not
authorized to grant more than one (1) temporary permit and one (1) renewal
for a thirty (30) day period for the same property within one (1) calendar
year.



NON-CONFORMING LIGHTING:



A.   Mercury vapor lamps in use for outdoor lighting.



B.   Any construction permit which invokes Certificate of Occupancy
requirements shall specify and require that any non-conforming sign, as to
lighting, located within the boundaries of the development site authorized by
the permit shall be brought into conformance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.



C.   No outdoor lighting fixture which was lawfully installed prior to the
enact shall be required to be removed or modified except as expressly
provided herein; however, no modification or replacement shall be made to a
non-conforming fixture unless the fixture thereafter conforms to the
provisions of this Ordinance.



D.   In the event that any non-conforming sign, as to lighting, is
abandoned or is damaged, and if the damage exceeds fifty (50) percent of the
reproduction value, exclusive of foundations, to replace it, the sign shall
be brought into conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance.



ZONING ADMINISTRATORS:



Any person desiring to install an outdoor lighting fixture that does not meet
the requirements of this Ordinance may apply to the Board of Adjustment for a
Zoning Administrator from the regulation in question.



CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:



In the event of conflict between the regulations set forth in this Ordinance
and any other regulations applicable to the same area, the more stringent
limitation or requirement shall govern.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



4.25  WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES



A.   PURPOSE. The purpose of this section is to establish general
guidelines for the siting of wireless communications facilities, towers and
antennas. The goals of this section are to:



1.   Ensure access to reliable wireless communications services throughout
all areas of the Town of Chino Valley.



2.   Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of wireless facilities, towers and antennas.



3.   Encourage the location of wireless facilities, towers and antennas in
non-residential areas.



4.   Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community.



5.   Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing wireless
facility and tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of
additional single-use towers.



6.   Encourage users of wireless facilities, towers and antennas to locate
them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal.



7.   Encourage users of wireless facilities, towers and antennas to
configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the
wireless facilities, towers and antennas through careful design, siting,
landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques.



8.   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently.



9.   Ensure public health, safety, welfare and convenience as enumerated
in Section 1.9.2(A) of this code.



10.   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful sitting of tower structures. In furtherance
of these goals, the Town shall give due consideration to the General Plan,
other provisions of this Ordinance, existing land uses, and environmentally
sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of wireless facilities,
towers and antennas.



B.   DEFINITIONS. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings set forth below:



ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE means man-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas, towers or wireless facilities.



ANTENNA means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a
tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiates or
captures electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or
other communication signals.



CO-LOCATION means the use by two or more wireless communications providers of
the same support structure or the same site, as defined in subsection “I”
below.



CONCEALED WIRELESS FACILITY means a wireless facility that cannot be directly
seen because it is enclosed within a structure or screen that completely
precludes it from direct view.



DISGUISED WIRELESS FACILITY means a wireless facility that can be directly
observed but uses an ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE or alternative site design
or materials in such a way as to make the identification of the use not
readily apparent to the casual observer.



EXISTING STRUCTURE means light poles, power poles, chimneys, billboards, and
other structures that are situated within the Town at the time of adoption of
this Ordinance.



FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.



FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.



HEIGHT means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the vertical
distance measured from the natural grade level to the highest point of the
structure directly above the natural grade when such structure is not located
in a platted subdivision. If the structure is located in a platted
subdivision, the height shall be the vertical distance measured from the
finished grade as shown on the subdivision grading plans or finished grade as
shown on the individual lot’s grading plans (whichever is lower), to the
highest point of the structure directly above the finished grade. In the
event that terrain problems prevent an accurate determination of height, the
Development Director shall rule as to height and appeal from that decision
shall be to the Board of Adjustment.



PREEXISTING WIRELESS FACILITIES, TOWERS AND ANTENNAS means any wireless
facility, tower or antenna for which a building permit has been properly
issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, including permitted
wireless facilities, towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so
long as such approval is current and not expired.



SITE means the physical location upon which wireless communications
facilities are located. Unless otherwise stated in this Section, “site”
shall be limited to the area occupied by a single tower and its accompanying
ground or roof-mounted equipment.



TOWER means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar
communication purposes, including monopole towers. The term includes radio
and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers,
cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The
term also includes the structure and any support thereto.



VISIBLE WIRELESS FACILITY means wireless facilities that are immediately
identifiable to the casual observer, with no incorporation of ALTERNATIVE
TOWER STRUCTURES or alternative designs or materials to obscure the use from
a casual observer.



WIRELESS COMMUNICATION means any technology for transmitting communication
through the air.



WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES means any combination of one or more
antennae, towers and/or structures or equipment used for the transmission of
wireless communication.



C.   APPLICABILITY



1.   New facilities, towers or antennas. All WIRELESS FACILITIES in the
Town shall be subject to these regulations.



2.   Existing facilities, towers or antennas



a.   Preexisting towers or antennas. Legally established preexisting
wireless facilities, towers and antennas shall comply with the requirements
of this Section.



3.   Exceptions.



a.   Amateur radio station operators and/or receive only operations. This
Section shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that
is under the maximum building height of the zoning district in which such
structure is located and which is solely used by a federally-licensed amateur
radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only operations,
including devices necessary for individual subscriptions to commercial 
wireless services.



b.   AM array. For purposes of implementing this Ordinance, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which
functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower.
Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the
outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower
units may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right.



c.   Wireless Facilities used by a governmental agency for public safety
purposes are permitted in all zoning districts subject to Subsection 4.25.E.2
of this code Section.



D.   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS



1.   Principal or accessory. Wireless facilities, antennas and towers may
be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of
an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of
a wireless facility, antenna or tower on such lot.



2.   Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
wireless facility, tower or antenna complies with district development
regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot-coverage
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot
shall control, even though the antennas, towers or wireless facilities may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.



3.   Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for a wireless facility,
antenna and/or tower shall provide to the Development Director an inventory
of its existing wireless facilities, towers, antennas, or sites approved for
towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the Town or
within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about
the location, height, and design of each tower. Each applicant shall also
provide a one-year build out plan for all other proposed wireless
communications facilities within the Town. The Development Director may share
such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals
or Conditional Use Permits under this Section or with other organizations
seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the Town, provided,
however that the Development Director is not, by sharing such information, in
any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.



4.   Aesthetics. Wireless Facilities, Towers and antennas shall meet the
following requirements:



a.   Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or be painted
a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.



b.   At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening,
and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding
buildings.



c.   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna, attachments and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must
be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the
color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna, attachments and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.



5.   Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted.



6.   State and Federal Requirements. All towers must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency
of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate wireless
facilities, towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are
changed, the owners of the wireless facilities, towers and antennas governed
by this chapter shall bring such wireless facilities, towers and antennas
into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6)
months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a
different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal
agency. Failure to bring wireless facilities, towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute
grounds for the revocation of the standing permit (if applicable) and removal
of the wireless facility, tower or antenna at the owner's expense.



7.   Building Codes; Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building
codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the
Electronic Industries Association (EIA) and by the Telecommunications
Industries Association (TIA), or subsequent, as amended from time to time. As
determined by the Development Services Director, the Town may require a
permit holder to perform inspections of its structure and, as required,
formally report to the Town the status of compliance with applicable
standards. If, upon inspection, the Town concludes that a tower fails to
comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or
property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the
owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with
such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within thirty
(30) days shall constitute grounds for the revocation of the standing permit
(if applicable) and removal of the wireless facility, tower or antenna at the
owner’s expense.



8.   Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in
the Town irrespective of municipal and County  jurisdictional boundaries.



9.   Not essential services. Wireless facilities, towers and antennas
shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this Section and shall not be
regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities or private
utilities.



10.   Franchises. Owners and/or operators of wireless facilities, towers
or antennas shall certify that all franchises required by law for the
construction and/or operation of a wireless communication system in the Town
have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the
Development Director.



11.   Public notice. For purposes of this Section, any Conditional Use
Permit request shall be pursuant to Section 1.9.3 of this Ordinance except
that the notice required shall include posting of the property, and mailing
to all property owners within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed
wireless communications facility, and publication in a newspaper of general
circulation regardless of any expression to the contrary in Section 1.9.2.



12.   Signs. No signs shall be allowed on a wireless facility, tower or
antenna, or on any portion of the premises leased for wireless
telecommunication use, with the exception of site identification and
emergency contact signage as indicated within this UDO.



13.   Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas, towers or wireless facilities shall comply with the
requirements of this Section 4.25.



14.   Co-location and multiple antenna/tower plan. The Town encourages
wireless facility, tower and antenna users to submit a single application for
approval of multiple wireless facilities, towers and/or antenna sites and to
submit applications that utilize co-location with an existing wireless
telecommunications provider. Applications for approval of multiple sites or
for co-location with an existing provider shall be given priority in the
review process.



15.   Security fencing. Wireless facilities, towers and antennas (and
where applicable to rooftop installations) shall be enclosed by security
fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and no more than eight (8) feet
in height. Fencing shall be constructed of chain link, block or masonry (as
directed by staff and/or approved by Council), and tower structures shall be
equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices. For rooftop installations,
applicants may substitute a security and access management plan which
demonstrates how access and security will be managed on site to preclude
general access to the facility; the TownCouncil may waive such requirements
related to security fencing as it deems appropriate.



16.   Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding wireless facilities and towers; provided, however, that the
TownCouncil may waive such requirements if the goals of this Section would be
better served thereby.



a.   Towers and wireless facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of
plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from
residentially zoned property. The standard buffer shall consist of a
landscaped strip at least four (4) feet wide outside the perimeter of the
compound. The applicant must ensure that any such plant materials shall be
sustained for the life of the proposed facility.



b.   In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal,
the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived.



c.   Existing mature plant growth and natural landforms on the site shall
be preserved to the maximum extent possible.



E.   ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMITS



1.   General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted
uses and shall require an administrative use permit or a Conditional Use
Permit.



2.   Permitted uses, all zones – The following uses are specifically
permitted in any zone via administrative use permit. All such uses shall be
fully compliant with Town design requirements for antennas, towers and
wireless facilities as enumerated in code:



Antennas, towers or wireless facilities located on property owned, leased, or
otherwise controlled or managed by the Town; provided, however, a license or
lease authorizing such wireless facility, antenna or tower has been approved
by the Council. No such license or lease shall be issued for a wireless
facility, tower or antennas located within three hundred (300) feet of any
residentially zoned property until an informational hearing has been held at
a regular or special TownCouncil meeting and notice of such hearing has been
advertised according to subsection 4.25.D.11 at least seven (7) days but not
earlier than fourteen (14) days prior to such hearing. All other wireless
facilities, towers or antennas require administrative use or Conditional Use
Permits as enumerated and regulated within this UDO



3.   Permits, Information Required and Design Elements.



a.   Intent: The intent of the following development standards is to
improve the design and placement of new Wireless Facilities, towers and
antennas, as well as the modification of such facilities, towers and antennas
in order to reduce the impact on the visual and aesthetic character of the
community. The standards are designed to: Encourage the use of concealment
technology; minimize the construction of new towers through the promotion of
co-location on existing Wireless Facilities, buildings or other structures;
ensure continuous maintenance of Wireless Facilities and enforce the timely
removal of any unused or outdated facilities; and regulate the use of
temporary Wireless Facilities. A Wireless Facility may be Concealed,
Disguised or Visible.



b.   Administrative or Conditional Use Permits; additions or changes;
information required. Subject to Subsection 3c. below, a site plan must be
approved or amended by the Development Services Department  to reflect any
additional antennae, microwave dishes, or attaching apparatus or a change in
support structure or expanded area for support equipment. Changes to
equipment that is fully enclosed within an equipment shelter that was
included on a previous site plan approval do not require a site plan
amendment. No site plan for a new or amended Wireless Facility, tower or
antenna shall be approved unless the support equipment is located entirely
within an equipment enclosure or equipment shelter that is architecturally
compatible with the surrounding area.



c.   Applicants for both administrative and Conditional Use Permits for a
wireless facility, antenna(s) or tower shall submit the following information:



i.   A scaled Site Plan clearly indicating the location, type and height
of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and
zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities), General Plan
classification of the site and all adjoining properties, adjacentroadways,
proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of
the proposed tower and any other structures, and other information deemed by
the Development Services Director to be necessary to assess compliance with
this section of the UDO.



ii.   The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residentially zoned properties.



iii   The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory
of existing sites submitted pursuant to Subsection 4.25.D.3 shall be shown on
an updated Site Plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of
construction and height of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of
the existing tower(s), if known.



iv.   Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the method
of camouflage or concealment.



v.   A description of compliance with applicable UDO subsections and all
applicable federal, state or local laws.



vi.   A notarized statement by the applicant indicating that the
construction of any tower will accommodate co-location of additional antennas
for future users.



vii.   Two photosimulations from the two (2) nearest intersections of
public rights of way or public lands.



viii.   An alternate site analysis report, detailing all potential sites
investigated by the applicant, and reasons why said alternate sites will not
meet the applicant's Radio Frequency (RF) and service objectives.



ix.   A statement of compliance with Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) RF exposure standards.



d.   Factors considered in Granting Conditional Use Permits for towers
(not in any particular order or priority). In addition to any standards for
consideration of applications pursuant to Section 4.25 of this Ordinance, the
TownCouncil shall consider the following factors in determining whether to
issue a Conditional Use Permit, although the TownCouncil may waive or reduce
the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the
TownCouncil concludes that the goals of this Ordinance are better served
thereby:



i.   The consistency of the request with the context of the surrounding
area;



ii.   The design of a Disguised Wireless Facility must be compatible with
the architectural character and natural features of the site or development;



iii.   The placement of the Wireless Facility on the lot or parcel and its
potential effect on expanding existing or developing future land uses;



iv.   The cumulative effect that existing Wireless Facilities in the
vicinity of the site may have on the request;



v.   Height of the proposed tower.



vi.   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residentially
zoned district boundaries.



vii.   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.



viii.   Surrounding topography.



ix.   Surrounding tree coverage and vegetation.



x.   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness.



xi.   Proposed ingress and egress.



xii.   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures, as
discussed in this Ordinance.



xiii.   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alterative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the TownCouncil that no
existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the
use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant’s proposed
antenna. An applicant shall submit information requested by the TownCouncil
related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology.



4. Concealed Wireless Communication Facilities. Concealed Wireless Facilities
used by a governmental agency for public safety purposes are permitted in all
zoning districts subject to Subsection 4.25.E.2. of this UDO section. Other
Concealed Wireless Facilities are permitted in all zoning districts, subject
to the following standards:



a.   When there is more than one underlying zoning district, the more
restrictive regulations shall apply. Concealed Wireless Facilities are
permitted on residentially zoned properties as follows:



(1)   Public/quasi-public spaces—Concealed Wireless Facilities are
permitted on residentially zoned property that are designated or used for
public or quasi-public spaces including, but not limited to, schools,
churches, golf courses, parks or government facilities, subject to obtaining
an administratively approved usepermit pursuant to the design guidelines
herein and other provisions contained in this Ordinance. Failure to comply
with applicable design guidelines and other required provisions in this
Ordinance will mandate that the proposed Wireless Facility be processed as a
Conditional Use Permit.



(2)   Open space residential tracts—Concealed Wireless Facility are
permitted in tracts within residential subdivisions that are zoned or platted
for open space or retention areas, subject to obtaining an administratively
approved usepermit pursuant to the design guidelines herein and other
provisions contained in this Ordinance. Failure to comply with applicable
design guidelines and other required provisions in this Ordinance will
mandate that the proposed Wireless Facility be processed as a Conditional Use
Permit.



b.   Design guidelines. A site plan must be approved by the Development
Services Department  demonstrating that the proposed Wireless Facility meets
the definition of “Concealed”. Site plans for Concealed Wireless
Facilities must demonstrate the following in order to be administratively
approved:



(1)   The antenna is fully enclosed, screened or obscured so that it is
not visible at all or, if visible, it is not recognizable as a Wireless
Facility to a casual observer; and



(2)   The antenna does not extend more than twelve (12) inches from the
building or structure to which it is attached; and



(3)   The underlying zoning district must allow the structure being
utilized to support the antenna and the support structure; and



(4)   The Concealed Wireless Facility and its support structure shall
comply with the setback requirements of the underlying zoning district or, if
located in a sign, by the standards contained in this Ordinance; and



(5)   The support equipment is located entirely within an equipment
enclosure that is architecturally compatible with the surrounding area,
completely screened from view, and built in compliance with the standards
outlined in this Zoning Ordinance; and



(6)   A Wireless Facility concealed as a flagpole shall be required to fly
a flag in compliance with the accepted protocol for the type of flag flown.
The flag and pole shall be visible from the building entrances used by the
public. The diameter of the pole structure must not exceed twenty-four (24)
inches; and



(7)   The installation of a Concealed Wireless Facility should be done in
a manner that minimizes the removal of mature vegetation or the disturbance
of natural vegetation.



5.   Disguised Wireless Communication Facilities. Disguised Wireless
Facilities used by a governmental agency for public safety purposes are
permitted in all zoning districts subject to Subsection 4.25.E.2. of this
Section. Other Disguised Wireless Facilities are permitted in all zoning
districts, subject to the following standards:



a.   When there is more than one underlying zoning district, the more
restrictive regulations shall apply. In addition, Disguised Wireless
Facilities must comply with the following design requirements in order to be
administratively approved; otherwise, a Conditional Use Permit is required:



(1)   Maximum height—Sixty-five (65) feet in height from natural grade
to the highest point of the pole or support structure for all Disguised
Wireless.



(2)   Required setbacks—The following minimum setbacks are required for
a Disguised Wireless Facility:



(a)   From another property zoned for residential purposes:



(i)   Disguised Wireless Facility—Except as described below, a minimum
of one hundred fifty (150) feet setback is required from another property
zoned for residential purposes. For purposes of this standard, land uses that
are permitted in residential zoning districts, including those that are
designated for public spaces such as, but not limited to, schools, churches,
golf courses, parks or government facilities shall be considered
“residential purposes”.



The setback may be reduced to fifty (50) feet from a property that is zoned
for residential purposes subject to obtaining a Conditional Use Permit
pursuant to this Ordinance.



(ii)   Wireless Facilities co-locating on public utilities—Except as
described below, a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet setback is
required from another property zoned for residential purposes. The setback
from a property that is zoned for residential purposes may be reduced to a
lesser distance or eliminated subject to obtaining a Conditional Use Permit
pursuant to this Ordinance.



(b)   From an adjoining property that is zoned for commercial  or
industrial purposes: No setback required except for perimeter landscape
setback requirements.



(c)   Streets: A minimum setback of twenty-five (25) feet from all public
and private rights-of-way or access-ways, unless being located on a
previously existing public utility pole or if a greater setback is required
by the underlying zoning.



(d)   Support structures or signs: The setbacks for any structure that is
supporting a Disguised Wireless Facility must comply with the setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district or this Ordinance if located
on a sign.



(3)   Restrictions on development in residential zoning
districts—Disguised Wireless Facilities are permitted on residentially
zoned properties subject to compliance with the above noted requirements and
as follows:



(a)   Public/quasi-public spaces—Disguised Wireless Facilities are
permitted on residentially zoned property that are designated for public or
quasi-public spaces such as, but not limited to, schools, churches, golf
courses, parks or government facilities subject to obtaining a Conditional
Use Permit pursuant to this Ordinance.



(b)   Open space residential tracts—Disguised Wireless Facilities are
permitted in tracts within residential subdivisions that are zoned or platted
for open space or retention areas, subject to obtaining a Conditional Use
Permit pursuant to the provisions contained in this Ordinance.



b.   Design guidelines. A site plan must be approved by the Development
Services Department  demonstrating that the proposed Wireless Facility meets
the definition of “Disguised”. The following minimum specifications shall
apply to these types of Disguised Wireless Facility:



(1)   Monopine or Broadleaf tree: A Monopine or Broadleaf tree must meet
the following design guidelines:



(a)   The pole structure must be built of steel or fiberglass and clad
with faux bark. The faux bark shall start at the base of the pole and
continue to the height of the first branch attachment. The balance of the
pole structure and the attachments must be painted or colored and textured to
blend with the faux branches.



(b)   The diameter of the pole structure must not exceed thirty-six (36)
inches at the base and shall taper to no greater than twenty-eight (28)
inches at the top of the pole structure.



(c)   All cables must be concealed within the pole structure.



(d)   The faux branches must:



(i)   Be constructed to a density of 2.5 branches for each one (1)
vertical foot of pole, and



(ii)   Start attachment at no greater than fifteen (15) feet above
finished grade and continue to the top of the pole, and



(iii)   Be a minimum of eight (8) feet long around the circumference of
the lower level and shall taper appropriately as the branches progress
upwards.



(e)   The entire length of all antenna and their attaching apparatus shall
be disguised by the branches and the antenna array shall not extend
horizontally more than thirty (30) inches beyond the structure to which it is
attached.



(f)   Microwave dishes shall be limited to one (1) square foot in size and
must be painted the same shade of green as the branches. The attaching
apparatus must also be painted the same shade of green as the branches.



(g)   No more than four (4) microwave dishes are permitted on each
Monopine or Broadleaf tree.



(h)   No climbing pegs are permitted on the pole structure.



(i)   The installation of a Monopine or Broadleaf tree should be done in a
manner that minimizes the removal of mature vegetation.



(2)   Ball field light poles: Wireless Facilities may be added to legally
existing or proposed Ball field light poles in compliance with the following
design guidelines:



(a)   The maximum allowable width of an antenna array is four (4) feet.



(b)   The antenna array shall not extend horizontally more than thirty
(30) inches beyond the structure to which it is attached.



(c)   The maximum allowable length of each antenna is ten (10) feet.



(d)   The diameter of the pole structure must not exceed thirty-six (36)
inches.



(e)   The addition of a Wireless Facility to a Ball field light must not
increase the height of the light structure by more than ten (10) feet.



(f)   All cables must be concealed within the pole structure.



(g)   Microwave dishes shall be limited to two (2) square feet in size.



(h)   No more than two (2) microwave dishes are permitted on each Ball
field light pole.



(i)   All microwave dishes, antennas, and attaching apparatus must be
painted to match the Ball field light pole.



(j)   The installation of ball field light poles should be done in a
manner that minimizes the removal of mature vegetation.



(3)   Water towers/tanks: Wireless Facilities incorporated into Water
towers or Water tanks must meet the following design guidelines:



(a)   The maximum allowable width of an antenna array is four (4) feet.



(b)   The antenna shall not extend more than eighteen (18) inches from the
structure to which it is attached.



(c)   The maximum allowable length of each antenna array is ten (10) feet .



(d)   The addition of a Wireless Facility must not increase the height of
the Water tower/tank structure.



(e)   All cables must be concealed within the support structure or fully
enclosed within a cable shroud.



(f)   Microwave dishes shall be limited to two (2) square feet in size.



(g)   No more than two (2) microwave dishes are permitted on each Water
tower or Water tank.



(h)   All microwave dishes, antennas, cable shrouds and attaching
apparatus must be painted to match the Water tower or Water tank.



(i)   The installation of a Water tower or Water tank should be done in a
manner that minimizes the removal of mature vegetation.



(4)   Existing public utility poles: The Town encourages Wireless
Facilities to be added to existing public utility poles, subject to the
following design guidelines:



(a)   Twelve kilovolt (12 kv) utility poles:



(i)   The antenna shall not extend more than twelve (12) inches from the
structure to which it is attached.



(ii)   The maximum allowable length of all antenna added to a 12 kv
utility pole is ten (10) feet.



(iii)   The addition of a Wireless Facility to an existing public utility
pole must not increase the height of the public utility pole by more than ten
(10) feet.



(iv)   All cables must be concealed within the public utility pole or a
cable shroud.



(v)   Microwave dishes shall be limited to two (2) square feet in size.



(vi)   No more than two (2) microwave dishes are permitted on each public
utility pole.



(vii)   All microwave dishes, antennas, cable shrouds and attaching
apparatus must be painted to match the public utility pole.



(b)   Sixty-nine kilovolts (69 kv) or larger utility poles or lattice-type
tower structures:



(i)   The maximum allowable width of an antenna array is four (4) feet.



(ii)   The antenna array shall not extend more than thirty (30) inches
from the structure to which it is attached.



(iii)   The maximum allowable length of each antenna is ten (10) feet.



(iv)   The addition of a Wireless Facility to an existing public utility
pole must not increase the height of the public utility pole by more than ten
(10) feet.



(v)   All cables must be concealed within the public utility pole or a
cable shroud.



(vi)   Microwave dishes shall be limited to two (2) square feet in size.



(vii)   No more than two (2) microwave dishes are permitted on each public
utility pole.



(viii)   All microwave dishes, antennas, cable shrouds and attaching
apparatus must be painted to match the public utility pole.



6.   Visible Wireless Communication Facilities. Visible Wireless
Facilities used by a governmental agency for public safety purposes are
permitted in all zoning districts subject to 4.25.E.2. of this UDO section.
All other Visible Wireless Facilities are permitted only in the Commercial
and Industrial Zoning Districts and must comply with the following standards
in order to be approved administratively:



a.   When there is more than one underlying zoning district, the more
restrictive regulations shall apply. In addition, Visible Wireless Facilities
must comply with the following:



(1)   Maximum height for Administrative Approvals —Eighty (80) feet from
natural grade to the highest point of pole or fifteen (15) feet higher than
the height of the top of the building to which it is mounted (see also side
mounted antenna height limitations below). Proposals in excess of the maximum
height allowances above require a Conditional Use Permit.



(2)   Required setbacks—The following setbacks are required:



(a)   From another property zoned for residential purposes: A minimum
setback of three hundred (300) feet is required. For purposes of this
standard, land uses that are permitted in those residential zoning districts,
including those that are designated for public spaces such as, but not
limited to, schools, churches, golf courses, parks or government facilities
shall be considered “residential purposes”.



(b)   From an adjoining property that is zoned for commercial  or
industrial purposes: No setback required except for any required perimeter
landscape setback standards.



(c)   Streets: A minimum setback of seventy-five (75) feet from all public
and private rights-of-way or access ways, unless a greater setback is
required by the underlying zoning.



(d)   Hillside: No Visible Wireless Facility shall be installed on a
property in or within five hundred (500) feet of a sensitive view shed,
ridgeline or hillside.



b.   Design guidelines. A site plan must be approved by the Development
Services Department  demonstrating that the proposed Visible Wireless
Facility meets the following minimum specifications:



(1)   The maximum allowable width of an antenna array is four (4) feet.



(2)   The antenna array shall not extend horizontally more than thirty
(30) inches beyond the structure to which it is attached.



(3)   The maximum allowable length of each antenna array is ten (10) feet.



(4)   The diameter of the pole structure must not exceed forty (40) inches.



(5)   All antenna cables must be concealed within the pole structure or a
cable shroud.



(6)   Microwave dishes shall be limited to two (2) square feet in size and
must be painted the same color as the Visible Wireless Facility.



(7)   No more than two (2) microwave dishes are permitted on each Visible
Wireless Facility.



(8)   All microwave dishes, antennas, cable shrouds and attaching
apparatus must be painted to match the Visible Wireless Facility.



(9)   Antennae mounted on the side of a building shall be permitted
subject to the following provisions:



(a)   The antenna must not extend above the existing profile of the
building or project more than twelve (12) inches from the building face.



(b)   The antenna shall be integrated into the building design in a manner
that is compatible with the architectural style and coloring of the
structure, considers the context and placement of the antenna on the
structure, and minimizes its visual impact.



(c)   Requests to exceed the established building profile shall be subject
to securing a usepermit in accordance with the provisions of this UDO when it
is demonstrated that the architectural element to which the antennae are
attached is integrated with and in proportion to the building design.



(10) The installation of a Visible Wireless Facility should be done in a
manner that minimizes the removal of mature vegetation or the disturbance of
natural vegetation. To ensure compliance, the following shall be done:



(a)   If required by the Development Services Department , a plant
inventory of the Wireless Facility and equipment enclosure or shelter site
(if no enclosure used) and a re-vegetation/salvage plan shall be submitted
for review and approval at the time of site plan review; and



(b)   Any trenching or site disturbance shall be re-vegetated to match the
existing or natural vegetation, and



(c)   No protected plant species shall be disturbed during construction
unless re-vegetated as part of an approved salvage plan.



7.   Equipment enclosures, support equipment and structures. Wireless
Facilities include different types and sizes of support equipment and
accessory structures needed to accommodate each antenna. No site plan for a
Wireless Facility shall be approved unless the following standards can be met:



a.   Not permitted—An equipment enclosure and all support equipment must
not be located within the required perimeter landscape setback(s) of a
development.



b.   Equipment enclosure—The following standards apply to equipment
enclosures:



(1)   Shall be screened primarily by a six (6) or eight (8) foot chain
link fence, decorative solid block or masonry perimeter wall, as required by
staff. No more than five (5) percent of each wall facade may be constructed
of alternative materials, including see through materials, as approved by the
Development Services Department  when deemed to be appropriate for security
purposes.



(2)   All entry gates visible from public streets or access ways shall be
constructed of sight-obscuring material approved by the Planning and
Development Services Department .



c.   Equipment shelter—The following standards apply to equipment
shelters:



(1)   Maximum height permitted is eight (8) feet in residential zones,
fourteen (14) feet in industrial and commercial  zones, to be measured from
finished grade or roof-top elevation of a supporting structure. Below grade
shelters are permitted.



(2)   An equipment shelter shall meet minimum setbacks on the lot or
parcel.



d.   Ground-mounted cabinets—Ground-mounted cabinets shall comply with
the following:



(1)   Maximum area shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet for a
single wireless Communications provider.



(2)   Maximum height permitted is eight (8) feet, to be measured from
finished grade elevation.



(3)   Ground-mounted cabinets that are visible from a public street or
access-way must be located within an equipment enclosure, equipment shelter
or enclosed building.



(4)   Ground-mounted cabinets are not permitted to be constructed within
the front yard setback of a residential zoning district.



e.   Other screening allowances—If the support equipment is screened
from view from a public street or accessway, alley, or adjacent property by a
permanent perimeter or interior wall, fence or structure that is permanent,
no separate wall is needed around the equipment enclosure.



f.   Illumination—Equipment enclosures or shelters shall not be
externally illuminated.



g.   Noise level—The average noise level of the support equipment,
measured at any property line that is zoned for residential purposes, must
comply with existing code requirements and nuisance abatement codes.



F.   CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS



1.   General. There is hereby created for this section only a Conditional
Use Permit for Wireless Towers, Facilities and Antennas which may be granted
by the TownCouncil as follows:



a.   If the Wireless Facility, tower or antenna is not an administratively
permitted use under this Ordinance, a Conditional Use Permit shall be
required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in
all zoning districts.



b.   Applications for Conditional Use Permits under this Section shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements of this Ordinance, except as
modified in this Section.



c.   In granting a Conditional Use Permit, the TownCouncil may impose
conditions to the extent such conditions are necessary to minimize any
adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. Such Conditions
of Approval (COAs) shall be incorporated into the building permit Process and
made a part of the final building inspection process and records. The Town
will not conduct any Final Inspection nor will it issue a Certificate of
Occupancy unless all COAs required in the zoning process are satisfied.



d.   Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits,
whether civil, mechanical or electrical, shall be certified by an Arizona
licensed professional engineer.



e.   An applicant for a Conditional Use Permit shall submit the
information and certifications described in Section 4.25.D., E., H., I. and
L. and a non-refundable fee established pursuant to a Resolution of the
TownCouncil.



f.   A Conditional Use Permit issued under this Section shall be
conditioned upon verification by the Town Engineer or his/her designee that
such facility and/or tower structure (and any appurtenances thereto) is
structurally sound. Such verification shall be received by the applicant
prior to submission and shall be reviewed annually.



G.   MINIMUM SETBACKS



1.   Setbacks. The setback requirements shall apply to all wireless
facilities, towers and antennas as required in the UDO; provided, however,
that the TownCouncil may reduce the standard setback requirements if the
goals of this Section would be better served thereby. Requests for relief
from setback requirements beyond those set forth in the UDO will result in
the application being processed as a conditional use.



H.   BUILDINGS OR OTHER EQUIPMENT STORAGE



1.   TownCouncil may reduce the standard building and equipment structure
requirements if the goals of this Section would be better served thereby.
Requests for relief from such requirements beyond those set forth in the UDO
will result in the application being processed as a conditional use.



I.   CO-LOCATION



1.   Required. Any new tower constructed in connection with an application
under this Section shall be constructed so that it is suitable for
co-location.



2.   Good faith. Applicants, additional users and permittees shall
exercise reasonable good faith efforts to cooperate in co-locating wireless
telecommunications facilities on the same support structures or site. For the
purposes of this section only, a “site” may accommodate more than one (1)
tower and its accompanying equipment; provided, however, that no “site”
shall exceed ten (10) acres.



3.   Exceptions. The TownCouncil may, upon a determination that the Town's
citizens would be better served, waive any portion of the requirements of
this subsection.



4.   Violation; penalty. Failure to comply with co-location requirements
may result in denial of a permit request or revocation of an existing permit.



J.   REMOVAL OF ABANDONED WIRELESS FACILITIES, ANTENNAS AND TOWERS



Any wireless facility, antenna or tower that ceases to be used or fails to
operate for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days shall be considered
abandoned, and the owner of such wireless facility, antenna or tower shall
remove the same within ninety (90) days after such abandonment. If such tower
or antenna is not removed in a timely fashion, the Town may give written
notice to the owner that it will contract for removal within thirty (30) days
following said notice. Thereafter, the Town may cause removal at the sole
cost of the owner.



K.   PRE-EXISTING and NONCONFORMING USES



1.   No expansion of nonconforming use. Wireless facilities and towers
that are constructed and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute the physical
expansion of a nonconforming use or structure.



2.   Preexisting wireless facilities, antennas and towers. Preexisting
wireless facilities, antennas and towers shall be allowed to continue their
usage as they presently exist and shall be allowed to accommodate additional
collocations to the tower site that are proposed in compliance with standing
code and design requirements. Routine maintenance and the replacement of
failed equipment with “like for like” equipment shall be permitted on
such preexisting (and possibly non-conforming) wireless facilities, antennas
and towers. “Like for Like” replacement shall include replacement of
equipment with newer equipment that is in substantial dimensional conformity
with the approved original equipment. Replacement equipment shall conform to
site design requirements and any color or surface treatments required to
ensure compatibility with the existing, standing wireless facility, antennas
or tower. “Like for Like” maintenance shall not allow the introduction of
additional equipment that is visible to the casual observer or was not
approved in the standing permit for the wireless facility, antennas or tower.
Maintenance and replacement of equipment that does not comply with the above
“Like for Like” requirements will require permits and inspections. New
construction other than routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall
comply with the requirements of this chapter.



3.   Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming wireless facilities,
towers or antennas. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Section, lawful
nonconforming wireless facilities, towers or antennas that are damaged or
destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain a Conditional Use
Permit and without having to meet the requirements specified in subsections
4.25.G.1 and 2. The type, height, and location of the tower on-site shall be
of the same type and intensity as the original facility approval; building
permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then applicable
building codes and shall be obtained within ninety (90) days from the date
the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said
permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified
in subsection 4.25.J.



L.   NOTICE



1.   Permit/Entitlement holders operating wireless facilities within the
Town shall be required to



provide updated notice and contact information to the Town if/when ownership
of the facility changes. Such notice and information shall be provided to the
Locality within 60 days of change of ownership.



2.   Wireless facilities within the Town shall display informational
signage on the gate of the wireless facility. Sign shall be four feet by four
feet in size and shall indicate the site name/number and emergency contact
information (phone number) of the facility owner or party responsible for the
operation and maintenance of the facility. Such signage and information shall
be present in order for final inspection and certificate of occupancy to be
approved.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 13-767, passed 3-26-2013)



4.26  LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS



4.26.1  INTENT



The intent of this Section is to create a strong and well defined framework
of landscaping in public/private property, consistent with the character of
the Town as defined by the Town's General Plan protect and increase property
values by requiring landscaping treatments around buildings, roadways and
parking areas in residential, commercial  and industrial areas; to provide
buffers between residential/commercial /industrialuses; and to provide shade
and variation of the landscaping, these standards emphasize the retention of
native trees, shrubs, rock formations, and other natural site features.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010)



4.26.2  LANDSCAPE PLANS: WHEN REQUIRED UNLESS MODIFIED BY THE ZONING
ADMINISTRATOR



A.   New multi-family and nonresidential developments are subject to the
requirements of this Section.



B.   Change of use from residential to commercial .



C.   All new subdivisions shall provide landscaping in the public open
spaces as required by this Section.



D.   Expansion, remodeling, and renovation of existing buildings, or a
stand alone parking lot shall provide an amount of landscaping and screening
proportionate with the degree of the improvements.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010)



4.26.3  LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS, GENERAL



1. Landscape Plan Required, Unless Modified by the Zoning Administrator



A landscape plan showing the following information shall be submitted with
the Site Plan at the time of application for building permit and/or with a
subdivisionplat where applicable:



a.   Designer name and address



b.   North arrow, scale, date of preparation and revisions;



c.   Name of project and address



d.   Vicinity map



e.   Sheet numbers



f.   Location of all proposed and existing buildings, structures and
pavement;



g.   Location and dimensions of all property lines;



h.   Location of all existing or proposed water features and drainage
facilities;



i.   Location of the one-hundred (100)-year floodplain on the site, if
applicable;



j.   Location, size and common name of any existing trees or shrubs to
remain on site;



k.   Location of all landscaping proposed for the site (drawn at one-half
(½) of mature size) including trees, shrubs, ground cover, ornamental
grasses or flowerbeds;



l.   Location of all existing or proposed signs, walls, fences, earthen
berms (drawn at one (1)-foot contour interval), site furniture, lights,
fountains, and/or sculptures on the site;



m.   Sight visibility triangles as described in Section 4.7;



n.   Location of all existing or proposed sidewalks, bike trails,
pedestrian paths, etc. on the site;



o.   Plant list for all existing or proposed trees or shrubs on the site,
including:



i.   Symbol



ii.   Botanical Name



iii.   Common Name



iv.    Quantity



v.    Installation Size



vi.    Height/Width at Maturity



p.   Location of all existing or proposed curb lines and curb cuts for
streets, alleys, parking lots and parking lot islands;



q.   Any additional information as determined by the Zoning Administrator
to be necessary for approval of the proposed plan.



r.   Proposed inert ground cover/dust control



2.   Installation of Materials



A landscape plan must be approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to the
installation of required landscaping.



3.   Certificate of Occupancy



All landscaping must be installed and inspected prior to the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy.



4.   Performance Standards



All landscaping shall be required to perform in accordance with the following
provisions:



a.   Safety



i.   Landscaping shall not hinder the vision of motorists and pedestrians
necessary for safe movement into, out of, and within the site. All
landscaping materials shall comply with all sight visibility triangle
requirements as described in Section 4.7.



ii.   Landscaping materials shall be selected and placed in such a manner
that they do not interfere with or damage existing or proposed utilities or
drainage facilities.



iii.   Landscaping materials shall be selected and placed so that the safe
and enjoyable use of surrounding properties is not inhibited.



iv.   Landscaping materials shall be selected and placed with sensitivity
toward the ultimate size that will be achieved over time.



v.   Landscaping with thorns, berries and other harmful plant
characteristics shall be carefully placed and pruned to avoid potential harm
to people or property on and off-site.



vi.   Weak-wooded trees shall only be used where limb breakage will not
cause harm to property, utility lines, or life.



b.   Maintenance



i.   The owner of the premises shall be responsible for the watering,
maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscaping, irrigation systems,
fences and walls, and other visual barriers including refuse disposal area
screens which have died (in the case of plant material) or fallen into
disrepair (in the case of fences or walls).



ii.   All required plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy,
vigorous growing condition, and neat and orderly appearance. They shall be
replaced as necessary, or as directed by the Zoning Administrator, and shall
be kept free of refuse and debris.



iii.   All fences, walls and other barriers shall be maintained in good
repair, meaning structurally sound and attractive in appearance. All fences,
required or otherwise, shall have the finished face directed toward lower
intensity zoned property, where a single-family residential property is
located adjacent to or across from multiple-family residential or
non-residential sites.



c.   Size of Plant Material



All plant materials required by this Ordinance shall be selected from the
ADWR drought tolerant/low water use plant lists and meet the following
minimum sizes at the time of planting:



i.   Trees: 75% of trees must be a minimum of 15 gallon. 25% must be 24”
box or larger.



ii.   Shrubs: Minimum 5 gallon or better.



d.   Mulching, Ground Covers and weed control



i.    All required shrubs and trees shall be mulched and maintained with
shredded hardwood bark, cypress, or gravel mulch. Plant groupings shall be
mulched in a continuous bed.



ii.   Mulch shall be applied so as to prevent or retard weed growth and be
kept free of weeds.



iii.   Ground covers shall be planted together in continuous beds and
spaced to achieve a substantially continuous ground cover within two (2)
years of the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. The ground covers must
be mulched or placed in decorative rock until substantially continuous
coverage is achieved.



e.   Penalty for Noncompliance



A property owner, upon notification by the Town, shall have a period of not
less than fifteen (15) days to restore, replace or repair plant material,
fences or other screening found to be in violation of the Performance
Standards set forth herein. If the violation is not corrected within the
specified time, it will be considered a violation of this Ordinance. In the
case of landscaping that performs poorly, Alternative Compliance may be
utilized pursuant to Section 4.26.5. No fine shall be levied during the time
that an Alternative Compliance proposal to remedy the problem situation is
being reviewed by the Development Services Department .



5.   Approval of the Public Works Director is required prior to placing
landscaping and other improvements in the rights-of-way.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010)



4.26.4  DETERMINATION OF REQUIREMENTS UNLESS MODIFIED BY THE ZONING
ADMINISTRATOR



1. Residential Subdivisions



a.   Arterial/collector street Trees



As a component of plat approval, residential subdivisions in the Town shall
be required one (1) shade tree a minimum of every thirty (30) linear feet on
center, within the public arterial/collector.



b.   Arterial/collector street Design



Arterial and collector streets shall have a minimum six (6) foot wide
sidewalk, separated from the roadway by a landscaped parkway of at least
eight (8) feet.



c.   Local Street Design



Local streets shall have a minimum four (4) foot wide sidewalk, separated
from the roadway by a landscaped parkway of at least six (6) feet.



d.   Preservation/Salvation Credit



Where there exists native vegetation, the property owner may substitute
existing trees for required trees, subject to the Alternative Compliance
provisions of this Section.



2.   Multiple-family, Office, Commercial and Industrial Districts



All lots improved with multi- family residential, office, commercial  and
industrial development shall be required to provide landscaping as set forth
herein. (See paragraph 4. c. for a reduction to this requirement).



a.   Front yard Landscaping. A ten (10) foot wide landscape strip is
required along the properties street frontage. For properties adjacent to SR
89, a twenty (20) foot wide landscape strip is required along the
property’s street frontage.



b.   Side and rear yard landscaping: when adjacent to zoning other than
multi - single family residential zoning, a five (5) foot wide landscape
strip is required along the property’s street frontage.



c.   Corner Lot: Corner lots shall be required to provide front yard
landscaping on all sides fronting on a public street or highway.



d.   Refuse Disposal Areas: Refuse disposal areas shall be screened on all
sides, including a solid gate for access, by a privacy fence, wall, or
equivalent material with a minimum height of six (6) feet and not greater
than seven (7) feet. The finished face of the fence shall face away from the
refuse disposal area.



e.   Mechanical Equipment: All roof top and ground level mechanical
equipment and utilities shall be fully screened from view of the centerline
of any street or the nearest boundary of a single- or two- family residence
district as seen from a height six (6) feet above the finished floor level of
the building it services.



3.   Buffer yards (Side and Rear yard Landscaping When adjacent to Single
family Residential “SR” Zoning)



a.   Buffer yard Required



Whenever a side or rear yard in any non-single-family residential, commercial
, or industrialzones abuts, or in the absence of an alley would abut any
single family residential district, a buffer yard shall be required.



b.   Depth of yard.



The buffer yard shall be ten (10) percent of the lot width or depth,
whichever is applicable, provided that no buffer yard shall be less than ten
(10) feet in width, and no buffer yard shall be required to be more than
twenty (20) feet in width. For property located on a corner lot where both
the rear lot line and the interior side lot line abut property in the
single-family residential districts, the buffer yard depth for both required
buffer yards may be determined by the lesser dimension of the lot width or
lot depth.



4.   Minimum Landscaping Pattern. The minimum landscaping pattern shall
include the following frequency:



a.   One (1) tree per twenty (20) linear feet.



b.   Four (4) shrubs per 400 square feet of required landscaped area.
Clustering of trees and shrubs is encouraged.



c.   Berm. Where a semi-continuous berm measuring a minimum of three (3)
feet and a maximum of four (4) feet in vertical height and not having a slope
greater than 3:1 on either side is provided, required buffer yard landscaping
requirements may be reduced by twenty (20) percent. Slopes may be increased
above 3:1 where retaining walls are used, subject to approval under the
Alternative Compliance provisions of this section. No individual section of
the berm may measure more than forty (40) feet in length. The berm should be
integrated into the overall landscaping plan, including landscaping on the
berm where practical.



d.   Prohibited Use. All driveways, refuse containers, storage areas,
aisle ways, vehicular maneuvering areas, mechanical equipment and structures
are prohibited within the required buffer yard. A sidewalk or paved trail may
be located within a buffer yard when used as a connection to other pedestrian
and/or recreational corridors. A concrete PAD for emergency exits from a
building shall be permitted in the buffer yard provided that the Building
Code requires it.



e.   Utility Areas. All on-site utility areas located within twenty-five
(25) feet of a required buffer yard shall be screened by a fence, wall, berm,
evergreen planting or combination thereof such that a substantially solid
visual barrier of six (6) feet in height is attained. fences or walls, when
provided, must be located between the activity area and the buffer yard.
Utility areas shall include refuse containers/dumpsters; storage; display of
materials or merchandise; loading or unloading goods, production assembly,
processing or demolition of goods. Plantings provided to screen utility areas
shall not count toward required landscaping.



5.   Parking lot landscaping perimeter requirements, unless modified by
the Zoning Administrator. Parking lots in all zoning districts are subject to
the following requirements. The landscape width may be reduced provided the
minimum width requirement, when averaged, is maintained overall. One (1) tree
per twenty (20) linear feet and four (4) shrubs per four hundred (400) square
feet of required landscaped area. Clustering of trees and shrubs is
encouraged.



a.   State Route 89 street frontage shall be landscaped with a minimum
width of twenty (20) feet.



b.   All other street frontages shall be landscaped with a minimum width
of ten (10) feet.



c.   Other parking perimeters all other lot lines adjacent to parking
areas shall be landscaped with a five (5) foot wide landscape strip.



d.   Islands. Where internal landscaping of the parking lot is required,
there shall be a minimum of one (1) curbed island provided for each fifteen
(15) parking stalls in each row. The minimum area for planting all types of
trees within parking lots shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180)
square feet. Shade trees and intermediate trees shall not be planted in any
area with a width of less than ten (10) feet. Shrubs shall not be planted in
an area of less than two (2) feet in width. Measurements of width and area
shall be from the inside edge of the curb(s). A minimum of fifty (50) percent
of every landscape island shall be planted with live plant material, such as
shrubs, or ground cover.



e.   Curb materials. Parking lot islands and medians shall be curbed with
concrete or a functionally equivalent material that must be approved by the
Zoning Administrator. The following materials are not considered functionally
equivalent to concrete curbs and are therefore unacceptable for use as curbs:
asphalt, landscape timbers, railroad ties, wood or lumber, and concrete wheel
stops.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010)



4.26.5  ALTERNATIVE LANDSCAPE PLANS



1.   Where unique situations complicate the provision of required
landscaping, applicants may choose to follow the requirements described
herein or submit an alternate landscape plan to the Zoning Administrator that
illustrates how the intent of UDO Section 4.26 will be fulfilled in an
alternative manner. The Zoning Administrator may approve, approve with
modifications, or deny the alternative landscape plan based on his or her
determination as to meeting the intent of the UDO landscape requirements and
the unique characteristics and challenges of the property at issue.



2.   If an applicant submits an alternative landscape plan which is not
approved by the Zoning Administrator, the applicant may appeal the Zoning
Administrator’s decision to the Board of Adjustment.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 15-798,
passed 6-23-2015)



4.26.6  PRESERVATION OF EXISTING LANDSCAPING



1.   Incentive. Existing landscaping that is in a vigorous growing
condition and is not specifically



prohibited by this Ordinance may count toward meeting the requirements of
this Ordinance.



2.   Protection during construction. Trees that are to be preserved under
the provisions of this Ordinance shall be fenced around the drip line of the
tree and marked to be saved during construction. Care shall be taken to
prevent damage to the tree and its root structure during construction.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010)



4.27  ANIMALS AND PETS



1.   Household pets. The keeping of “pets” such as dogs and cats are
allowed in all zoning districts. This provision also allows for the keeping
of indoor birds (such as parrots, parakeets and canaries). Fish and other
pets which will at all times be kept within a fully enclosed dwelling or
accessory building provided there are not odors, noise, insects, or other
nuisances caused by the keeping of such animals which would affect the health
and welfare of the occupants of surrounding properties, but not non-household
animals as defined below.



2.   Non-household animals. The keeping of non-household animals such as
horses, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, or any breed, strain, or crossbreed
thereof, bees, poultry and other non-household birds shall be prohibited
except in those zoning districts in which they are specifically allowed.



3.   Project animals. This provision is intended to allow for the
non-commercial  keeping of non-household animals as “project animals”
officially associated with the 4-H or Future Farmers of America in
residential zones where they are not specifically allowed. The keeping of up
to nine (9) “project animals” shall be allowed on premises. Any one (1)
project may include up to three (3) adult rabbits, poultry (except roosters
and geese, which are not permitted), or other non-hoofed animals.



a.   Annually a completed form, prescribed by the Development Services
Department , with name and physical address of each applicant and type,
duration and number of animals of each project shall be submitted to the
Development Services Department  by said resident-poultry, rabbits and other
small animal projects shall be allowed in any residentially zoned lot less
than one (1) acre by special permit only.



b.   Pens, stables, cages and other shelters for such animal projects
shall not be located in the required front or street-side yard setback or
closer than ten (10) feet to any property line. All such structures shall be
kept in a neat and sightly manner and shall be controlled daily from refuse,
manure, flies and other nuisances at all times. Storage of feed, equipment
and other material related to such animals shall be kept within an enclosed
building.



4.   Nuisance. Where the keeping of such project animals becomes a
nuisance, the Development Services Director shall have the authority to
require a reduction in the number of and/or removal of such animals. Normally
the Director will allow a ten (10) day grace period for compliance to the
Ordinance. In exceptional cases the Director shall require immediate removal
of such animals.



a.   The provisions of the Ordinance are not intended to authorize the
keeping of animals, regardless of number, size or type, in a manner which
constitutes a nuisance and which impairs the enjoyment or use of nearby
properties or violates other legal applicable land use restrictions the
properties are subject to.



b.   Performance standards



i.   Odors: emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall be
contained in such quantities so as not to be offensive, or create a public
nuisance or hazard. Odors normal to the raising of livestock will not be
considered a violation of performance standards unless such odors are
excessive due to overcrowding, poor sanitation or other poor management.



ii.   Burning for agricultural purposes or other purposes as permitted by
the Chino Valley Fire District shall be exempted from the above performance
standards.



(Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008)



4.28  BUILDING SETBACKS WHEN ADJACENT TO A STREET



Intent: allow for the acquisition of future right of way dedications and
leave a reasonable building setback remaining for the existing structure.



Setback requirement: all of the setbacks shall be measured from the presumed
dedication  of twenty-five (25) feet from the section, mid section, or
presumed street center line, which ever applies; whether or not the
dedication  has actually occurred at this time.



Under special circumstances a reduction in the setback requirement may be
granted by the Zoning Administrator.



Building setbacks shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all one (1) mile
streets/arterial.



ONE (1) MILE STREETS/ARTERIAL:



Road 6 North



Road 5 North



Road 4 North



Road 3 North



Road 2 North



Center Street



Road 2 South



Outer Loop Road/ Road 4 South



Road 5 South



Road 1 East



Road 1 West



The East Side of Reed Road; and



Perkinsville Road



In addition, building setbacks shall be fifty (50) feet from State Route 89
rights of way.



Building setbacks shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet from all one half
(½) mile streets/ collector.



ONE HALF (½) MILE STREETS/ COLLECTOR:



Road 4 ½ North



Road 3 ½ North



Road 1 North



Road 1 South



Road 3 South



Building setbacks shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet from all other
streets/local streets.



(Ord. 08-707, passed 10-23-2008)



4.29  DESIGN CONCEPTS



A.   Development goals: protect investment in the community by encouraging
consistently high quality development and promote projects that are suitable
in the context of a southwest environment.



B.   Applicability: to achieve these goals, the design concepts apply to
all new commercial  developments and redevelopment or remodeling of existing
commercial  developments where more than 50% of the exterior of the
structure will be substantially modified.



1.   Site planning. The relationship to existing residential development:



a.   Position trash enclosures, compactors, truck loading areas and
outdoor storage away from residential uses to the extent practical.



b.   Locate drive-through lanes away from adjoining single-family and
multi-family developments. Locate speakers and menu boards so that noise is
not directed toward residential uses and incorporate a screen wall and
landscaping to lessen noise.



c.   Construct a masonry wall to separate a residential development from a
proposed commercial  development and plant large evergreen trees in the
required landscape area to buffer the residential use.



d.   Strive to minimize driveway cuts on State Route 89 and arterial
streets by providing vehicular cross-access easement s and shared access
driveways between adjacentcommercial  projects.



2.   Signage:



a.   Screen restaurant menu boards from adjacentpublic rights-of-way and
adjacent properties.



3.   Landscaping: provide landscaping that is ten (10) percent above the
requirements of the minimum landscaping pattern requirements.



4.   Lighting:



a.   Locate light poles in landscaped areas. Paint concrete light pole
bases to match the primary color of the building or finish the bases to match
parking screen walls.



b.   Highlighting of unique or special features of the site. Such as
architectural features. Specimen trees and artwork with accent lighting
should be considered.



c.   Use decorative wall-mounted sconces or light fixtures when building
lighting is proposed on elevations away from residential uses.



C.   Building design:



1.   Massing: the visual impact of a building depends not only on its
size, but also on the relationship between its length, width and height.



a.   Building mass should be broken into smaller elements, consistent with
the proportions of the architectural style selected and surrounding uses.



b.   In large multi-building projects, vary the size, massing and height
of the buildings in relation to each other.



c.   Reduction of building mass may be achieved by using a combination of
the following techniques:



i.   Variation in the rooflines and form.



ii.   Use of ground level arcades and covered areas.



iii.   Use of protected and recessed entries.



iv.   Use of vertical elements on or in front of expansive blank walls.



v.   Addition of windows on elevations facing streets.



2.   Design:



a.   Provide weather and sun protection, such as overhangs, awnings and
canopies.



b.   Predominant exterior building materials should be of high quality and
durable. These include, but are not limited to:



i.   Brick, adobe, mortar washed slump block.



ii.   Stone, natural or faux.



iii.   Integral color, sand blasted or stained textured masonry.



iv.   Split-face or scored concrete masonry units.



v.   Textured tilt-up concrete panels.



vi.   Stucco.



vii.   Metal roofs.



viii.   Concrete and clay tile roofs.



ix.   Clear and tinted glass.



x.   Architectural metal.



c.   Predominant exterior building materials should not include the
following:



i.   Un-textured tilt-up concrete panels.



ii.   Pre-fabricated steel panels.



iii.   Corrugated metal.



iv.   Highly reflective glass.



v.   Grooved plywood.



d.   The front elevation colors should possess low reflectivity
characteristics, and respect the diversity of color in the southwest.



(Ord. 10-729, passed 7-22-2010; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)



4.30  COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE STANDARDS



A.   In commercial  or industrial zoning districts:



1.   No greater than ten (10) percent of the floor area shall be used for
retail sales or restaurants which shall be an accessory use to the greenhouse
use.



2.   No greater than twenty (20) percent of the floor area shall be used
for entertainment purposes, which shall be an accessory use to the greenhouse
use.



B.   In agricultural/residential zoning districts, no greater than ten
(10) percent of the floor area shall be used for the sale of farm produce
that is primarily grown on site or other accessory uses.



(Ord. 11-738, passed 1-11-2011; Ord. 13-779, passed 12-10-2013)



4.31  MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES, OFF-SITE CULTIVATION SITES AND
INFUSION FACILITIES



A.   All medical marijuana facilities shall comply with the regulations
set forth in this section.



B.   All medical marijuana cultivation facilities shall be wholly
contained within an enclosed, locked facility as defined in A.R.S. §
36-2801(6).



C.   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a medical
marijuana facility shall provide written evidence of the following from the
appropriate state regulatory agency:



1.   The proposed facility is in compliance with all applicable state
regulatory agency and state law requirements.



2.   Any application submitted to and approval granted by a State
regulatory agency.



3.   In addition to the documents required in Subsections C.1. and C.2.,
above, an applicant for an infusion facility, whether located within a
dispensary or cultivation facility, shall provide certified copies of all
approved permits and licenses required by Local Heath Department.



4.   In addition to the documents required in Subsections C.1. and C.2.,
above, an applicant for a dispensary shall provide:



a.   A complete list of the cultivation and infusion facilities from which
the dispensary will receive medical marijuana or medical marijuana infused
products. Said list shall include:



(i)   The name and physical location of the cultivation or infusion
facility;



(ii)   The number of any state license granted by the state regulating
agency to the cultivation or infusion  facility; 



(iii)   The  name and contact information for each and every member of
the board of directors of the cultivation and/or infusion facility.



b.   A copy of the operating procedures submitted to and approved by the
state regulatory agency.



5.   In addition to the documents required in subsections C.1. and C.2.,
above, an applicant for a cultivation facility shall provide a complete list
of all dispensaries for which the cultivation facility will cultivate medical
marijuana, including:



(i)   The name and physical location of the dispensary;



(ii)   The number of any license granted by the regulatory agency; and



(iii)   The name and contact information for each and every member of the
board of directors of the dispensary.



D.   The following separation requirements shall apply to all medical
marijuana facilities:



1.   Five hundred (500) feet from any school, public or private.



2.   Five hundred (500) feet from any public park, public building, or
public community center.



3.   Five hundred (500) feet from any drug or alcohol rehabilitation
facility or correctional transitional housing facility.



4.   Five hundred (500) feet from any residential zoning district.



5.   Five hundred (500) feet from the nearest edge of the right-of-way of
State Route 89.



E.   There shall be no retail sales, restaurant, food service, or
entertainment activities within a medical marijuana cultivation facility.



F.   Dust, fumes, odor, or vapors emitting from any cultivation or
infusion facility shall be mitigated to minimize impact on surrounding
properties. Mitigation includes, but is not limited to, the following:
ventilation of buildings, dust control, and/or installation and use of
devices designed to minimize dust, fumes, odors, or vapors.



G.   All medical marijuana facilities shall be  located  in a permanent
building or structure. No such facility shall be allowed to locate in a
trailer, cargo container, or motorized vehicle.



H.   The total square footage of a medical marijuana dispensary facility
shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet.



I.   There shall be no consumption of medical marijuana on the premises of
any medical marijuana facility.



J.   Entry into limited access areas within a medical marijuana facility
is restricted to medical marijuana dispensary agents or persons accompanied
by a medical marijuana dispensary agent.



K.   Medical marijuana infusion facilities shall:



1.   Be located on the same site as a dispensary or a cultivation facility.



2.   On-site infusion facilities, whether attached or free standing, shall
not occupy greater than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the
respective dispensary or cultivation facility.



3.   There shall be no retail sales, restaurant, food service, or
entertainment activities within a medical marijuana infusion facility.



L.   All cultivation of medical marijuana shall take place within an
enclosed, locked structure comprised of a roof and walls that fully obscure
all plants and cultivation activities from public view and in compliance with
the provisions of this code and Arizona state law. There shall be no outdoor
cultivation of medical marijuana within the corporate boundaries of the Town.



(Ord. 13-779, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 16-811, passed 1-26-2016; Ord. 16-816,
passed 6-14-2016)



5  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



5.1  INTENT



The purpose of these regulations is to provide for the health, safety,
general welfare and harmonious development of the Town; to ensure that all
future development shall meet the requirements of any General Plan and the
applicable specific plans for the development of the Town adopted or which
may be adopted pursuant to Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6, Arizona Revised
Statutes; to ensure that future development will preserve and enhance the
Town’s natural scenic attributes; to ensure that all new development will
maintain and encourage a pleasing environment and be in harmony with the
special character and historical quality of the Town. The purpose of these
regulations is also to secure adequate provisions for streets and traffic
circulation, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewerage, drainage and
flood control, in the development of lots and properties to achieve optimum
utility and livability. A further purpose of these regulations is to
facilitate the provision for school sites, lands for recreation and other
publicuses; to promote the conveyance of land by accurate legal description;
and to establish procedures which will achieve a basis of mutual
understanding and equitable relationships between public and private
interests.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.1.2  SHORT TITLE



For the purpose of identification, these regulations shall hereafter be
referred to as the “Subdivision Regulations”.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.1.3  AUTHORITY



The Subdivision Regulations are authorized by Title 9, Chapter 4, Articles
6.2 and 7 of the Arizona Revised Statutes.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.1.4  JURISDICTION



These regulations shall govern the subdivision of all land that lies within
the corporate limits of the Town.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.1.5  ADMINISTRATION



A.   Title: These regulations shall hereafter be referred to as the
“Subdivision Regulations”.



B.   Purpose and Scope: The purpose of the Subdivision Regulations is to
ensure the orderly growth and harmonious development of the Town; to provide
convenient traffic circulation on a coordinated street system with major
thoroughfares adjoiningsubdivisions; to ensure the adequate provision of
water, drainage facilities, sanitary sewerage, and other utilities; to
provide adequate sites for schools, recreation areas, and other public
facilities; and to facilitate the accurate conveyance of ownership of land by
accurate legal description; and to provide procedures for the achievement of
these purposes. These regulations accommodate growth by considering the need
for services generated by subdivisions together with public ability to
provide and/or private willingness to contribute to the costs of these
services. It applies to all properties proposed for subdivision, land split,
or lot line adjustment within the Town limits. No building or other
development permit required by the Town may be issued for property which has
been divided in violation of these regulations.



C.   Application and Interpretation: Circumvention of the Subdivision
Regulations is prohibited. No person may sell, offer to sell, or divide any
portion of any lot or parcel of land smaller than allowed under Arizona
Revised Legal Statutes, or change the location of a property line of an
existing lot or parcel within the Town limits without obtaining the approval
of the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee for lot splits and the
TownCouncil for subdivisions as required by these regulations. No land may be
divided, and no property line location may be changed, in a way that would
result in the creation of a property that would not conform to the
requirements of this Ordinance.



The interpretation and application of the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be made by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee. Where any provision
of this Ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any
other provision, or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the provision that is more restrictive or imposes higher
standards controls. Nothing contained in these regulations shall be construed
as releasing a subdivider from the Arizona Revised Statutes.



D.   Administration: The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee is
hereby authorized to receive, process, and otherwise act upon preliminary and
final subdivisionplats in accordance with these regulations. The Planning and
Zoning Commission  and Town staff are hereby designated as advisory agents
to the TownCouncil and are charged with the duty of investigating and
reporting upon matters referred to them in accordance with these regulations.



E.   Fees: Fees for Town services provided in the administration of this
Ordinance shall be set by Resolution of Council and may be changed from time
to time.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.2  SUBDIVISION APPLICATION PROCEDURES



5.2.1  GENERAL PROVISIONS



A.   In General: Every land division shall conform to the goals and
objectives of the General Plan, Unified Development Ordinance, and other
ordinances adopted by Council and laws of the State of Arizona that
specifically relate to subdivisions and the development of land.



B.   Reservation of Public Land: Where a tract to be subdivided contains
all or any part of a park, school, flood control facility or other area shown
on the General Plan as a public area, or required by TownCouncil as a public
area, such site shall be dedicated to the public or reserved for acquisition
by the public within a specified time period. The subdivider and the
appropriate public agency shall reach an agreement regarding such acquisition
prior to consideration of final plat by Council.



The Town may reserve land within a proposed subdivision for publicschools and
parks, recreational facilities, open space, water and wastewater facilities
and public safety annexes, subject to the following conditions:



1.   The required reservations are in accordance with principles and
standards adopted by TownCouncil, which standards include the policies for
open space set forth in the General Plan.



2.   The land reserved shall be in the size and shape as to permit the
remainder of the land area in which the reservation is located to develop in
an orderly and efficient manner.



3.   The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall
have a period of one year after the recording of the final subdivisionplat to
enter into an agreement to acquire such reserved land area. The purchase
price shall be the fair market value thereof at the time of the filing of the
preliminary plat plus the taxes against such reserved area from the date of
the reservation, and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the
maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any
loan covering such reserved area.



4.   If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does
not exercise the reservation agreement set forth in paragraph 3. above,
within the agreed upon period of time, the reservation of such area shall
terminate unless a mutually agreeable time extension is consummated.



C.   Owner/Agent Authorization: Applications may only be submitted by
property owners or their authorized representatives. The Zoning Administrator
may require proof of ownership/agency prior to accepting an application.



D.   Zoning Standards: Proposed subdivision must be designed to meet the
specific requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. In
the event that a change in zoning is required to enable the development to be
built as proposed, any necessary zoning amendment must be initiated by the
property owner (or authorized agent) in accordance with the procedures for
processing applications for changes in zoning set forth in this Ordinance. No
subdivisionplat for which a zone change is required may be considered by the
Town until the required zone change has been adopted by Council.



E.   Outline of the Review Process: The preparation, review and approval
of subdivisions within the Town Limits shall proceed through the following
progressive stages:



1.   Pre-Application Conference;



2.   Preliminary plat submittal - considered by Planning and Zoning
Commission  and TownCouncil;



3.   Subdivision Technical Review - considered and reviewed by Town Staff
and pertinent outside public service and utility agencies;



4.   Final plat submittal - considered by TownCouncil.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.2.2  PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE



Pre-application Conference: The pre-application conference precedes
preparation of platting and improvement plans by the subdivider. During this
conference, subdividers make their intentions known informally to the Town,
are advised of specific public objectives related to the subject tract, and
are given detailed information regarding platting procedures and requirements.



A.   The subdivider must provide a general outline of the proposed
development including:



1.   Sketch plan(s) and ideas regarding land use, street and lot
arrangement, and tentative lot sizes;



2.   Tentative proposals regarding water supply, sewage disposal, surface
drainage and streetimprovements.



B.   Staff will discuss the proposal with the subdivider and provide input
and suggestions regarding procedural steps, public policy objectives, design
and improvement standards, and general platting requirements. Then, depending
upon the scope of the proposed development, the Staff will:



1.   Check existing zoning of the tract and recommend changes in zoning if
necessary or desirable;



2.   Determine the adequacy of existing or proposed schools, parks, and
other public places;



3.   Inspect the site or otherwise determine its relationship to major
streets, utility systems, and adjacent land uses, and identify any unusual
problems such as those related to topography, utilities, drainage, etc;



4.   Determine whether a Development Master Plan (DMP)  will be required
prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, and the extent to which the
property owner will be required to prepare it.



C.   Subdivision Referral and Approval Process: Within fifteen (15) days
of the pre-application conference, the Zoning Administrator or his/her
designee will send a written notice to the subdivider with Staff’s
recommendations related to preparation and submittal of a preliminary plat by
developer to be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Council.



1.   Subdivisions: If the sketch plat involves a subdivision only, the
Zoning Administrator or his/her designee will issue a written notice advising
the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of a preliminary plat to be
considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission  and Council.



2.   Development Master Plan: A DMP may be required prior to the
preparation of a preliminary plat if; the tract is sufficiently large to
comprise an entire neighborhood, if the tract is to be developed in multiple
phases or if the tract is only a portion of a larger landholding of the
subdivider, or the tract is part of a larger land area the development of
which is complicated by unusual topographic, utility, land use, land
ownership, or other conditions. The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee
may issue a Notice to Proceed to prepare a DMP. The entire land area covered
by the DMP need not be under the subdivider’s control. In many cases the
DMP will be the conceptual land use plan needed for a zone change application
that may be necessary to permit development of the tract.



a.   Preparation: Development Master Plans must be prepared to a scale and
accuracy commensurate with their purposes, and must include:



1)   General street pattern with particular attention to collector streets
and future circulation throughout the development;



2)   General location and size of existing and proposed school sites,
parks, and other public areas;



3)   Location of shopping centers, multiple-family residential or other
non-residential land uses;



4)   Methods proposed for sewage disposal, water supply and storm drainage;



5)   Approximate densities and intensities of various land uses.



b.   Phasing Plan and Schedule Approval: Upon acceptance of the general
design approach by the Commission and TownCouncil, the DMP should be followed
by the preparation of a preliminary plat. If development is to take place in
several stages, the DMP must be submitted as a supporting document for each
stage. The DMP must be kept up to date by the subdivider as modifications
take place.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)



5.2.3  PRELIMINARY PLAT



No later than 120 days after the date of the Zoning Administrator’s comment
letter, an applicant shall apply for a preliminary plat or submit a
Development Master Plan (DMP) , unless the applicant can show cause for the
delay to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator.



A.   Application Procedures and Requirements



1.   In General: The preliminary plat stage of land subdivision involves
detailed subdivision planning, submittal, review, and approval of the
preliminary plat. The preliminary plat must substantially conform to the
conceptual land use plan  and may only be submitted subsequent to the
issuance of a “Notice to Proceed”, and must be accompanied by payment of
the prescribed fee. The subdivider must provide all essential information
outlined below to enable the Zoning Administrator to determine the character
and general acceptability of the proposed development.



B.   Preliminary plat Submission: In addition to a completed preliminary
plat Application Form, a complete submittal shall include:



1.   Twelve (12) blueline (or blackline) copies of the plat, which must be
scaled to fit on one twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches sheet
(where practical, although the scale may not exceed one hundred (100) feet to
the inch), in addition to two eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches
reduced copies, showing:



2.   Identification and Descriptive Data



a.   Proposed subdivision name, location by Township, range, and section,
and reference by dimension and bearing to a section or quarter section corner.



b.   North arrow, scale, and date of preparation.



c.   Name, address and phone number of the owner, and the engineer,
surveyor, landscape architect, or land planner who prepared the plat.



d.   Vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to
main traffic arteries and any other landmarks that would help to locate the
project.



e.   Property owners name, fee number or assessor’s parcel numbers for
all abutting properties.



3.   Existing Conditions Data



a.   Topography by one (1), two (2) or five (5) foot contour intervals
adequate to reflect the character and drainage of the land as determined by
the Public Works Director, and related to U.S. Coastal and Geodetic Survey
(USC&GS) datum, or other datum approved by the Public Works Director.



b.   Surveyed location of all existing improvements on public rights of
way and private property including land use, structures and fences, walls,
shacks, barns, utility lines, wells, streams, irrigation canals and
structures, private and public culverts, ditches, washes, lakes, water
features of all types, direction of flow, flow pattern, location and extent
of areas subject to inundation, and whether such inundation is frequent,
periodic, or occasional and data regarding frequency.



c.   Location, width, and names of all platted streets, drainage and
utility easements, public areas, and municipal boundaries within, adjacent
to, or extending from the property.



d.   Location of historic and archaeological sites, if any.



e.   Acreage and zoning of the property and abutting properties.



f.   Complete boundary dimensions of the property and engineer's
calculations and estimated values for each tributary storm runoff channel for
ten (10), fifty (50), and one hundred (100)-year frequency storms (the values
should be indicated along the boundary of the survey map for all points of
drainage entering and exiting the property).



g.   Evidence of adequate access from an existing publicright-of-way.



4.   Proposed Conditions Data



a.   Proposed lot configuration, including approximate size and dimensions
of each lot, and identification of each lot by number, and total number of
lots; building setback lines; street layout, including location, width, curve
radii, and proposed names.



b.   Identification of average and minimum lot size(s).



c.   Designation of all land(s) to be dedicated and reserved for public
use with use and acreage for each indicated.



d.   Location of all proposed private and controlled access streets and
identification of all access devices on local streets within the subdivision;
their means of accomplishing access control (e.g. signage, traffic barriers,
gates, etc.) and monitoring devices and facilities; and their hours of
operation and standards and procedures for admittance.



e.   A general statement regarding proposed utility methods and status of
existing capacities of nearby water, sewer, and other public utilities.



5.   A preliminary plat on disk in digital format compatible with the Town
computer database. Typically, the form of these files will be in DXF, DWG or
other similar industry standards digital file developed in AutoCAD R13 or
greater.



6.   Payment of prescribed filing fee.



7.   A preliminary draft or outline of protective covenants  and
restrictions that demonstrate the proposed theme and character of the
proposed subdivision.



8.   Such other information as, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator
or his/her designee, will be required to complete a thorough analysis of the
preliminary plat in terms of its compliance with all Town Codes, ordinances,
rules and regulations.



C.   Preliminary plat Review and Approval



1.   Upon acceptance of an application for approval of a preliminary plat,
the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee will have five (5) working days
to advise the applicant if the submittal is complete. Copies of complete
applications will be forwarded to the Town departments and utility and public
safety agencies that serve the area for their review and comment.



2.   The reviewing agencies and departments shall transmit their comments
and recommendations to the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee. The
Zoning Administrator or his/her designee will then summarize the received
comments and recommendations, prepare a staff report and present it to the
Commission.



3.   The Commission shall consider the proposed preliminary plat at its
next regularly scheduled meeting no sooner than twenty-one (21) days after an
application has been determined to be complete. Upon approval of a
preliminary plat, or approval with conditions by the Commission, Council may
consider the proposed preliminary plat at its next regularly scheduled
meeting.



4.   Preliminary plat approval constitutes authorization for the
subdivider to proceed with the preparation and submittal of engineering plans
and specifications for public infrastructure improvements and the final plat.
Preliminary plat approval does not assure final plat approval and shall
expire within one (1) year of approval if a final plat is not submitted.
Extensions of one (1) year may be granted by the Zoning Administrator or
his/her designee upon written request by the applicant/subdivider.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)



5.2.4  SUBDIVISION TECHNICAL REVIEW



A.   The subdivider must provide the Zoning Administrator or his/her
designee with a complete set of engineering plans and specifications prepared
by a civil engineer who is currently registered in the State of Arizona. Such
plans and specifications must be designed based upon the approved preliminary
plat and may be prepared prior to or in conjunction with the final plat.



B.   The final plat will not be considered by Council until all
engineering plans for water, sanitary sewer, streets, grading and drainage
and all other improvements have been approved by the Public Works Director
and other applicable review agencies.



C.   When applicable, for water and sewer mainline extensions, the
subdivider must furnish Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ)
and the Public Works Director such evidence as the ADEQ may require regarding
the adequacy of the design and operation of the proposed potable water and
sanitary sewerage facilities. Applications for plan review by ADEQ may only
be made with written authorization of the Public Works Director.



D.   Engineering Plan and Specification Submission Comprehensive
Development Plan (CDP)  In conjunction with the other engineering plans
prescribed in this Ordinance, the subdivider must provide a CDP that
illustrates the physical relationship of all the proposed utility
improvements for the proposed subdivision. The intent of this plan is to
cumulatively index all proposed utility improvements for easy reference, and
to provide for a coordinated development effort. The subdivider, at his
option, may choose to submit a preliminary CDP Staff review prior to the
preparation and submittal of a final CDP and other improvement plans.



At a minimum, the CDP should depict the proposed location and separation of
all publicimprovements and how they relate to the lots or blocks of the
subdivision. The CDP should provide approximate distances and measurements of
all proposed rights-of-way; easement s; one hundred (100)-year floodplain
limits for regulatory flows; utility placements; edge of pavement; curb,
gutter, and sidewalk (if required); drainage structures; and the building
footprint. The CDP should be overlaid on a topographic map with a contour
interval of not less than five (5) feet. The topographic mapping should
extend fifty (50) feet beyond the subdivision boundaries. Spot elevations for
the proposed grading should be provided at various locations to assist in
determining the suitability of topography to the proposed subdivision.
Finally, if the project is to be phased, the phase lines must be shown on the
CDP.



ENGINEERING STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES NEED TO BE REFERENCED HERE!



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 15-798, passed 6-23-2015)



5.2.5  FINAL PLAT



No later than one year after the approval of a preliminary plat, a subdivider
may apply for approval of a final plat. Failure to do so will automatically
nullify the approval of the preliminary plat without any action by the Town
unless the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee has approved an extension
prior to the expiration of one (1) year.



A.   Application Procedure and Requirements:



1.   In General: The final plat stage involves the final design of the
subdivision, submittal of engineering plans and specifications (if not
already completed), final CC&R's, satisfactory assurance documentation,
execution of a development agreement, if applicable, and signing of an
Infrastructure Improvement Agreement.



2.   Zoning: The zoning of a tract must permit the proposed development.
Zoning changes required to enable the property to be developed as proposed
must be approved by Council prior to the submission of a preliminary plat.



3.   Easements: It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to
provide on the final plat, prior to plat recordation, such easements in such
location and width as required for public utility purposes. The following
notation shall be placed on all final plats: “Construction within
easements, except by public agencies and utility companies, shall be limited
to utilities and wood, wire or removable section-type fencing and/or
plantings or turf. It is understood that the utility companies will not be
required to replace any obstructions or plantings that must be removed during
the course of maintenance, construction, or reconstruction within any utility
easement.”



B.   Final plat Submission: In addition to a completed final plat
application form, a complete submittal shall include:



1.   A record plat drawn in permanent black ink on linen or mylar on a
sheet conforming to twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches with
the scale not to exceed one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. Two (2)
copies shall be submitted. The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee may
permit a variation in that scale should there be unusual size or shape to the
tract proposed for subdividing. If more than two (2) sheets are required for
the drafting of the final plat, an index sheet of the same dimensions
illustrating the layout of the entire subdivision shall be shown.



2.   A certificate or letter from each utility company providing service
to the area indicating approval of the method of the proposed utility
installations and confirming the availability of services.



3.   An Arizona Department of Transportation access permit where required.



4.   If not already completed in Stage III - Subdivision Technical Review,
an Infrastructure Improvement Agreement shall be consummated between the
subdivider and the Town.



5.   A completion date for the construction of the improvements shall be
declared and notice given to Zoning Administrator or his/her designee, which
date shall be approved by Council. The completion date for the improvements
should not exceed two years from the date of such approval. Failure to
complete the improvements by the completion date may cause the forfeiture of
the assurances described hereafter.



6.   A final plat, in recordable form, on disk in digital format
compatible with the Town computer database to facilitate the inclusion of the
final plat into the Town parcel database. Typically, the form of these files
will be in DXF, DWG or other similar industry standards digital file
developed in AutoCAD R13 or greater.



7.   A copy of the protective covenants, conditions and restrictions
(CC&R's) in the form for recording shall be submitted and recorded with the
final plat. The CC&R's shall include, at a minimum, a mechanism to allow the
capability for home or property owners to establish or create a homeowners
association subsequent to the declarant conveying a majority of the
subdivided properties to other parties.



8.   Identification and Descriptive Data



a.   North arrow, scale, and date.



b.   A title which includes the name of the subdivision and its location
by section, Township, and range.



c.   Name, address, registration number, and valid seal of the registered
land surveyor preparing the plat.



9.   Survey Data



a.   Subdivision boundary lines and corners, together with courses and
distances and all curve or angle data. Subdivision corners must be shown and
must close on the ground within .05 foot per one hundred (100) feet; other
monuments, lot corners, and other survey points must also be described and
located. One (1) tie must be made by true course and distance to a GLO
corner, or, if none exists, to a corner of common acceptance. Proposed
subdivisions adjacent to existing subdivisions must tie to the corners of the
existing subdivisions. adjoining property must be identified by subdivision
name, or if unsubdivided, and Forest Service lands noted. All connecting
streets, private and public and Forest Service roads must be shown and named.



b.   Name, courses, length and width of all public streets and street
cross sections; radii, points of tangency, and central angles of all
curvilinear streets; radii of all rounded street line intersections;
location, dimensions, bearings, radii, arcs, and central angles of all sites
to be dedicated to the public; and a statement noting that the streets
dedicated on the plat will not be accepted for Town maintenance until they
are brought up to minimum Town standards.



c.   A registered professional land surveyor must certify that all lots
are staked, or will be staked within six (6) months.



10.   Existing Conditions Data



a.   Utility easement s intended to remain on the property. The notation
as described above shall be on the final plat.



b.   Drainage easements intended to remain on the property, with the
following notation: “Natural, unimpeded flow is preferred in all drainage
ways, wherever practical. No structure of any kind may be constructed or
placed, nor may any vegetation be planted nor be allowed to grow within, on
or over any drainage easement  which would obstruct or divert the flow of
storm water. The Town may construct and/or maintain drainage facilities on or
under the land in any drainage easement .”



11.   Descriptive Data Required:



a.   Name, right-of-way lines, courses, lengths, width of all public
streets, crosswalks, utility easements; radii, points of tangency and central
angles of all curvilinear streets and rounded street line intersections.



b.   Utility easements needed in conjunction with the new plat to include
the notation as cited above.



c.   All drainage ways shall be shown on the plat. The rights-of-way or
easements for all major drainage ways, as designated by the Public Works
Director, shall be dedicated to the public.



d.   Location and dimension of all residential lots, including
identification of each lot by number and size of each lot, total number of
lots and average and minimum lot sizes.



e.   All residential lots shall be numbered by consecutive numbers
throughout the plat. “Exception”, “tracts”, and parks shall be so
designated, lettered or named and clearly dimensioned.



f.   Locations, dimensions, bearings, radii, arcs, and central angles of
all sites to be dedicated to the public with the use clearly indicated.



g.   Location of all adjoiningsubdivisions with date, map and page number
of recordation noted, or if unrecorded or unsubdivided, so marked.



12.   Assurances: In order to ensure proper installation of
subdivisionimprovements, the subdivider shall designate the type of assurance
in a form and method acceptable to the Town Attorney and approved by
TownCouncil in conjunction with review of the final plat. A final copy of the
assurance shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator within 90 days of
Council approval, and prior to the recordation of any final plat approved by
Council.



The amount of the assurance shall be based on a cost estimate prepared by a
registered civil engineer in an amount to cover one hundred ten (110) percent
of the complete installation of the improvements. This assurance shall
provide for its forfeiture to the Town in the event the Town does not accept
the improvements by the declared completion date due to the default of the
subdivider. Any portion of the forfeiture in excess of the expenses incurred
by the Town in connection with the installation of the improvements shall be
returned to the subdivider. The owner must provide the Town with one of the
following types of financial assurances for the completion of the
construction of the improvements required for the development of the
subdivision:



1)   Cash or Surety Bond



a)   The subdivider shall deposit with the Town Clerk cash or a surety
bond.



b)   The surety bond shall be executed by the subdivider with a
corporation duly licensed and authorized to transact surety business in the
State of Arizona, as surety. The bond shall be in favor of the Town, shall be
continuous in form, and shall require that the total aggregate liability of
the surety for all claims shall be limited to the face amount of the bond,
regardless of the number of years the bond is in force, and shall provide
that:



c)   The bond or cash shall be released upon satisfactory performance of
the work and its acceptance by Council.



d)   Progress payments may be made to the subdivider on his order from any
cash deposit made. Such progress payments shall be made in accordance with
standards established by the Public Works Director.



e)   The bond may be cancelled by the subdivider, provided that other
security, satisfactory to the Town has been deposited which will cover the
obligations of the subdivider that remain to be performed.



f)   Any work abandoned or not completed by the subdivider may be
completed by the Town, which shall recover the construction costs from the
subdivider or the bonding agent.



2)   Assurance of Construction through Loan Commitment



In lieu of providing assurance of construction in the manner provided above,
the subdivider may provide assurance of construction of all required utility
and infrastructure improvements, by delivering to the Town in a manner
described above, an appropriate agreement acceptable to the Town Manager
between an approved lending institution and the subdivider, which provides:



a)   A statement that funds sufficient to cover the entire cost of
installing the required improvements, including engineering and inspection
costs, and the cost of replacement or repairs of any existing streets or
improvements demanded by the Town in the course of development of the
subdivision have been deposited with such approved lending institution by the
subdivider. The agreement shall provide that the funds in the approved amount
are specifically allocated, and will be used by the subdivider, or on his
behalf, only for the purpose of installing the subdivisionimprovements.



b)   That the Town shall be the beneficiary of such agreement, or the
subdivider's rights shall be assigned to the Town, and the Public Works
Director shall approve each disbursement of such funds. The agreement may
also contain terms, conditions, and provisions normally included by such
lending institutions in loan commitments for construction funds, or as may be
necessary to comply with statutes and regulations applicable to such lending
institutions.



3)   Alternative Assurances



In lieu of providing a surety bond or an agreement between the subdivision
developer and an approved lending institution, the Town Attorney may approve
and recommend to TownCouncil such alternative assurances that it deems
sufficient to guarantee and assure construction of the required improvements,
including a contractual agreement by an approved lender guaranteeing the
performance of the subdivision developer, or a Performance Deed of Trust, in
first lien position, or such other assurances as Council shall deem
sufficient and appropriate.



4)   When no adjacent arterial or collector (as identified on the Chino
Valley Streets Master Plan) is being constructed and the improvement of an
arterial or collector street by a governmental agency is anticipated in the
short-term future, the subdivider shall deposit the current estimated cost of
improving the abutting half street in an account.



13.   Dedication and acknowledgment - A statement dedicating all streets
and easement s for public use by the person holding legal title of record to
the property. If the property contains any liens, all lien holders shall
execute an appropriate release for all dedications. If the plat shows private
access ways, it must note that public utilities, including refuse collectors,
shall be reserved the right to install, conduct and maintain utilities in
such access ways. The signatures following this dedication  and
acknowledgment shall be notarized.



14. Final plat Review



Upon acceptance of an application for approval of a final plat, the Zoning
Administrator or his/her designee will have five (5) working days to advise
the applicant if the submittal is complete. Copies of complete applications
will be sent to the Town departments and utility and public safety agencies
that serve the area.



Council shall consider the proposed final plat at its next regularly
scheduled meeting no sooner than twenty-one (21) days after an application
has been determined to be complete.



Recordation: Upon receipt of the required assurances, and proof of adequate
water supply, the applicant will provide the Town with three (3) copies of
the approved final plat drawn in permanent black ink on mylar approximately
four (4) mil in thickness, and Zoning Administrator or his/her designee will
have the final plat recorded and provide a recorded copy of the plat to the
applicant.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.2.6  LAND SPLITS NOT REQUIRING A SUBDIVISION



Land splits do not require the submission and approval of preliminary and/or
final plats and do not include or allow for a land split or further division
of previously subdivided land but are subject to the following:



A.   All parcels or lots created in a land split must meet the minimum
parcel size applicable under the current zoning of the lots or parcels
created by the land split.



B.   The proposed land split may not create any new non-conforming
structures related to buildingsetbacks or increase the non-conformance of an
already non-conforming structure relating to buildingsetbacks.



C.   The parcels or lots created by the land split shall have permanent
legal access by connecting to a public street, a street which is part of the
public access system, a private street created by a properly recorded plat,
or a public way. Those areas within the public way which are owned by the
owner of a contiguous lot or parcel shall be included in the computation of
the gross square footage of said parcel or lot and such inclusion will
continue whether or not the Town thereafter formally accepts dedication of
any portion of the public way but buildingsetbacks will be measured from the
frontage on said public way except as applicable to flag lots created in
conformity with this Code.



D.   A person proposing a land split shall submit a Record of Survey
prepared by a civil engineer or registered land surveyor licensed in Arizona
which reflects the lots or parcels created by the land split and the legal
access as referenced in the foregoing Paragraph C for the lots or parcels
created. The access required to be depicted in the Record of Survey shall be
only that portion leading to a public street, a street which is part of the
public access system or an existing public way. No building permit shall be
issued for a lot or parcel created by a land split until the party seeking
the building permit has provided the requisite Record of Survey reflecting
compliance with Subsection 5.2.6, A., B., C. and D. and paid the required
fees for review and approval of land splits as those fees may be established
by the Town Council.



E.   A party seeking rezoning of property shall provide for dedication of
those portions of the property which are within the future street system or
publicaccess system as then adopted by appropriate Resolution or Ordinance
and shall, in any event, provide for sufficient and reasonable public ways to
serve as access for all lots created by land splits that may thereafter occur
on said property pursuant to the rezoning of such property.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006; Ord. 07-683, passed 1-11-2007)



5.2.7  MINOR SUBDIVISION



A.   Approval of subdivision required. Until a preliminary plat and final
plat of a subdivision shall have been approved in accordance with this
article, no person proposing a subdivision within the Town shall subdivide or
file a record of survey, map or plat for record, or sell any part of a
subdivision, or proceed with any improvement or other work on same.



B.   Duties of subdivider. While a subdivision is in the preliminary
planning stage, the subdivider shall consult the Zoning Administrator to
determine conformity to the General Plan, the applicable specific plans, the
zoning regulations and compliance with the provisions of these regulations
and the requirements for the design and installation of public improvements
as required by the Town.



C.   Preliminary plat and engineering drawings. The subdivider shall cause
to be prepared a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision and other
exhibits as specified herein. The Planning and Zoning Department shall review
the preliminary plat and submit its recommendations to the Commission as
specified herein. The Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, may
administratively approve the preliminary plat, if the minor subdivision meets
all requirements of the Unified Development Ordinance. If for any reason the
Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, decides not to administratively
approve the minor subdivision, the approval of the minor subdivision will
follow the same process as approval of a preliminary plat for a major
subdivision outlined in Section 5.2.3.



D.   Final plat approval and recording. The subdivider shall cause to be
prepared a final plat as specified in Section 5.2.5 B., which shall conform
substantially to the preliminary plat as approved. The Zoning Administrator,
or his/her designee, may administratively recommend approval of the final
plat, and forward the final plat on to Council for their consideration and
approval. If for any reason the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee,
decides not to administratively recommend approval of the final plat, the
approval of the final plat will follow the same process as approval of a
final plat for a major subdivision outlined in Section 5.2.5. The approved
and executed copy shall be recorded in the Yavapai County  recorder's office
after full compliance with these regulations, and one copy shall be filed in
the Commission's office and one with the Town Engineer.



E.   Special Submission Conditions for Minor subdivisions. The Zoning
Administrator, or his/her designee, may waive certain submission requirements
for minor subdivisions, when, in their judgment, the unique circumstances of
the site do not require the submission of such data for the accurate review
of the minor subdivision, provided however, that the Zoning Administrator, or
his/her designee, may not reduce any requirements for physical improvements
required by this Ordinance, nor any State of Arizona, statutory requirements.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.3  DESIGN PRINCIPLES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



5.3.1  STREET LOCATION AND ARRANGEMENT



A.   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all
streets should conform to the Town's General and Transportation Plans and
should ensure public safety and convenience, and respond to existing natural
features of terrain, vegetation, and drainage.



B.   Street layout shall provide for the continuation of existing
principal streets through new subdivisions. Principal streets typically
follow section or mid-section lines, however, if the alignment is impractical
then right-of-way should be provided at least every three thousand (3,000)
feet.



C.   Certain proposed streets shall be extended to the tract boundary to
provide future connection with adjoining unplatted lands.



1.   Street connections to an adjoining platted tract shall be made only
to those extended streets of the platted tract.



2.   Street connections shall be designed to accommodate the amount of
increased traffic flow generated by the proposed subdivision, as determined
by an engineered traffic study or as approved by the Public Works Department.



D.   Local streets shall be so arranged as to discourage their use by
through traffic. If topography allows and suitable alternate locations are
available, minimums of two (2) accesses are highly recommended for
ingress/egress into the subdivision.



E.   The maximum length of cul-de-sac streets shall be one thousand, five
hundred (1,500) feet measured from the intersection of the right-of-way lines
to the extreme depth of the turning circle along the street centerline.
However, no cul-de-sac shall provide access to more than twenty-five (25)
single family residences.



F.   Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing or
proposed arterial and collector routes, sufficient right-of-way may be
required for access, frontage streets, and/or turning movements or for
reverse frontage combined with a one (1) foot non-vehicular access easement 
abutting the major route; or for such other treatment as may be justified for
protection of residential properties from function of the major route.



G.   Where a subdivision abuts or contains the right-of-way of a limited
access highway or an irrigation canal or abuts a commercial or industrial
land use, the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee may recommend location
of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way
at a distance suitable for appropriate use of the intervening land. Such
distance shall be determined with due regard for approach grades, drainage,
bridges or future grade separations.



H.   Streets shall be so arranged in relation to existing topography as to
produce desirable lots of maximum utility and streets of reasonable gradient
and to facilitate adequate drainage.



I.   No alleys may be constructed in residential, commercial , and
industrialsubdivisions, except that the Zoning Administrator or his/her
designee may waive the requirements in certain areas because of topography,
open area provided or service access.



J.   Half streets shall be discouraged, but may be permissible where
necessary to provide right-of-way required by the Town's General and
Transportation Plans, to complete a street pattern already begun or to assure
reasonable development of a number of adjoining parcels. The minimum paved
street width of a half street is twenty (20) feet. Where there exists a
platted half streetabutting the tract to be subdivided, the remaining half
shall be platted within the tract. In lieu of the actual construction of a
half street, the subdivider may provide a cash payment that is based on a
cost estimate prepared by a registered civil engineer and that is approved by
the Public Works Director. This money will be disbursed to the Town at the
time the contract is awarded for the Town project to improve the full width
of the street.



K.   A minimum of two (2) permanent reference survey monuments shall be
required for a street as a recoverable point for future surveys.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.3.2  STREET DESIGN (NEED ENG. DESIGN STANDARDS!)



All streets in the Town, unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance, shall
be designed to the standards in this subsection and as follows:



A.   Minimum Required Right-of-Way Width



1.   Principal and minor arterial streets and highways as indicated by
Town standards but, in any event, no less than one hundred (100) feet or as
required by the Arizona Department of Transportation standards.



2.   Collector streets as indicated by current Town standards but, in any
event, no less than eighty (80) feet.



3.   Local streets as indicated by current Town standards but, in any
event, no less than fifty (50) feet, unless otherwise specified in this
Ordinance.



a.   Cul-de-sac streets shall terminate in a circular right-of-way fifty
(50) feet in radius with a minimum improved traffic turning circle forty (40)
feet in radius. The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee may approve an
equally convenient form of space where extreme conditions justify.



b.   Dead end streets will not be approved except in locations designated
by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee as necessary to future
extension in development of adjacent lands. A dead end street  serving more
than four (4) lots shall provide a temporary turning circle with a forty (40)
foot radius or other acceptable design to accomplish adequate access.



c.   Local roads for industrialsubdivisions are highly recommended at
sixty (60) feet. However, when the size of subdivisions or other factors
limit the inclusion of the sixty (60)-foot rights-of-way, the Zoning
Administrator or his/her designee may approve the use of fifty (50)-foot
rights-of-way with all intersection radiuses at forty-five (45) feet.



4.   Access or frontage streets - As required by a traffic impact study or
as needed for principal arterials.



Town Street Design Standards



 

Item
 
Principal Arterial (1)
 
Minor Arterial
 
Collector
 
Residential One Dwelling per Acre or Greater
 
Residential Less than One Dwelling per Acre
 
Commercial
 
Industrial


Minimum Right of Way
 
Per ADOT (1)
 
100'
 
80'
 
50'
 
50'
 
50'
 
60'


Minimum Roadway Width w/o On Street Parking
 
Per ADOT
 
42'
 
28'
 
24'
 
24'
 
28'
 
28'


Pavement Edge

Treatment
 
7" ADOT C&G
 
6" Vert. C&G
 
Ribbon Curb
 
Rolled Curb
 
Ribbon Curb
 
6" Vert. C&G
 
Ribbon or Rolled Curb


Sidewalk
 
6' on each side
 
5' Min. on each side (2)
 
None (3)
 
4' Min. on one side (3)
 
None (3)
 
4' Min. on each side (2)
 
None (3)



 



Street Design Notes



(1)   Currently, all principal arterial routes are state highways owned
and maintained by the Arizona Department of Transportation.



(2)   Sidewalk may be required on only one (1) side of the road with an
increased width if approved by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee
and the Public Works Director. (Also, see note #3.)



(3)   A minimum of two (2) foot wide shoulder is required if no sidewalk
is installed. This shoulder shall maintain the same slope as the pavement and
shall be constructed of ABC or an approved equal. However, construction of
sidewalks on collector roads shall be determined through a Development
Agreement.



Note: These standards are primarily for new roadway construction. These
standards may be adjusted on projects involving rehabilitation or
reconstruction of existing improvements as approved by the Public Works
Director.



B.   Grades



1.   Maximum:



a.   Arterial routes: as determined by the Public Works Director.



b.   Collector streets eight (8) percent.



c.   Local residential streets twelve (12) percent.



(Maximum longitudinal slopes of up to eighteen (18) percent may be used for a
distance not to exceed three hundred (300) feet if existing terrain dictates,
and if approved by the Public Works Director).



d.   Cul-de-sacs eight (8) percent.



e.   Intersections five (5) percent for a minimum of fifty (50) feet from
points of intersection.



2.   Minimum: all streets shall have a minimum longitudinal slope of
three-tenths (0.3) percent.



3.   Desirable: all streets six (6) percent.



4.   Exceptions may be made by the Zoning Administrator or his/her
designee upon review and approval of the Public Works Director.



C.   Vertical Curves



1.   Arterial routes: Minimum length, one hundred (100) feet, or as
determined by using the AASHTO Standards.



2.   Collector and minor streets: Minimum length, one hundred (100) feet,
or as determined by using the AASHTO Standards for residential streets, the
length of the vertical curve may be reduced to fifty (50) feet if existing
terrain dictates and if approved by the Public Works Director.



3.   When the longitudinal grade for all streets changes with an algebraic
difference of one (1) percent as measured between the tangent grades in
percent, a vertical curve shall be provided.



D.   Horizontal Alignment



1.   Arterial routes: As determined by the Public Works Director.



2.   When tangent center lines deflect from each other more than ten (10)
degrees and less than ninety (90) degrees, they shall be connected by a curve
with a minimum centerline radius of five hundred (500) feet for collector
streets and one hundred fifty (150) feet for local streets.



3.   Between reverse curves there shall be a tangent section of centerline
not less than one hundred (100) feet long, unless the radius exceeds seven
hundred fifty (750) feet on arterial and collector streets or two hundred
fifty (250) feet on local streets, in which cases fifty (50) feet of tangent
shall be required if approved by the Public Works Director.



4.   Streets intersecting arterial and collector streets shall do so at an
angle that shall not vary from ninety (90) degrees by more than ten (10)
degrees; intersections of local streets shall not vary from ninety (90)
degrees by more than fifteen (15) degrees.



5.   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred
thirty-five (135) feet shall be avoided unless otherwise approved by the
Public Works Director.



6.   Minor streets intersecting a collector street or arterial route shall
have a tangent section of centerline at least one hundred fifty (150) feet in
length measured from the right-of-way line of the major street; except that,
no such tangent is required when the minor street curve has a centerline
radius greater than four hundred (400) feet with the center located on the
major streetright-of-way line.



Where topographic conditions make necessary other treatment to secure the
best over-all design, these standards may be relaxed by the Public Works
Director and the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee.



7.   Streetintersections with more than four (4) legs and Y-type
intersections where legs meet at acute angles shall be avoided.



8.   At streetintersections, property line corners shall be rounded by
circular arc having a minimum radius length of thirty-five (35) feet for
collector and arterial streets and twenty-five (25) feet for local streets.



E.   Private Streets



Private streets shall be constructed to conform to current Townstreet
standards, including but not limited to right-of-way widths, roadway
geometric criteria, and pavement structural section. If private streets are
proposed for a subdivision, then the following additional requirements must
be met:



A homeowners association shall be established at the time the final plat is
approved with a mechanism for funds to be placed in escrow account for future
operations and maintenance. An emergency rapid entry system for unrestricted
entry of police and fire emergency vehicle at all gated locations shall be
provided. For uniformity, the only allowable system shall be the “Knox
Rapid Entry System”. Finally, a note shall be placed on the final plat that
states, “All private streets that are identified as a “tract” or
“common areas” shall be maintained by the homeowners association. The
Town shall not maintain these roads unless they are improved at the expense
of the property owners to Town standards which are in effect at the time of
the request.” Any deviation or Zoning Administrator from these requirements
shall require TownCouncil approval.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.3.3  WATER FACILITIES DESIGN



A.   Subdivision water system and facilities will substantially conform to
the precepts of the Chino Valley Comprehensive Water Master Plan and other
water company master plans.



B.   Each lot or building unit shall be supplied with potable water in
sufficient volume and pressure for domestic use and fire purposes. Design and
construction of any and all facilities relating to transmission and
distribution of potable water within and outside of any subdivision must meet
with the written approval of the Public Works Director.



C.   Water mains shall be looped or installed in a circulatory
configuration whenever possible. Branching or dead-end patterns may be
acceptable if no looping alternative is present.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.3.4  SEWER FACILITIES DESIGN



A.   Wastewater disposal facilities shall be installed to serve each lot
and be subject to the following standards and approvals:



1.   individual systems, including septic tanks, shall be discouraged, but
may be constructed in areas not presently served. Property is considered
served if a public sewer is within two hundred (200) feet of a property line
or if the cost of extending the sewer main is less than two (2) times the
cost of an individual system(s).



2.   Public sanitary sewers shall be installed in areas which are
reasonably accessible to an existing sewer system or if the lot sizes are
one-half (½) acre or less. Gravity sewer system is the preferred method of
collecting and conveying wastewater. However, low-pressure sewer systems may
be installed if a homeowners’ association is established during the
platting process to oversee operation and maintenance of the individual
grinder pump stations. If low-pressure sewer systems are utilized within a
subdivision, a hybrid of gravity and low-pressure sewer should be
contemplated with line lengths for low-pressure sewer system kept to minimum
lengths in an attempt to minimize odors.



B.   Public sanitary sewers that are proposed in public utilityeasement s
extending through the rear or side yards of lots shall be discouraged.
However, topography or excessive cost may dictate the installation of sewers
in such public utilityeasements.



C.   Design and construction of any and all facilities relating to the
collection and conveyance of wastewater within and outside any subdivision is
the responsibility of the developer of the subdivision and must meet with the
written approval of the Public Works Director.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.3.5  DRAINAGE DESIGN



A.   Drainage and topography shall be a primary consideration of any
subdivision.



B.   The preservation of natural flood areas, streams, washes, arroyos,
rivers or ephemeral drainage courses should be maintained, if possible, in
their natural state. The limits of the ten (10) year flood event shall define
the extent of the area of concern. The only exceptions are for roadway
crossings and utility lines, if no other alternative exists. Any subdivision
proposal that proposes the preservation of natural flood areas shall be
considered superior to all others.



C.   Drainage layout and development shall meet all State and Federal
requirements to allow residents of Chino Valley to purchase flood insurance,
to receive disaster relief, to obtain real estate loans and to minimize flood
damage.



D.   Subdivision improvements that propose grading and/or grade changes
shall not have an adverse impact on surrounding property. At the boundaries
of the subdivision, all drainage and floodwaters shall be accepted and
released so that the flow characteristics are minimally disturbed by
providing appropriate entrance and exit transitions.



E.   All weather access to all lots shall be provided during the
regulatory flood and shall mean depths of flows over streets will not exceed
one (1) foot to allow passage of emergency vehicles. The standard applies to
both public and private streets.



F.   All drainage ways that convey fifty (50) cubic feet per second or
more, during the one-hundred (100)-year flood event, shall be considered a
regulatory flood and shall be dedicated to the public with provisions for
maintenance access ramps. Flows less than fifty (50) cubic feet per second
shall be regulated for impacts to buildings and structures, particularly, the
placement of the finished first floor or basement, and shall be designated a
common area or noted on the final plat as impacting a lot and the lot owner's
responsibility for maintenance.



G.   Drainage basins or watersheds with known flood hazards shall be
designated as a critical basin. Within designated critical basins, all
proposed subdivisions shall address on-site detention for the two (2)-, ten
(10)- and one hundred (100)-year flood event to mitigate the post-development
drainage to the pre-development levels. If the subdivider can demonstrate
that on-site detention will exacerbate the downstream condition then the
Public Works Director may waive the requirement.



H.   A drainage study that addresses the hydrologic and hydraulic
components relating to onsite and off-site drainage shall be developed and
prepared by a registered Arizona Professional Engineer. The drainage study
shall be approved before the street improvement plans and final plat are
approved. If the subdivision will be developed in phases, a master drainage
plan will be required.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.3.6  BLOCK DESIGN



A.   Blocks should not exceed fifteen hundred (1,500) feet in length
between street centerlines. Variation from this requirement may be justified
where topography or optimal lot configurations are achieved or when lot sizes
average one-half acre or greater.



B.   Blocks should have sufficient width for an optimal layout of two (2)
tiers of lots of the size required by this Ordinance development standards.



C.   Where practical, pedestrian ways with a minimum easement
/right-of-way width of ten (10) feet may be required at mid-block and/or
internal connection locations where essential for access to schools,
playgrounds, common open space or other community facilities. Pedestrian ways
may be used for utility purposes.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.3.7  LOT PLANNING



A.   Lot width, depth, and area shall comply with the minimum development
standards of the applicable zoning district.



B.   Lots having double frontage should be avoided except where necessary
to provide separation of the residential development from traffic collectors
and arterials.



C.   Corner lots should be a minimum of ten (10) feet wider than the
interior lots within the same block.



D.   The depth to width ratio of useable area should be no greater than
three (3) to one (1).



E.   Grouping of wider side yards of no less than thirty (30) feet in
combined width shall be encouraged to convey openness and privacy as well as
create useable storage area.



F.   Where gross densities of four (4) units to the acre or greater are
provided, front yard setback lines should be staggered within a ten (10)-foot
range to create a diversified streetscape. No front yard should be less than
twenty (20) feet.



G.   Where a two (2)-story single-family dwelling is provided, the rear
yard setback should be a minimum of thirty (30) feet.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.3.8  EASEMENT PLANNING



A.   Generally, a Public UtilityEasement (PUE) shall be sixteen (16) feet
in width. In cases of steep greater than a six (6) percent slope or unusual
topography, the PUE should be increased to twenty (20) feet in width. The PUE
should be located on one (1) lot instead of straddling property lines.



B.   A one (1)-foot easement  prohibiting vehicular access to and from
arterials and collectors from rear yards of a double frontage lot  shall be
required.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.4  IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS



A.   Purpose



1.   The purpose of this Section 5.4 is to establish the minimum
acceptable standards for improvement of public streets and utilities, to
define the responsibility of the subdivider in the planning, constructing,
and financing of publicimprovements and to establish procedures for review
and approval of engineering plans.



2.   All improvements required in streets or easement s which are required
as a condition to plat approval shall be the responsibility of the
subdivider, provided, however, that the subdivider may be allowed to meet the
requirements by participation in an improvement district approved by the Town.



3.   Any subdivider failing to comply with the following minimum
acceptable standards shall be punished as provided in this Ordinance.



B.   Engineering Plans



1.   The subdivider shall have a complete set of engineering plans and
specifications prepared by a registered civil engineer who is currently
registered in the State of Arizona, and submit such plans to the Public Works
Department for approval. Such plans and specifications shall be based on the
approved preliminary plat and shall be prepared in conjunction with the
comprehensive development plan.



2.   Final engineering plans shall be approved by the Public Works
Director prior to recordation of the final plat. This final plan approval is
valid for a period of one (1) year. If construction is not started prior to
the plan approval expiration, the plans shall be resubmitted to the Public
Works Department for an update approval according to current standards and
guidelines. If, after construction has begun on a project and it is stopped
for any reason for a period of one year or more, the plan approval becomes
outdated . The plans must be resubmitted for update approval prior to
restarting construction. The plans will be reviewed for compliance with
current standards and requirements.



3.   Improvement plans shall include plans, profiles and typical street
cross sections that contain the following minimum information:



a.   The cover sheet shall include at least the following information:



(1)   Name and type of plan;



(2)   Vicinity map;



(3)   Location map;



(4)   Benchmarks approved by the Town;



(5)   Basis of bearing for the project;



(6)   Name, address, and phone number of subdivider;



(7)   Name, address, phone number, and professional seal of engineer
preparing plans;



(8)   List of utility agencies serving the proposed development;



(9)    Plan sheet index;



(10)   Approval signature block of the Town, Public Works Director;



(11)   Bluestake note.



b.   Plans shall include at least the following information:



(1)   Street names;



(2)   A north arrow and graphic on each plan sheet;



(3)    Stationing and lateral dimensions of streets and rights-of-way,
including pertinent survey data and curb return data;



(4)   Location of existing and proposed utilities being designed and
existing streets to be joined;



(5)   Drainage structures, including cross gutters, culverts, catch
basins, or similar items. Show a positive outlet for all drainage leaving the
site and will not have a negative impact on the downstream property. All
concentrated drainage flowing from publicright-of-way onto private property
must have a drainage easement  to flow into or a note on the final plat
relating the drainage impact on the lot;



(6)   Curb, gutter, sidewalks and asphalt structures;



(7)   Survey monument location to be set, existing control monuments to be
referenced prior to destruction and all benchmarks used;



(8)   New traffic control devices, all existing traffic control devices
within the area of the project, and changes in traffic control devices in the
vicinity of the project that are required as a result of the project;



(9)   The top and toe of slopes for both cuts and fills shall be shown if
the project extends outside of the right-of-way limits;



(10)   Location of all existing and proposed water lines, water valves,
water meters, water service lines, fire hydrants, sewer manholes, sewer
services, storm drains, and street lights shall be shown on the plans;



(11)   Construction notes indicating any and all construction items for
utilities, paving, storm drainage, etc.;



(12)   Town current general notes for construction;



(13)   A plan sheet showing the location of all traffic control signs
shall be included as a plan sheet;



(14)   Additional information needed to clarify plans or deal with
specific conditions.



c.   Profiles shall include at least the following information:



(1)   Bench marks, including description, location and elevation;



(2)   Existing and finished grade profiles. Profiles of centerline and
right and left gutter control line or edge of pavement are required. The
presentation must clearly show and distinguish existing profiles and other
profile information;



(3)   Finished elevations including BVC, PI, and EVC of vertical curves,
vertical intersection points, curb returns match lines and all other points
needed for vertical control of construction;



(4)   Slopes and vertical curve lengths;



(5)   Curb return profiles at intersections;



(6)   Drainage structures and utilities;



(7)   Extension of the improvement project as required assuring that the
design is compatible with future extensions;



(8)   Consistent stationing throughout the plans;



(9)   Additional information needed to clarify profiles or deal with
special conditions, i.e., profile or drainage channels, stationing and
elevations at beginning and end of all curb returns, grade breaks and
beginning and end of construction.



d.   Cross Section shall include at least the following:



(1)   Typical street cross-sections are needed for each condition
encountered and each should be clearly identified as to where it applies;



(2)   Materials and thickness, including sub-base select material
aggregate base, prime coat, asphaltic concrete, curb and gutter, and sidewalk
with notation of the engineering firm preparing the soils reports and the
report numbers, if applicable. The specification and types of materials shall
be stated.



(3)   Horizontal dimensions to all key points, including rights-of-way.



(4)   Cross slopes.



(5)   Parkway conditions. Maximum and minimum slopes are to be shown for
cuts, fills, and side hill conditions. Any side ditches or other special
conditions are to be shown. A minimum two (2)-foot wide flat area shall be
constructed behind the sidewalk or curb before the slope begins.



(6)   Right-of-way widths in relation to centerline, and identified by
street name to which it is applicable;



(7)   Limits of applicability by station if necessary.



e.   The plans shall contain the current Town “General Notes” for
water, sewer, grading, and paving construction as prepared by the Public
Works Director.



f.   One set of Recorded Drawings on reproducible film and electronic file
(AutoCAD or approved equal) of all improvements must be submitted to and
approved by the Public Works Director prior to final approval of the project.



C.   Construction and Inspection



1.   All improvements in the public rights-of-way and easement s shall be
constructed under the inspection and approval of the Town. The developer
shall be responsible for the total cost of all inspection and testing during
the construction of all improvements. The developer will execute an
Infrastructure Improvement Agreement (IIA) with the Town and the developer
will be responsible for the performance of the required inspections and
testing. If the developer decides to have the Town perform the inspection and
testing, an estimated advance payment will be provided to the Town prior to
the commencement of any construction work. If the developer chooses to
provide the inspection and testing, a payment in the amount as established by
resolution, will be required for the Town's oversight and monitoring of the
IIA requirements.



2.   All construction work shall be performed and all material furnished
shall be in reasonably close conformity to the lines, grades, cross sections,
dimensions, and material requirements, including tolerances shown on the
plans and profiles or indicated in the specifications. The Public Works
Director shall determine the limits of reasonably close conformity in each
individual case and the Public Works Director's judgment shall be final and
conclusive.



3.   The Public Works Director shall be notified at least three (3) days
before the start of any construction. Clearing and grubbing activities shall
not proceed without approved Improvement Plans by the Public Works Director.



4.   All relocation and reconstruction of irrigation and utility
facilities shall be constructed to the standards of the owning utility and
the Town.



5.   All underground utilities installed in streets shall be constructed
prior to the surfacing of such street. Service stubs to platted lots within
the subdivision for underground utilities shall be placed to such length as
not to necessitate disturbance of streetimprovements when service connections
are made.



6.   Prior to accepting any subdivision, the developer shall submit
engineering record drawings or as-built plans for all water and sewer
infrastructure.



The record information shall be submitted on both a high quality mylar having
a thickness of approximately four (4) mil and on a digital format which is
compatible with the Town computer database to facilitate the inclusion of the
plans into the Town database. Typically, the form of these files will be in
DXF, DWG or other similar industry standards digital file developed in
AutoCAD R13 or greater. Additionally, a certified letter from a professional
land surveyor shall be required, stating that the centerlines of streets,
easements, and survey monuments are located as denoted on the final plat.



7.   When public infrastructure improvements for a subdivision are
accepted by Council for maintenance and operation, the developer shall
provide all approvals from all appropriate regulatory agencies (for example,
ADEQ Approval of Construction) and shall provide a warranty or guarantee for
a period of two (2) years against defective materials and workmanship.



D.   Development of Plans and Specifications



The “Uniform Standard Specifications and Details for Public Works
Construction” as published by the Maricopa Association of Governments (MAG)
are recognized as acceptable construction specifications and standard
details. Because of variations in climate, soils, and availability of
materials, modifications to the MAG specifications may have been implemented
by the Town. The MAG specifications shall be utilized at the direction and
approval of the Public Works Director. Other pertinent manuals for the
development of plans and specifications include “A Policy on Geometric
Design of Highways and Streets” as distributed by AASHTO; all design
manuals, specifications, and standard details as distributed by the Arizona
Department of Transportation; all engineering bulletins as distributed by the
Arizona Department of Environmental Quality; “Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways” as distributed by the U.S.
Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration; and the various
design manuals, procedures, and guidelines as published by professional
organizations and governmental agencies.



E.   Streets



1.   A Geotechnical report shall be required for the pavement design of
all subdivision roads. The design approach shall be based on the latest
methodology that is utilized by the Arizona Department of Transportation or
the American Association of Highway and Transportation Officials.



Traffic volumes for the pavement design shall be based on a trip generation
analysis as developed by the Institute of Transportation Engineers.



2.   Portland cement concrete shall normally be used for all required curb
and gutter, valley gutters, and sidewalks unless otherwise approved by the
Public Works Director.



3.   A seal coat shall be required on all street-paving projects. If
pavement cuts occur after the final lift of asphaltic concrete then a chip
seal will be required.



4.   The developer shall be responsible for the installation of all
regulatory, warning, and streetsigns for the orderly movement of vehicles and
for public safety. Regulatory and warning signs shall be in conformance
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Streetsigns shall be in accordance
with Town standards and include 911 or emergency addressing.



F.   Drainage



1.   Show the limits of the one hundred (100)-year floodplain on the final
plat in a readily retraceable manner with frequent ties to intersecting lot
lines for all flows of fifty (50) cubic feet per second or more.



2.   Watercourses that are relocated, altered, or include any man-made
improvements, should be developed with channel treatments that allow for the
reestablishment of vegetation. The use of concrete will be limited to
headwalls, cut-off walls, transitions, and areas with limited right-of-way
because of existing improvements. The placement of concrete structures shall
be at the discretion of the Public Works Director.



3.   Culverts for streets shall be designed to convey at the fifty
(50)-year peak discharge with no flow over the roadway, Additionally, the
flow depth over the street shall be limited to one (1.0) foot for one hundred
(100)-year peak discharge if the street provides all weather access.



4.   A minimum pipe diameter of eighteen (18) inches shall be required for
all street crossings and a minimum pipe diameter of twelve (12) inches for
all driveways.



5.   Culvert outlet velocities should be kept below fifteen (15) feet per
second unless special conditions exist. The maximum velocity should be
consistent with the channel stability requirements at the culvert outlet. If
the culvert velocities exceed permissible velocities for the proposed outlet
(greater than five (5) feet per second for natural conditions depending on
soil types), suitable outlet protection must be provided.



6.   Drainage ditches or storm drains along streets and adjacent areas
shall be required to avoid trapping water and to ensure positive drainage
away from the streets. Street drainage shall be designed to provide for one
(1) lane of traffic on all local streets and one (1) lane of traffic in both
directions for all collectors and arterials for the ten (10)-year peak
discharge.



G.   Water



1.   New water facilities shall be designed in accordance with the Arizona
Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) and the Arizona Department of
Health Services Bulletin No. 10 (latest edition). Any deviation from the
bulletin's requirements shall have the written approval of the Town.



2.   All water mains shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in diameter or
designated otherwise by the Public Works Director to minimum water flow
requirements of the pressure zone or the Chino Valley Comprehensive Water
Master Plan.



3.   All water mains, valves, and fittings shall be constructed with
materials having a working pressure rating of two hundred (200) pounds per
square inch.



4.   The longitudinal bending of water mains shall not be allowed. All
changes in direction or angle will require the appropriate fittings.



5.   All dead ends on new mains shall be provide with a blow-off cock in
the plug or cap, and reaction backing or thrust blocking shall be arranged
not encased or covered by the concrete, if used.



6.   Fire hydrants shall be spaced at a distance no greater than seven
hundred fifty (750) feet apart in residential areas and five hundred (500)
feet apart in commercial  and industrial areas. The measurement between fire
hydrants shall be linear and the measurement will be effected along the
centerline of the streets. The Chino Valley Fire District may adjust the
distances between fire hydrants when circumstances dictate.



7.   The water system for the subdivision must be capable of supplying and
sustaining the required flows for fire protection throughout all subdivided
properties as approved by the Town. For residential areas, the minimum
required fire flow capability is one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute for
a duration of two (2) hours with a minimum system pressure of twenty (20)
pounds per square inch while the required fire hydrant flow rate is being
met. For all multi-family, industrial and commercial  areas the chief
Building Code official, in consultation with the Chino Valley Fire District,
shall determine minimum fire flow capability and that flow will be provided
with a minimum system pressure of twenty (20) pounds per square inch.



8.   The approval of the final design of the water system rests with the
TownCouncil and will be based on the conformity of the design to policy,
standards, and specifications. The developer is responsible for all approvals
with ADEQ and other regulatory agencies.



9.   The Town may issue building permits after the approval of the water
system and the installation of an all weather road. Approval of the water
system requires that the water lines have been successfully pressure tested
and disinfected to Town standards and that fire flow can be provided to all
subdivided properties. An all weather road for this purpose means that the
sub-grade and aggregate base material has been constructed to the approved
plans and specifications and the width of the road is a minimum of twenty
(20) feet wide. Water service shall not be connected to any structures until
approval from ADEQ is received.



10.   The Town will not issue any certificates of occupancy until the
subdivisionimprovements are accepted for maintenance and operation by Council.



H.   Sewer



1.   New sanitary sewerage facilities shall be designed in accordance with
the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) and the Arizona
Department of Health Services Bulletin No. 11 (latest edition). Any
deviations from the bulletins requirements shall have the written approval of
the Town.



2.   New sanitary sewers shall be designed to carry the designated peak
wet weather flow from the area that will be ultimately tributary to the
respective reach of sewer.



3.   No public gravity sewer lines shall be less than eight (8) inches in
diameter. All gravity sewer line pipes shall be of bell and spigot and
gasketed joints.



4.   The longitudinal bending of PVC SDR 35 sewer pipe is allowable with a
minimum allowable radius of one hundred fifty (150) feet and no joint
deflection. Because longitudinal bending is allowable for PVC sewer pipe,
drop manholes shall be discouraged with elevational differences addressed by
vertical sweeps of the sewer main.



5.   Testing of gravity sewer lines and manholes may include multiple test
methods to ensure a minimum of inflow and infiltration. Sewer lines shall be
subject to but not limited to low pressure air testing, deflection testing,
and closed circuit TV inspection. Manholes, at a minimum, shall be vacuum
tested after the frame and cover are installed.



6.   Low pressure pipe shall be PVC SDR 21 with gasketed joints or HDPE
SDR 11 with welded joints. Substitution may be provided if the pipe is of
equal or better quality.



7.   Low pressure sewer system shall be pressure tested in accordance with
applicable test procedures for potable water lines.



8.   The outfall for all low-pressure sewer systems shall include adequate
measures to prevent sulfide corrosion of manholes and to mitigate odors.



9.   Pump stations that are to be operated and maintained by the Town
shall be designed as a wet/dry well type system and include odor control,
corrosion mitigation measures, and supervisory/control and data acquisition
systems.



10.   Sewer house service connection shall have adequate separation or
protection from potable water house service connections. Sewer service lines
should be installed at points ten feet from the lowest lot corner adjacent to
the sewer main. Crossing of water and sewer service lines, especially a
low-pressure sewer with water service line, may require that the sewer
service line be sleeved.



11.   The Town will not issue any certificates of occupancy until the
subdivisionimprovements are accepted for maintenance and operation by Council.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.5  MODIFICATIONS, APPEALS AND ENFORCEMENT



5.5.1  MODIFICATIONS



A.   Modification of Standards



Council may modify the standards required by this Ordinance as they apply to
a particular property when there exist unusual conditions of topography, land
ownership, adjacent development or other circumstances which would not be
able to be addressed to best serve the interests of the citizens of the Town
if the requirements of this Ordinance were strictly applied.



B.   Modification of Final Plat



No change, erasure, modification or revision shall be made on or of any final
plat after approval by the Council unless the Council first approves any
proposed alteration; and any alteration shall be void unless approval thereof
is endorsed upon the final plat by the Council.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.5.2  APPEALS



A.   Appeals: Any decision, or interpretation, of this Ordinance may be
appealed to the Town Manager; decisions of the Town Manager may be appealed
to Council. The agency to which a decision has been appealed may either:



(a)   Uphold,



(b)   Reverse,



(c)   Modify, or



(d)   Refer the decision back to its author for reconsideration.



B.   Time Limits: Appeals will only be considered if they are filed within
ten (10) working days of a decision. Decisions are final after the ten
(10)-day appeal period has passed, if no appeal has been filed.



C.   Stays of Proceedings: An appeal suspends the action taken and stays
all proceedings in the matter, unless the Town certifies that a stay would
cause imminent peril to life or property. Upon such certification,
proceedings shall not be stayed except by restraining order as injunctive
relief granted by a court of record on application and notice to the Town.
Proceedings shall not be stayed if the appeal requests relief that has been
previously denied except pursuant to a special action in Superior Court.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.5.3  ENFORCEMENT



A.   Fines/Imprisonment: Any person, as principal, owner, agent, tenant,
employee, or otherwise found violating this Ordinance, or violating or
failing to comply with any order or regulation made hereunder, shall be
guilty of a civil violation punishable as provided in this Ordinance. Such
person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
during which any such violation or failure to comply with these regulations
is committed, continued or permitted. All remedies provided for herein shall
be cumulative and exclusive. A finding of guilty or responsible and
punishment of any person hereunder shall not relieve such person from the
responsibility to correct prohibited conditions. In addition to the other
remedies provided herein, any adjacent or neighboring property owner who is
damaged by the violation of any provision of this Ordinance may institute any
action in law or equity to prevent or abate such violation.



B.   Enforcement Action: Any division of property contrary to this
Ordinance is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the Town Attorney
may, upon order of Council, or on his own initiative, immediately commence
all necessary actions or proceedings for the abatement, enjoinment, and
removal thereof in the manner provided by law; and may take such other lawful
steps as may be necessary, and shall apply to such court or courts as may
have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate, enjoin, and restrain
any person from violating this Ordinance.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



5.6  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



The Town designates the Yavapai County  flood control district as the
enforcement authority for all floodplain management activities within its
corporate limits. The district is hereby authorized to exercise the powers
and duties set forth in Title 45, Chapter 10, Article 4, Arizona Revised
Statutes, within all areas of the Town.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



6  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



6.1  PURPOSE



The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of Chino Valley by establishing minimum property maintenance
standards to eliminate those conditions that contribute to blight and
deterioration.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



6.2  SCOPE



These provisions apply to residential, commercial, and industrial properties
and the responsibilities of persons for the use and maintenance of all
buildings and structures, premises and vacant land.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



6.3  DEFINITIONS



Where terms are not defined in this Ordinance, they shall have the meanings
given to them in the Town Code, Unified Development Ordinance or Building
Code. In the absence of any definition, all words and phrases shall be given
their commonly understood meaning from accepted custom and usage.



A.   “Abate” means to repair, replace, remove, destroy, or otherwise
remedy the condition in question by such means, in such manner, and to such
extent as the Zoning Administrator/Designee determines is necessary to bring
the condition into compliance with this Ordinance in the interest of the
general health, safety and welfare of the community.



B.   “Blight or Blighted” means unsightly conditions of a building,
structure, accessory building, fence, outdoor storage, landscaping; or
property characterized by neglect, lack of maintenance, damage or any other
similar conditions of disrepair or deterioration. Examples include but are
not limited to the accumulation of debris, wood, scrap iron or other metal,
boxes, paper, vehicle parts, tires, inoperable vehicles or equipment,
discarded appliances; or any items that may harbor insect or vermin
infestation or create a fire hazard; landscaping that is overgrown, dead or
damaged; fences that are broken, rotted, damaged or leaning; buildings or
structures exhibiting general disrepair or dilapidation including but not
limited to deteriorated shingles, peeling paint, broken doors or windows or
any other evidence of neglect or lack of maintenance.



C.   “Deterioration” means lowering in the quality of the condition of
a building, structure or parts thereof including but not limited to holes,
breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting, or any other evidence of
physical decay or neglect or lack of maintenance.



D.   “Fence” (includes screen walls and/or retaining walls) means self
standing structures constructed of wood, chain link, metal, masonry or
similar materials designed for and commonly used to provide semi-privacy,
security, screening or bank retention between grade separations.



E.   “Garbage” means putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food.



F.   “Inoperable vehicle” means any vehicle for which required license
plates and/or tags have expired and that is partially or wholly dismantled,
discarded, wrecked, on blocks or similar devices, stripped, or scrapped; or a
vehicle with a deflated tire or tires or from which a wheel or tire has been
removed; or any motor vehicle which is inoperable due to mechanical failure
or mechanical disassembly.



G.   “Litter” means garbage, refuse and rubbish and all other waste
materials which, if thrown or deposited in a manner prohibited by this
Ordinance, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare, and
includes, but is not limited to paper and metal, such as containers or cans.



H.   “Refuse” means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes,
except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles or parts thereof and solid
market and industrial wastes.



I.   “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and non-combustible wastes, including but not limited to,
wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, metal cans, yard clippings, leaves, metal,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.



J.   “Responsible person” means an owner, tenant, renter, lessor,
lessee, manager, agent, lien holder or any fiduciary or person with power of
attorney or other person who is occupying or having charge of, possession or
control of the premises or has the authority and ability to act on behalf of,
or in the interest of, the owner.



K.   “Town” means the Town of Chino Valley.



L.   “Trash” means any accumulation of refuse, rubbish, litter or
garbage.



M.   “Weeds” mean any vegetation which attains such large or
uncontrolled growth as to become, when dry, a fire hazard or menace to
adjacent property.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



6.4  ALL PREMISES



All commercial , residential, and industrial premises within the Town shall
be maintained in a neat and attractive manner to prevent the appearance of a
blighted or deteriorated condition or from becoming a threat to the safety
and welfare of the adjacent property or surrounding area. All exterior
property including yards, ground covers, trees, shrubs or other landscaping
and any exterior surfaces of any buildings or structures including but not
limited to fences, walls, or roofs, or appurtenances shall be properly
maintained and shall not otherwise present a blighted or deteriorated
appearance.



The responsible person of any residential, commercial  or industrial
premises shall maintain the entire premises free of debris, litter, trash and
weeds up to the curb of a street or edge of pavement where curbs are not
present.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



6.5  FENCES, SCREEN WALLS, AND RETAINING WALLS



All fences, screen walls and retaining walls on the property shall be
maintained in a safe and structurally sound condition and shall not otherwise
present a deteriorated or blighted appearance. This includes but is not
limited to leaning or damaged fences, fences missing slats or blocks or any
other materials that are otherwise broken or damaged in such amounts as to
present a deteriorated or blighted appearance.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



6.6  LANDSCAPING



All property shall be free from any condition that contributes to visual
blight including but not limited to vegetation of any kind that is
substantially dead or damaged or characterized by uncontrolled growth,
neglect, lack of maintenance or any similar conditions. An owner or
responsible person shall maintain ground cover, trees, shrubs or vegetation
of any kind so as not to interfere with the use and enjoyment or other public
or private property.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



6.7  VACANT LAND



An owner or responsible person shall keep all vacant land free of any
abandoned, inoperable, junked or wrecked vehicles, debris, garbage, junk,
litter, trash, weeds, outcroppings, strippings or other excavated material,
whether from the same or other property, so as not to present a deteriorated
or blighted appearance.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



6.7.1  KEEPING OF INOPERABLE VEHICLES



It is unlawful for any responsible person to place, park or store an
inoperable vehicle(s) or any major portion thereof, in or on any public or
private property in any manner so as to be visible from without the property
upon which it is stored.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



6.8  LITTERING



It is unlawful for any business, corporation, firm or responsible person to
fail to provide litter or trash receptacles for the containment of litter and
trash generated within or upon their premises or to allow litter or trash
from receptacles to become windblown and be disbursed into the surrounding
area.



It is unlawful for any property owner, agent, contractor or subcontractor in
charge of any construction or demolition site to cause, maintain, permit or
allow the accumulation of any litter or debris on the site before, during, or
after completion of the project or to allow any litter or debris to become
windblown and deposited into the surround area.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



6.9  MAINTAINING A HEALTH HAZARD



It is unlawful for any responsible person to allow the accumulation on any
property of the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish or fowl; or of any
waste vegetable or animal matter in any quantity, garbage, animal or human
excreta, sewage, or other offensive substances.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)



6.10  OUTSIDE STORAGE OF MATERIALS



It is unlawful for any responsible person to store, keep or maintain on any
residential, commercial or industrial property, materials or substances or
any nature which contribute to the appearance of a blighted or deteriorated
condition or is injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of property or
persons.



It is unlawful for any responsible person to store, keep or maintain inside
or outside of any premises in a place accessible to children, any abandoned,
unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has an
airtight door or lid, snaplock or other locking device which may not be
released from the inside, without first removing the door or lid, snaplock or
other locking device from the icebox, refrigerator or container.



(Ord. 06-678, passed 11-9-2006)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2015 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Arizona Statutes Annotated





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO ARIZONA STATUTES ANNOTATED



 

A.R.S. Cites
 
Code Section




Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6
 
2.1, 5.1


Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6.2
 
5.1.3


Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 7
 
5.1.3


9-238
 
2.1


9-474
 
4.4


9-499
 
1.11.10


9-499.E.
 
1.11.10


12-124
 
1.11.8


13-707
 
1.11.11


13-802
 
1.11.11


13-902
 
1.11.11


13-3912
 
1.10.5


36-481
 
3.5


36-581
 
3.6–3.14


36-582
 
3.5–3.14


36-1681
 
4.8


36-2801
 
2.1


36-2801(6)
 
4.31


36-2801(11)
 
2.1


36-2806(e)
 
2.1


Title 38, Chapter 3, Article 8
 
1.4.4, 1.5.5


Title 45, Chapter 10, Article 4
 
5.6


 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




06-678
 
11-9-2006
 
1.1 - 1.3, 1.4.1 - 1.4.5, 1.5.1 - 1.5.6, 1.6.1 - 1.6.3, 1.9, 1.9.1, 1.9.1.1 -
1.9.1.3, 1.9.2, 1.9.3, 1.9.4.1, 1.9.4.2, 1.9.5, 1.10.1 - 1.10.6, 1.11.1 -
1.11.11, 1.12, 2.1, 3.1 - 3.17, 4.2 - 4.22, 4.22.1 - 4.22.11, 4.23 - 4.25,
4.26.1 - 4.26.6, 5.1, 5.1.2 - 5.1.5, 5.2.1 - 5.2.7, 5.3.1 - 5.3.8, 5.4, 5.5.1
- 5.5.3, 5.6, 6.1 - 6.10


07-683
 
1-11-2007
 
1.11.1 - 1.11.11, 2.1, 4.5, 5.2.6


07-694
 
9-13-2007
 
1.11.7, 1.11.11


08-707
 
10-23-2008
 
2.1, 3.5 - 3.17,4.22.2 - 4.22.4,4.27, 4.28


10-729
 
7-22-2010
 
1.9.1.3, 2.1, 3.4 - 3.17,4.22.8, 4.26.1 - 4.26.6, 4.29


10-734
 
7-8-2010
 
4.23


10-742
 
11-9-2010
 
1.9.4, 1.9.4.1, 1.9.4.2, 3.1, 3.18, 4.19


11-738
 
1-11-2011
 
2.1, 3.5 - 3.11,3.15 - 3.17,4.5, 4.22.4, 4.22.8, 4.30


13-776
 
11-12-2013
 
4.8


13-778
 
11-12-2013
 
4.21


13-779
 
12-10-2013
 
2.1, 3.5 - 3.7,3.15 - 3.17,4.30, 4.31


14-784
 
6-10-2014
 
4.21


14-785
 
7-8-2014
 
2.1, 3.5 - 3.13,3.15, 4.10


14-786
 
7-22-2014
 
1.9.2, 1.9.4.1 - 1.9.4.3


15-795
 
4-28-2015
 
1.1, 1.4.1 - 1.4.5,1.5.1, 1.5.2, 1.5.4 - 1.5.8


15-797
 
6-23-2015
 
1.9.2


15-798
 
6-23-2015
 
1.9, 1.9.1, 1.9.1.1 - 1.9.1.4,2.1, 4.21, 4.22.8, 4.26.5, 4.29, 5.2.2 - 5.2.4


16-811
 
1-26-2016
 
3.5–3.7, 3.15, 3.16, 4.31


16-812
 
3-22-2016
 
1.9.5


16-816
 
6-14-2016
 
4.31


17-819
 
3-14-2017
 
2.1, 4.21, 4.21.1 - 4.21.9


 
 
 
 
 




 




