
El Mirage, AZ Code of Ordinances


CITY OF EL MIRAGE, ARIZONA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
VOLUME 1



Supplement 2019 S-10 contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. O19-04-03, passed 4-2-2019



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CITY OFFICIALS
OF
EL MIRAGE, ARIZONA



 




CITY COUNCIL



MAYOR
 
Alexis A. Hermosillo


VICE-MAYOR
 
Roy Delgado


 
 
 


COUNCILOR
 
Monica Dorcey


COUNCILOR
 
Anita Norton


COUNCILOR
 
Lynn Selby


COUNCILOR
 
David Shapera


COUNCILOR
 
Donna Winston




 





CITY OFFICIALS



CITY MANAGER
 
Crystal Dyches


CITY ATTORNEY
 
Justin Pierce


CITY CLERK
 
Sharon Antes




 



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



Ordinance O09-04-05



AN ORDINANCE OF THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF EL MIRAGE, ARIZONA,
CODIFYING, RESTATING, COMPILING AND AMENDING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF
ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.



   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of El
Mirage are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form
and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and



   WHEREAS, the Arizona Revised Statutes of the State of Arizona empowers
and authorizes the political subdivision of the State to revise, amend,
restate, codify and compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances
not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate such ordinances into
one ordinance in book form; and



   WHEREAS, the Common Council of the City of El Mirage has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City
of El Mirage of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance
take effect at an early date.



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF EL
MIRAGE, ARIZONA:



   Section 1.  The general ordinances of the City of El Mirage as
revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby
adopted as, and shall constitute, the "Code of Ordinances of the City of El
Mirage, Arizona".



   Section 2. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall
consist of the following Titles:



   VOLUME 1



   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES - [Reserved]



   PARALLEL REFERENCES



   INDEX



   VOLUME 2



   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



   Section 3.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in
such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or
in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds
or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to
public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public
places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
Code.



   Section 4.  Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Common Council of the City of El Mirage, and the
Clerk of the City of El Mirage is hereby authorized and ordered to file a
copy of such Code of Ordinances in the Office of the City Clerk.



   Sections 5. Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and
places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same
is properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public
hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been given.



   Section 6. This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of the City of El Mirage, and shall take effect
immediately upon adopting and approval of the Common Council of the City of
El Mirage.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Common Council of the City of El Mirage, Arizona on
this 14th day of May, 2009.



                           Fred Waterman     
        /s/



                           Fred Waterman, Mayor



ATTEST:                        APPROVED AS TO FORM:



Richard Saathoff               
/s/                  Richard Flaaen               
    /s/



Richard Saathoff, City Clerk                  Richard
Flaaen, City Attorney



Ordinance O10-02-05



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF EL MIRAGE, ARIZONA AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the first supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of El
Mirage, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the City and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the City that this ordinance take effect
immediately;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF CITY OF EL MIRAGE:



Section 1.   That the first supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of El Mirage as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of
its adoption and approval by the Mayor and Council of the City of El Mirage,
and the City Clerk is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement
into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
City Clerk.



Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect
immediately upon approval.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Mayor and Council of the City of El Mirage this
11th day of February, 2010.



                                /s/ 



Michele Kern, Mayor



ATTEST:



                                /s/ 



Richard Saathoff, City Clerk



APPROVED AS TO FORM:



                                /s/ 



Richard Flaaen, City Attorney



Ordinance O11-01-01



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF EL MIRAGE, ARIZONA AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the second supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of El
Mirage, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the City and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the City that this ordinance take effect
immediately;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF CITY OF EL MIRAGE:



Section 1.   That the second supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of El Mirage as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of
its adoption and approval by the Mayor and Council of the City of El Mirage,
and the City Clerk is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement
into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
City Clerk.



Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect
immediately upon approval.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Mayor and Council of the City of El Mirage this
13th day of January, 2011.



Lana Mook  /s/ 



Lana Mook, Mayor



ATTEST:



Richard Saathoff    /s/  



Richard Saathoff, City Clerk



APPROVED AS TO FORM:



Robert M. Hall  /s/  



Robert M. Hall, City Attorney Interm



Ordinance O12-07-08



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF EL MIRAGE, ARIZONA AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the third supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of El
Mirage, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the City and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the City that this ordinance take effect
immediately;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF CITY OF EL MIRAGE:



Section 1.   That the third supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of El Mirage as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of
its adoption and approval by the Mayor and Council of the City of El Mirage,
and the City Clerk is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement
into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
City Clerk.



Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect
immediately upon approval.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Mayor and Council of the City of El Mirage this
17th day of July, 2012.



Lana Mook  /s/ 



Lana Mook, Mayor



ATTEST:



Richard Saathoff    /s/  



Richard Saathoff, City Clerk



APPROVED AS TO FORM:



Robert M. Hall  /s/  



Robert M. Hall, Interim City Attorney



Ordinance O15-08-07



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF EL MIRAGE, ARIZONA AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the sixth supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of El
Mirage, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City; and



   WHEREAS, the A.R.S. § 9-240 empowers and authorizes the political
subdivision of the State to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any
existing ordinances or enact new ordinances, and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the City and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the City that this ordinance take effect
immediately;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF CITY OF EL MIRAGE:



   Section 1.   That the sixth supplement to the Code of Ordinances of
the City of El Mirage as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation
of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby
adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day
of its adoption and approval by the Mayor and Council of the City of El
Mirage, and the City Clerk is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such
supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office
of the City Clerk.



   Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect
immediately upon approval.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Mayor and Council of the City of El Mirage this
10th day of August, 2015.



Lana Mook  /s/ 



Lana Mook, Mayor



ATTEST:



Sharon Antes  /s/  



Sharon Antes, City Clerk



APPROVED AS TO FORM:



Robert M. Hall  /s/  



Robert M. Hall, City Attorney



Ordinance O16-12-12



AN ORDINANCE OF THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF EL MIRAGE, ARIZONA,
ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF
EL MIRAGE, ARIZONA AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the S7 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of El
Mirage, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the City and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take
effect at an early date;



   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
EL MIRAGE:



   Section 1.   That the S7 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of El Mirage as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day
of this adoption and approval by the Mayor and Council of the City of El
Mirage, and the City Clerk is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such
supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office
of the City Clerk.



   Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at
the earliest date provided by law.



   PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Mayor and Council of the City of El Mirage
this 6th day of December, 2016.



Lana Mook  /s/ 



Lana Mook, Mayor



ATTEST:



Sharon Antes  /s/  



Sharon Antes, City Clerk



APPROVED AS TO FORM:



Robert M. Hall  /s/  



Robert M. Hall, City Attorney



ORDINANCE 017-10-11



AN ORDINANCE OF THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF EL MIRAGE, ARIZONA,
ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF
EL MIRAGE, STATE OF ARIZONA, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing corporation of Cincinnati. Ohio, has
completed the S-8 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of El
Mirage, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of this
Political Subdivision; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance
take effect at an early date;



   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
EL MIRAGE THAT:



Section 1.   The S-8 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Political
Subdivision as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of
this adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
City of El Mirage is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement
into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
Clerk.



Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at
the earliest date provided by law.



   PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Mayor and Council of the City of El Mirage on
this 3rd day of October, 2017.



                             \s\  Lana Mook   
                   



                           Lana Mook, Mayor   
               



ATTEST:                        APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
   



  \s\  Sharon Antes                                
     \s\  Robert M. Hall                 



Sharon Antes, City Clerk                  Robert M. Hall,
City Attorney



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY




CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   How code designated and cited



   10.02   Construction of ordinances and code



   10.03   Definitions



   10.04   Additional rules of construction



   10.05   References to this code



   10.06   Conflicting provisions; different chapters



   10.07   Conflicting provisions; same chapter



   10.08   Section headings



   10.09   Effect of repeal



   10.10   Severability of parts of code



   10.11   Provisions as continuation of existing ordinances



   10.12   Ordinances not affected by code



   10.13   Repeal of ordinances



   10.14   Civil hearings; citation; issuance



   10.15   Civil Code infraction; jurisdiction; purpose



   10.16   Civil sanctions



   10.17   Civil hearings; duty to respond



   10.18   Civil hearings and judgment



   10.19   Filing of criminal charges



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.



   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated “The Code of the City of El Mirage,
Arizona,” and may be so cited.  The code may also be cited as the “El
Mirage City Code.”



(Prior Code, Art. 1-1)



§ 10.02  CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES AND CODE.



   (A)   Generally. The rules and the definitions set forth in this
chapter shall be observed in the construction of this code and the ordinances
of the city unless the construction would be inconsistent with either the
manifest intent of the Council or the context of this code or the ordinances
of the city.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-2)



   (B)   Acts by agents. When this code or an ordinance requires an act
to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal,
the requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an
authorized agent.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural. Words of the masculine gender
include the feminine; words in the singular number include the plural and
words in the plural number include the singular.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-9)



   (D)   Joint authority. All words purporting to give “joint
authority” to three or more city officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving the authority to a majority of the officers or other
persons unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the
authority.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-11)



   (E)   Or, and. “Or” may be read “and”, and “and” may be
read “or”, if the sense requires it.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-14)



   (F)   Shall, may. “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is
permissive.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-20)



   (G)   Shall have been. The words “shall have been” include past
and future cases.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-21)



   (H)   Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses,
and the future includes the present.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-25)



   (I)   Time computation. The time within which an act is to be done
as provided in this code or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance,
when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and
including the last, except that if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or
holiday it shall be excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the
whole of Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be
excluded.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-26)



   (J)   Time; reasonable. In all cases where any section of this code
shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to
be given, the reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time only
as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the duty or compliance with
the notice.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-27)



§ 10.03  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rules regarding definitions. All words and phrases
shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage
of the language; but technical words and phrases and  others as may have
acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and
understood according to the peculiar and appropriate meaning.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      BOARD. A board of the city unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-8)



      CITY. The City of El Mirage, Arizona.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-3)



      CODE. The words “the code” or “this code” shall mean the
Code of the City of El Mirage, Arizona, unless the context indicates
otherwise.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-4)



      COMMISSION. A commission of the city unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-8)



      COUNCIL. The Common Council of the City of El Mirage, Arizona.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-5)



      DAY. The period of time between any midnight and the midnight
following.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-6)



      DAYTIME. The period of time between sunrise and sunset.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-7)



      DEPARTMENT. A department of the city unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-8)



      EMPLOYEE. An employee of the city unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-8)



      FOLLOWING. Next after.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-17)



      IN THE CITY or WITHIN THE CITY. All territory over which the city
now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its
police powers or other regulatory powers.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-10)



      MONTH. A calendar month.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-12)



      NIGHTTIME. The period of time between sunset and sunrise.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-7)



      OATH. An affirmation or declaration.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-13)



      OFFICE. An office of the city unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-8)



      OFFICER. An officer of the city unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-8)



      PERSON. Firms, corporations, or voluntary associations, as well
as to individuals, unless plainly inapplicable.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-15)



      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property, except real
property as defined in this section.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-16)



      PRECEDING. Next before.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-17)



      PROPERTY. Real and personal property.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-18)



      REAL PROPERTY. L ands, tenements, and hereditaments.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-19)



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK. “Signature” or
“subscription” includes a mark when the signer cannot write, the
signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a witness
who writes his or her own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s name;
but a SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK can be acknowledged or can serve as a
signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so
sign their own names thereto.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-22)



      STATE. The State of Arizona.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-23)



      TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to a building or land, shall
include any person holding a written or an oral lease or who occupies the
whole or part of the building or land, either alone or with others.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-24)



      WEEK. Seven consecutive days.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-28)



      WRITING. Any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by
ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement, or record is
required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the
English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-29)



      YEAR. A calendar year, except where otherwise provided.



(Prior Code, § 1-3-30)



§ 10.04  ADDITIONAL RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   In addition to the rules of construction specified in §§ 10.02 and
10.03, the rules set forth in §§ 10.04 through 10.07 shall be observed in
the construction of this code.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)



§ 10.05  REFERENCES TO THIS CODE.



   All references to chapters, articles, subchapters, or sections are to
the chapters, articles, subchapters, and sections of this code unless
otherwise specified.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-2)



§ 10.06  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; DIFFERENT CHAPTERS.



   If the provisions of different chapters of this code conflict with or
contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all
matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of the chapter.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-3)



§ 10.07  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; SAME CHAPTER.



   If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same
chapter, the provisions of the section that is last in numerical order shall
prevail unless the construction is inconsistent with the meaning of the
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 1-4-4)



§ 10.08  SECTION HEADINGS.



   Headings of the several sections of this code are intended as a
convenience to indicate the contents of the section and do not constitute
part of the law.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-5)



§ 10.09  EFFECT OF REPEAL.



   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so
provided. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution, or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under
the ordinance repealed.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-6)



§ 10.10  SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this code shall be
severable, and, if any provision of this code is held unconstitutional for
any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality
shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of the code.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-7)



§ 10.11  PROVISIONS AS CONTINUATION OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.



   The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the same
as ordinance provisions previously adopted by the city relating to the same
subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof
and not as new enactments.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.



   (A)   The adoption of this code shall not be construed to repeal or
in any way to affect or modify:



      (1)   Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding
franchises, annexations, dedications, or zoning;



      (2)   Any ordinance making an appropriation;



      (3)   Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any
bond issue may have been authorized;



      (4)   The running of the statute of limitations in force at
the time this code becomes effective;



      (5)   The continued existence and operation of any department,
agency, commission, or officer heretofore legally established or held;



      (6)   Any bond of any public officer;



      (7)   Any taxes, fees, assessments, or other charges incurred
or imposed;



      (8)   Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming,
approving, or accepting any compact or contract with any other municipality,
the state or any county or subdivision thereof, or with the United States or
any agency or instrumentality thereof;



(Prior Code, § 1-9-2)



      (9)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing,
locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street
or public way in the city;



      (10)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and
assessing taxes thereof;



      (11)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or
subdivision in the city.



      (12)   Prescribing the number, classification, duties,
benefits or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent
herewith;



      (13)   Any ordinance relating to zoning;



      (14)   Any ordinance which is temporary although general in
effect;



      (15)   Any ordinance which is special although permanent in
effect;  and



      (16)   Any ordinance the purpose of which has been
accomplished.



   (B)   All ordinances referenced to in division (A) are hereby
recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if
set out at length in this code. The ordinances are on file in the City
Clerk’s office.



Statutory reference:



   Savings clauses for state code, see A.R.S. § 1-104



§ 10.13  REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the city adopted on
final passage on or before July 1, 2008, and not included in such this code
or recognized and continued in force by reference herein, are hereby repealed
from and after the effective date of such code. This repeal shall not be
construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a
subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this section.



§ 10.14  CIVIL HEARINGS; CITATION; ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The City Manager or his or her designee is authorized to
investigate any complaints of violation of those chapters of the code
providing for enforcement by civil sanctions.



   (B)   The City Manager or his or her designee, upon a reasonable
belief that a violation exists, may issue a citation stating generally the
nature of the violation to the respondent. The citation shall be in a format
similar to that of the Arizona uniform traffic ticket and complaint and shall
be issued in the manner provided in A.R.S. § 13-3903. The citation shall
reasonably describe the nature of the violation to the respondent. The
citation shall notify the respondent that, in the event of a failure to
appear, a judgment by default will be entered against him or her, and the
Court will impose a civil sanction not to exceed $1,000, plus any charge for
service of process.



   (C)   As an alternative to the issuance of a citation pursuant to
division (B) above, the City Prosecutor may commence an action by filing a
complaint in Municipal Court.



   (D)   (1)   Service of the citation may be accomplished and will
be deemed proper and complete by any of the following methods:



         (a)   By having the respondent sign the citation with
the promise to appear in Court or schedule a hearing within 30 days of the
issuance of the citation;



         (b)   By hand delivering a copy of the citation to the
respondent, and the filing of an affidavit of service;



         (c)   By receiving an acknowledgment of the receipt of
the citation by first-class mail executed by the respondent within 30
calendar days of the date of mailing the citation; or



         (d)   In the event that service can not be accomplished
as set forth in division (D)(1) or (2) of this section, the city may serve
the respondent by any means allowed by the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure
for the Superior Court. In the event that the city is required to use a
process server to serve the respondent after providing the respondent the
opportunity to acknowledge receipt of the citation previously mailed to
respondent, the Hearing Officer shall include an amount in any judgment to
reimburse the city for the cost of process service of the citation.



      (2)   Each and every day during which the violation occurs is
a separate violation.



(Prior Code, § 1-11-1)



§ 10.15  CIVIL CODE INFRACTION; JURISDICTION; PURPOSE.



   (A)   The City Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to adjudicate
and assess and collect penalties for civil violations of the city code and
other ordinances as declared in §§ 33.01 through 33.43. The City Magistrate
shall serve as the Hearing Officer as provided in A.R.S. § 9-500.12 and this
chapter.



   (B)   The jurisdiction of the City Court over Civil Code violations
shall not be interpreted or applied in any manner to limit the jurisdiction
of the Superior Court over civil actions for declaratory relief, injunctive
relief, abatement of public or private nuisances, or damages, the basis of
which may be an act, omission, or condition in violation of the city code or
other ordinances.



   (C)   The purpose of §§ 10.14 through 10.20 is to provide, as an
additional alternative to other enforcement means, for an informal, speedy,
and inexpensive process for adjudication of Civil Code violations, based upon
an administrative hearing model.



(Prior Code, § 1-11-2)



§ 10.16  CIVIL SANCTIONS.



   If a person pleads responsible or is found to be responsible for a
civil violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance incorporated
herein, the Court shall, unless some other sanction is specifically set forth
elsewhere in the code, impose a civil sanction in an amount not less than $50
nor more than $1,000. In imposing any sanction, the Court shall take into
account the city’s cost of enforcement against the offender.



(Prior Code,  § 1-11-3)



§ 10.17  CIVIL HEARINGS; DUTY TO RESPOND.



   (A)   The respondent shall, within 30 days after service of the
citation, appear in person or through the respondent’s attorney before the
Hearing Officer.



   (B)   If the respondent admits the allegations contained in the
citation, the Hearing Officer shall impose a civil sanction pursuant to
section § 10.16. The Hearing Officer may also order abatement of the
violation pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-499 and the city code.



   (C)   If the respondent denies the allegations contained in the
citation, the Hearing Officer shall set a hearing date within 30 days.



   (D)   Failure to respond timely to a citation or to appear for a
hearing shall result in a default being entered against the respondent. Upon
entering a default, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order as if a
determination that a violation has occurred had been made.



(Prior Code, § 1-11-4)



§ 10.18  CIVIL HEARINGS AND JUDGMENT.



   (A)   At the hearing, the city employee or the City Prosecutor, on
behalf of the city employee responsible for enforcement of code violations,
shall present evidence of the violation and the respondent or his or her
designated representative shall have the opportunity to present evidence. The
city shall have the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that
the respondent was responsible for the violation for which the citation was
issued. Affirmative defenses must be pleaded and proved by the person
asserting the defense.



   (B)   Formal rules of evidence shall not apply and the Hearing
Officer may admit any evidence deemed relevant or probative by the Hearing
Officer.



   (C)   The Hearing Officer, upon decision, shall enter a written
judgment that includes the finding of responsible or not responsible. The
judgment shall include the imposition of a civil penalty and/or the entry of
an abatement agreement or order. The abatement agreement or order may include
an order by the Hearing Officer that the respondent post a financial
guarantee with the city to pay for the cost of cleaning up the property
and/or to comply with the applicable provisions of the city code. The Hearing
Officer may impose other requirements as appropriate.



   (D)   A civil penalty may be assessed pursuant to § 10.16 for each
violation. The Hearing Officer shall assess additional penalties provided by
this code for failure to pay a civil penalty. The penalties shall be subject
to collection and enforcement in the same manner as the judgement.



   (E)   In addition to any penalty provided for in this code, a person
found to be in violation shall be liable for all costs that may be associated
with the city’s bringing the premises into compliance with this code. The
Hearing Officer shall impose restitution for costs as part of the sentence.



   (F)   Any judgment for civil penalties taken pursuant to this
chapter may be collected as any other civil judgment. The City Attorney may
record the judgment with the County Recorder on behalf of the city. The cost
of recording the judgment shall be assessed against the respondent and
collected in the same manner as the judgment.



(Prior Code, § 1-11-5)



§ 10.19  FILING OF CRIMINAL CHARGES.



   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, the city may, at any
time, file criminal charge(s) pursuant to §§ 90.01 through 90.15.



(Prior Code, § 1-11-6)



§ 10.20  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   Final decisions of the Hearing Officer are subject to judicial review
pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. § 12-124.



(Prior Code, § 1-11-7)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this
code, except as otherwise provided in this code, shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided by
state law. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as hereinabove described.



   (B)   Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any
act required by Chapters 70 through 73 of this code constitutes a civil
traffic violation. Civil traffic violations are subject to the provisions of
A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 6, Article 20 and 21, and amendments thereto.



Statutory reference:



   The statutes cited in this division have been repealed. Civil traffic
violations are subject to the provisions of A.R.S. §§ 28-1591 et seq.



   (C)   Violations of Volumes 1 or 2 of the El Mirage City Code can be
declared to be Civil Code infractions which may be adjudicated and enforced
by the City Court, as an additional enforcement alternative to other remedies
provided in this section or remedies and procedures provided for specifically
in the El Mirage City Code and Zoning Ordinance. Use of the Civil Code and
zoning infraction alternative is not mandatory and shall be at the discretion
of the city official undertaking enforcement action.



(Prior Code, Art. 1-8)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY





         31.   OFFICERS





         32.   MAYOR AND COUNCIL





         33.   CITY COURT





         34.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS





         35.   TAX CODE




CHAPTER 30:  ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY



Section



Personnel System



   30.01   Creation and scope



   30.02   Conditions of employment



   30.03   Rules and regulations



   30.04   Political contributions



   30.05   Designation of Personnel Officer



   30.06   Personnel policies and procedures



   30.07   Meet and confer



Purchasing



   30.20   Purpose



   30.21   Definitions



   30.22   General authority to expend funds



   30.23   Purchasing authority



   30.24   Sole source procurement



   30.25   Professional services



   30.26   Emergency purchases



   30.27   Cooperative purchasing



   30.28   Municipal construction projects



   30.29   Enforcement



   30.30   Audit of records



   30.31   Expenditures; signatures on checks and ratification



   30.32   Protests, suspension and/or debarment



   30.33   Non-discrimination and equal access, and civil rights
statement



   30.34   Minority-owned business enterprises (MBE), women-owned
business enterprises (WBE) and disadvantage business entities (DBE)



   30.35   Disposition of surplus property



Travel Expenses



   30.50   Travel expenses



Civil Preparedness and Disaster



   30.65   Purposes



   30.66   Definitions



   30.67   Civil preparedness organization



   30.68   Powers and duties



   30.69   Mutual aid



   30.70   Immunity of city and representatives thereof



PERSONNEL SYSTEM



§ 30.01  CREATION AND SCOPE.



   There is hereby adopted a merit system for the employees of the city,
the provisions of which shall apply to all employees of the city, except
elected officials, officers of the city appointed by the Council, persons
engaged under contract to supply expert, professional or technical services,
temporary employees, and volunteer personnel who receive no regular
compensation from the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-3-1)



§ 30.02  CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT.



   The appointment, promotion, and tenure of every employee shall be
conditioned solely on merit and fitness and the satisfactory performance of
the duties and responsibilities assigned.  No employee or applicant for
employment shall be discriminated against on the basis of race, color,
religion, sex, political affiliation, or handicapped status.



(Prior Code, § 3-3-2)



§ 30.03  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Council may adopt, by resolution, rules and regulations to give
effect to this subchapter, which may be modified or changed from time to
time, but the rules and regulations shall follow the generally accepted
principles of good personnel administration.



(Prior Code, § 3-3-3)



§ 30.04  POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS.



   No officer, official, or employee of the city shall use any influence
or pressure upon any employee to obtain any assessment or contribution of
money or time, either direct or indirect, for any political campaign or
personal gain.



(Prior Code, § 3-3-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 30.05  DESIGNATION OF PERSONNEL OFFICER.



   (A)   The Personnel Director is hereby designated the Personnel
Officer of the city and shall be responsible for the overall administration
of the merit system and the recruitment, hiring, promotion, and selection of
all city employees.



   (B)   Until such time as the city employs a Personnel Director, and
during any period in which the position of Personnel Director is vacant, the
City Manager will assume the duties and responsibilities of the Personnel
Director. In the event that both the Personnel Director and the City Manager
positions are vacant, the City Council shall appoint an individual to serve
as acting Personnel Director on an interim basis, until such time as one of
those two positions is occupied.



(Prior Code, § 3-3-5)



§ 30.06  PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Council shall, by resolution, adopt a personnel policy and
procedures manual.



   (B)   The city is an equal opportunity employer and shall abide by
all applicable state and federal discrimination regulations.



(Prior Code, § 3-3-6)



§ 30.07  MEET AND CONFER.



   (A)   Findings and purpose.



      (1)   The citizens of El Mirage have a fundamental interest in
the development of harmonious and cooperative relations between city
management, elected officials, administrators, and the employees of El Mirage;



      (2)   Recognition by the city of the fundamental rights of
public employees to organize and full acceptance of the principle and
procedure of full communication between public employers and public
employees, can alleviate various forms of strife and unrest;



      (3)   The city, its employees and employee organization, have
a basic obligation to the public to assure the orderly and continuous
operation and functions of government;



      (4)   Strikes, work stoppages, slowdowns, and other concerted
efforts designed to disrupt city services, are contrary to the public good
and are strictly prohibited. Participation in these efforts may be grounds
for termination;



      (5)    It is the purpose of this section to obligate the city
management, city employees and their representatives, acting within the
framework of law, to enter into discussions with affirmative willingness to
resolve issues, grievances, and disputes relating to working conditions,
wages, benefits, and hours of work. It is also the purpose of this section to
promote harmonious employer-employee relations by providing a uniform basis
for recognizing the right of public employees to join, or refrain from
joining, an organization of their own choice.  Also, it is their right to be
represented by the organization in their dealings with the city in accordance
with the provisions of this section. Representation shall only be provided on
matters subject to meeting and conferring, in accordance with division
(C)(1)(a). Additionally, this section provides that the results of agreements
between the employer and its employees shall be drafted into written
memorandums of understanding.



      (6)   It is not the intent of this section to conflict with
the Arizona Revised Statutes with regard to wages and benefits as it relates
to public safety employee organizational rights. In the event such a conflict
exists, the statutes are intended to prevail.



   (B)   Employee groups.



      (1)   There shall be two groups within the city. It shall
include:



         (a)   All police officers in classifications up to and
including Sergeants;



         (b)   Firefighters up to and including the rank of
Captain.



      (2)   Authorized representation of an employee group shall be
determined by the presentation of a petition (or membership applications) to
the City Manager containing the signatures of at least 51% of the employees
in the above designated groups. The petition shall designate the employee
group and the employee organization designated to represent those employees.
Upon verification of the signatures, the City Manager shall designate the
named employee organization, as the official and exclusive employee
organization for representation purposes provided for by this section. The
designated employee organization shall have the right to bi-weekly or monthly
dues deductions, if approved by the employees of the organization.



   (C)   Meeting and conferring.



      (1)   (a)   An employee organization that has been verified
by the City Manager, shall submit a proposal to the City Manager relating to
hours, safety regulations and other working conditions, by December 1, of
each year.



         (b)   In the first year of this section, the employee
organization shall submit its initial proposal by April 1.



      (2)   Upon receiving a proposal from a verified employee
organization, the City Manager, shall submit a written response to the
proposal to the employee organization within 30 days from receipt of the
proposal.



      (3)   Within ten days from receipt of the City Manager’s
response, representatives of the employee organization and the City Manager,
as determined by the employee organization, shall begin “meeting and
conferring” at mutually agreed upon locations and times, for the purpose of
entering into a written memorandum of understanding relating to the proposal
regarding working conditions, wages, benefits, and hours. Meetings shall be
at least three hours in duration, unless mutually agreed otherwise. Meetings
shall take place weekly until an agreement is reached, or impasse is declared.



      (4)   The City Manager, or his or her designated
representative, and the representative of the employee organization, shall
initial all areas of agreement. Those areas which were not agreed to shall be
outlined as areas in dispute. If agreement has not been reached by March 10,
a federal mediator will be requested by the moving party. The City Manager,
the employee representatives, and the federal mediator, will meet as often as
necessary to reach an agreement.



      (5)   If an agreement still has not been reached by April 1,
an arbitrator will be requested by the moving party from the American
Arbitration Association. Standard rules of the American Arbitration
Association will be utilized in the section and use of the arbitration.
However, selection of the arbitrator shall be limited to residents of
Yavapai, Coconino, or Maricopa County.



      (6)   All issues not previously agreed to will be submitted to
the arbitrator for resolution. On or before May 1, or as soon thereafter as
is practicable, all areas of agreement, as well as those areas in dispute and
still under consideration, and the recommendations of the arbitrator, shall
be submitted to Mayor and Council for their consideration. The Mayor and
Council may also take whatever actions they feel appropriate with regard to
those areas in dispute. Final action by the Mayor and Council shall
constitute the memorandum of understanding.



(Ord. O00-01-04, passed 1-27-2000; Ord. O16-09-08, passed 9-6-2016; Res.
R16-09-20, passed 9-6- 2016; Ord. O17-06-07, passed 6-20-2017)



PURCHASING



§ 30.20  PURPOSE.



   The purchasing code is designed to direct city personnel in making
purchases efficiently and effectively by providing systematic guidance for
municipal expenditures. The purchasing code separates purchasing authority
into two categories: "Formal" and "Informal," and mandates the procurement of
"formal" purchases, and disposition of surplus property.



(Ord. O16-06-06, passed 6-21-2016; Res. R16-06-17, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 30.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.



   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager or designee.



   CONTRACTS. All executed agreements for the procurement of commodities,
services, construction or materials. The essential elements of a contract are
an offer and an acceptance of that offer. Contracts are considered legally
binding written agreements and an obligation between the city and competent
parties.



   COOPERATIVE PURCHASING. A procurement conducted by, or on behalf of,
more than one public procurement agency in accordance with A.R.S. § 41-2632.



   INVITATION FOR BID (IFB). A formal solicitation document inviting
contractors and/or suppliers to participate in a sealed bid process for
specific materials and/or services.



   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Services where the primary effort involved is
intellectual or conceptual rather than physical; where the services are to be
rendered by providers with extensive formal education or appropriate state
licensure and expertise in a specific field; and where the application of one
or more of the following would be involved: creativity, innovation,
interpretation, judgment unusual talent, and/or treatment.



   REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL (RFP). A formal solicitation document requesting
potential providers of goods and services submit a proposal. The solicitation
document specifies a city goal and requests the submission of proposals on
the methods of attaining that goal. An evaluation committee will award
proposals based on measurable weighted criterion.



   RESPONSIVE. A submission by a contractor, supplier, and/or firm that
fully conforms in all material respects to the solicitation requirements,
including form and substance.



   SOLE SOURCE. A supplier who is the only one that possesses the unique
ability or capability to meet the particular source requirements; therefore,
no competition for the required materials, goods, and/or services is
obtainable.



   SOLICITATION. The formal process of the city seeking information, bids,
qualifications, or proposals from prospective contractors and/or suppliers.



(Ord. O16-06-06, passed 6-21-2016; Res. R16-06-17, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 30.22  GENERAL AUTHORITY TO EXPEND FUNDS.



   Council approval of the annual municipal budget shall be construed to
include authority for municipal expenditures as set forth in the budget,
except as may be otherwise provided by the Council by resolution. Although
purchases have been approved through the annual municipal budget, all
purchases will follow the purchasing code as set forth in §§ 30.23 through
30.35.



(Ord. O16-06-06, passed 6-21-2016; Res. R16-06-17, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 30.23  PURCHASING AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The City Manager shall authorize purchases up to and including
$30,000; these purchases are deemed "informal" purchases.



      (1)   The City Manager may establish procedures for "informal"
purchases as deemed necessary.



      (2)   Purchases up to $5,000 do not require quotations;
purchases in excess of $5,000 and up to $30,000 require a minimum of three
telephone quotations.



      (3)   Violation of division (A) will be administered according
to the City of El Mirage Personnel Policy Manual.



   (B)   The City Council shall approve all purchases greater than
$30,000. These purchases shall constitute "formal" purchases.



      (1)   "Formal" purchases shall be sought through one of the
following:



         (a)   Invitation for Bid (IFB); or



         (b)   Request for Proposal (RFP).



      (2)   All formal purchases shall be published in accordance
with the A.R.S. § 41-2533; § 41-2579; and §§ 39-202 through  39-205.



      (3)   The Council may waive "formal" purchase requirements
when it determines it is in the best interest of the city.



      (4)   Purchases may not be artificially separated, fragmented,
or split to bypass "formal" purchase requirements.



      (5)   The City Manager may authorize increases up to $30,000
for "formal" purchases previously approve by Council before seeking
additional approval.



      (6)   Sealed bid procedures.



         (a)   A request for sealed bids may include the
requirement that each bidder furnishes a performance bond, in cash or
otherwise, sufficient to secure the performance sought.



         (b)   Sealed bids shall be received on behalf of the
Council by the City Clerk. Each bid shall be identified, on its envelope, as
a bid. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and location designated in
the "advertisement for bids." A tabulation of all bids received shall be
submitted for action to the Council at a regular or special meeting. The City
Manager shall report to the Council his or her findings as to whether each
bid meets the city’s requirements and shall further advise the Council on
issues relative to awarding the contract. A tabulation of all bids received
shall be retained on file for public inspection during regular business hours
following the bid opening. A public records request may be required for
viewing bid documents.



      (c)   Awarding of contracts based upon sealed bids shall be by
Council action and the Council shall retain the right to reject any or all
bids. Notice of the provisions of this section shall be included in the call
for bids. In the event of the rejection of all bids received by the Council,
or of partial rejection of any bid, the Council may have the City Manager
negotiate the terms of a contract on behalf of the Council.



      (d)   Contracts shall be awarded by Council to the lowest
responsive and best bidder, except as otherwise provided herein.



      (e)   If two or more bids received are determined to be the
lowest responsive and best, and if the public interest will not permit the
delay of re-advertising for bids, Council shall determine the successful
bidder by lot.



      (f)   The city may provide additional notice to foster and
promote competition such as direct mailing, telephoning, or emailing notice
to prospective bidders.



      (g)   Unless the right of rejection is exercised as provided
by § 30.23(B)(5)(c) or § 30.32(C), the purchase or contract shall be made
from and with the lowest responsive and best bidder for the entire purchase,
contract or for any part thereof. In determining the lowest responsive and
best bidder, the Council shall consider:



         1.   The best overall value for the city provided by the
bidder;



         2.   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to
perform the contract or provide the service required;



         3.   The ability of the bidder to perform the contract
or provide the services promptly or within the specified time, without delay
or interference;



         4.   The quality of performance of previous contracts;



         5.   The compliance with previous and existing
compliance by the bidder with laws and regulations of the federal, state,
and/or city by the bidder;



         6.   The financial resources and/or ability of the
bidder to perform the contract; and/or



         7.   The quality, availability, and adaptability of the
supplies or services.



(Ord. O16-06-06, passed 6-21-2016; Res. R16-06-17, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 30.24  SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT.



   (A)   City Manager Authority. The City Manager is exempt from
requirements in this chapter for procurement and payment of utilities,
Council approved debt service, bond and financing costs, employee costs,
employer benefit costs, insurance payments, banking fees and charges, pass
through payments, reimbursements, taxes and assessments, and payments to
other governments and political subdivisions of the state of Arizona.



   (B)   Council authority. A sole source procurement request which
exceeds the bid threshold identified in § 30.23(B) shall be subject to the
approval of Council when there has been a written determination that
competition is not available and there is only one known source for the
supply of materials, goods, and/or services.



(Ord. O16-06-06, passed 6-21-2016; Res. R16-06-17, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 30.25  PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.



   (A)   The procurement of professional services, including but not
limited to accounting, auditing, engineering, or legal services, are hereby
exempt from the requirements of § 30.23(B) when it is determined by the City
Manager that it is in the city's best interest to procure these professional
services by direct selection. The exemption applies to both the "formal"
purchase process and Council action except as provided in division (B) below.



   (B)    Contracts for construction and for the services of architects
and engineers to be used in connection with construction contracts are
governed by the provisions of A.R.S., Title 34.



      (1)   The following professional services shall be procured in
accordance with A.R.S. § 34-603:



         (a)   Architect services;



         (b)   Assayer services;



         (c)   Construction-manager-at-risk construction services;



         (d)   Design-build construction;



         (e)   Engineer services;



         (f)   Geologist services;



         (g)   Job-order-contracting construction services;



         (h)   Landscape architect services; or



         (i)   Land surveying services.



(Ord. O16-06-06, passed 6-21-2016; Res. R16-06-17, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 30.26  EMERGENCY PURCHASES.



   (A)   The City Manager may make emergency procurements if there
exists a threat to public health, welfare, or safety, or if a situation
exists which makes compliance with the procurement process specified in §
30.23 contrary to the public interest. Emergency procurements shall be made
with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances.



   (B)   A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for
the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract
file.



   (C)   Whenever an emergency expenditure in excess of the amount
stated in § 30.23(B) is made, a report specifying the nature of the
emergency and the amount of the expenditure shall be made to the Council at a
regularly scheduled Council meeting.



(Ord. O16-06-06, passed 6-21-2016; Res. R16-06-17, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 30.27  COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.



   The city may participate in, sponsor, conduct, or administer
cooperative, joint, group and interstate cooperative procurement to establish
contracts or price negotiations for goods, services, or construction services
that use source selection methods substantially equivalent to those set forth
in § 30.23.



(Ord. O16-06-06, passed 6-21-2016; Res. R16-06-17, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 30.28  MUNICIPAL CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS.



   The City of El Mirage shall complete construction projects in
compliance with A.R.S. § 34-201.



(Ord. O16-06-06, passed 6-21-2016; Res. R16-06-17, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 30.29  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Manager to enforce the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The City Manager shall prepare such reports as may be
necessary for the Council to act in keeping with the provisions of this
subchapter, and the City Clerk shall maintain the records to demonstrate that
the provisions of this subchapter have been met.



   (C)   The records of payments for goods or services shall include
written documentation that the provisions of this subchapter have been met.



(Ord. O16-06-06, passed 6-21-2016; Res. R16-06-17, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 30.30  AUDIT OF RECORDS.



   The annual audit of municipal records shall include an examination of
records under this subchapter.



(Ord. O16-06-06, passed 6-21-2016; Res. R16-06-17, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 30.31  EXPENDITURES; SIGNATURES ON CHECKS AND RATIFICATION.



   All checks and back up materials for expenditures shall bear two
signatures of the following four positions: the City Manager, the City Clerk,
the City Finance Director, or the Assistant Finance Director. Checks written
by the Court shall bear two signatures of the following three positions:
Director of Court Services, Judicial Supervisor, or Judicial Lead.



(Ord. O16-06-06, passed 6-21-2016; Res. R16-06-17, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 30.32  PROTESTS, SUSPENSION AND/OR DEBARMENT.



   (A)   Protests can only be made for "formal" purchases. Any person
or firm who has submitted a bid or proposal may protest a "formal" purchase
solicitation issued by the city prior to award. Protests cannot be made by a
third party. The bidder may file a protest for:



      (1)   The rejection of a request for changes in the formal
solicitation;



      (2)   Scope of work;



      (3)   Suspension and/or debarment from the procurement
process; or



      (4)   The apparent lowest and best bid.



   (B)   The protest shall include, at a minimum:



      (1)   The protestor's name, street address, phone number, fax
number (if any) or e-mail address (if any), signature of the protestor or its
representative, and a copy of the formal solicitation document or contract;
and



      (2)   A detailed statement of legal and factual grounds of the
protest including relevant documents.



   (C)   The written protest must be filed with the City Clerk and
include items in division (A)(2). The Finance Director shall have 15 business
days to respond.



   (D)   The protestor may file an appeal within 15 business days of
the date of the Finance Director's response. The City Manager shall have the
final authority to resolve protests. The City Manager shall issue written
decision within 15 business days after an appeal has been filed. The decision
shall contain an explanation regarding the basis of the decision.



   (E)   The City Manager has the sole authority to debar or suspend a
vendor, contractor, and/or professional service provider from participating
in city procurement for a period up to three years, based upon the following
factors:



      (1)   Insufficient financial ability, equipment, or personnel
to perform the contract;



      (2)   Breach of contractual obligations to city, public and/or
private agencies;



      (3)   Failure to comply with the requests of an investigation;



      (4)   Conviction for committing a criminal offense as an
incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or
subcontract, or in the performance of the contract or subcontract;



      (5)   Conviction under state or federal statutes of
embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification, or destruction of
records, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of
business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously, and
directly affects responsibility as an Arizona contractor;



      (6)   Conviction under state and federal antitrust statutes
arising out of the submission of bids or proposals;



      (7)   Violation of contract provisions  determined by the
City Manager to be so serious as to justify debarment action, including but
not limited to the following:



         (a)   Deliberate failure without good cause to perform
in accordance with the specifications or within the time limit provided in
the contract; or



         (b)   A recent record of failure to perform or of
unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one or more
contracts; provided that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance
caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall be considered to be
a basis for debarment.



      (8)   Any other cause the City Manager determines to be so
serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as an Arizona contractor,
by another governmental entity for any cause listed in regulations, or
outstanding contract disputes or claims or current litigation with the city.



   (F)   The City Manager shall issue written statement which shall
state the reason for debarment or suspension and rights to appeal.



(Ord. O16-06-06, passed 6-21-2016; Res. R16-06-17, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 30.33  NON-DISCRIMINATION AND EQUAL ACCESS, AND CIVIL RIGHTS STATEMENT.



   The City of El Mirage prohibits discrimination on the basis of age,
race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin
in its admission or access to, or treatment or employment in its federally
assisted program and activities. Any contractor, subcontractor, and/or vendor
receiving benefit from the City of El Mirage is subject to Title VI of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964, § 504 of Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Title II of
the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, the Age Discrimination Act of
1975, and Title IX of the Education Amendment of 1972, and offers all persons
the opportunity to participate in programs or activities regardless of age,
race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin.



(Ord. O16-06-06, passed 6-21-2016; Res. R16-06-17, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 30.34  MINORITY-OWNED BUSINESS ENTERPRISES (MBE), WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESS
ENTERPRISES (WBE) AND DISADVANTAGE BUSINESS ENTITIES (DBE).



   (A)   The City of El Mirage will endeavor to ensure in every way
possible that disadvantaged, minority, and women-owned businesses shall have
every opportunity to participate in providing professional services, goods,
and construction contracts to the city without being discriminated against on
the basis of age, race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or
national origin.



   (B)   The City of El Mirage is responsible for ensuring compliance
with § 3, part 135, of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968,
involving all contracts and subcontracts.



(Ord. O16-06-06, passed 6-21-2016; Res. R16-06-17, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 30.35  DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS PROPERTY.



   (A)   The sale and disposition of property by a city or town is
governed by A.R.S. § 9-402.



   (B)   The sale and disposition of property must be advertised for
bid in accordance with A.R.S. § 39-204.



   (C)   The City Manager may act on behalf of the city in all matters
pertaining to the disposition of excess or surplus equipment material, and
property.



   (D)   Unless otherwise authorized by law, city code, ordinances, or
regulations no department shall transfer, sell trade, donate, or otherwise
dispose of supplies, equipment, materials, or property owned by the city
without authorization from the City Manager.



(Ord. O16-06-06, passed 6-21-2016; Res. R16-06-17, passed 6-21-2016)



TRAVEL EXPENSES



§ 30.50  TRAVEL EXPENSES.



   (A)   Not all specific information is listed in this subchapter; one
shall consult administrative policies and procedures for more or detailed
information.



   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the Mayor,
members of the Common Council and City staff, or any other person authorized
by the Common Council, and shall pertain to expenses incident to attendance
at conferences approved by the Common Council and attended for the benefit
and in the interest of the city.



   (C)   Wherever prior arrangements can be made for travel incident to
conferences attended for the benefit and in the interest of the city, the
individual will arrange in advance, when possible, for the following items to
be billed directly to the city:



      (1)   Transportation, including air travel and car rental;



      (2)   Lodging;



      (3)   Registration fees and other costs incidental to the
program or conference; and



      (4)   Any other usual or ordinary costs for which advance
billing arrangements can be made.



   (D)   Wherever billing arrangements cannot be made for any of the
items listed in division (C) above, city checks can be obtained to pay for
the items in advance or to reimburse the individual authorized to attend the
conference only upon presentation of a valid voucher or receipt evidencing
the actual cost.



   (E)   For out-of-pocket expenses which cannot be paid in advance or
billed directly to the city, a per diem allowance shall be advanced for each
day of anticipated attendance at the conference or program. Expenses to be
covered by this allowance include but are not limited to the following:



      (1)   Meals;



      (2)   Tips;



      (3)   Entertainment reasonably related to the city’s benefit;



      (4)   Intricacy transportation, including buses and taxis;
and/or



      (5)   Telephone calls incidental to the educational program.



   (F)   The procedure for per diem advances and reimbursements shall
be as follows.



      (1)   Advances. Advances will be made by the Finance
Department in an amount to be determined by city policy.



      (2)   Requests. Requests for advances must be submitted to the
Finance Department no later than five days prior to the date of travel.



      (3)   Verification. An individual must actually demonstrate
attendance at the conference for the number of days for which an advance has
been made.



      (4)   Excess. In the event that an individual has received an
allowance for days in excess of those actually in attendance at a conference,
that amount must be returned to the Finance Department within five days of
the date of return.



   (G)   Individuals using their personal automobiles for travel to or
from seminars and conferences for the benefit and in the interest of the city
may be reimbursed in an amount to be determined by city policy.



(Prior Code, Art. 3-6)



CIVIL PREPAREDNESS AND DISASTER



§30.65  PURPOSES.



   The purposes of this subchapter are to:



   (A)   Reduce vulnerability of people and the community to damage,
injury, and loss of life and property resulting from natural or human-made
catastrophes, riots, or hostile military or paramilitary action;



   (B)   Prepare for prompt and efficient rescue, care, and treatment
of persons victimized or threatened by disaster;



   (C)   Provide a setting conducive to the rapid and orderly start of
restoration and rehabilitation of persons and property affected by disasters;



   (D)   Clarify and strengthen the roles of the Mayor, Council,
Manager, and city agencies in prevention of, preparation for, response to,
and recovery from disasters;



   (E)   Authorize and provide for cooperation in disaster prevention,
preparedness, response, and recovery;



   (F)   Authorize and provide for coordination of activities relating
to disaster prevention, preparedness, response, and recovery by agencies and
officers of the city, agencies of the private sector, and similar activities
in which the federal government, the state, and its political subdivisions
may participate; and



   (G)   Provide a disaster management system embodying all aspects of
pre-disaster preparedness and post-disaster response.



(Prior Code, § 3-5-1)



§ 30.66  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIVIL PREPAREDNESS. The organization, administration, trained manpower,
facilities, equipment, material, supplies, programs, emergency plans, ability
to execute emergency plans, and all other measures necessary and incidental
thereto relating to disaster prevention preparedness response and recovery by
all governmental and private sector agencies to protect or save health, life,
or property.



   DIRECTOR. The Director of Civil Preparedness.



   DISASTER. The occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe
damage, injury, or loss of life or property, or extreme peril to the safety
of persons or property, resulting from any natural or manmade causes,
including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, blight,
drought, famine, infestation, air contamination, epidemic, explosion, riot,
or other acts of civil disobedience which endanger life or property, or
hostile military or paramilitary action.



   EMERGENCY. The existence of a disaster within the city limits requiring
immediate action by the emergency forces of the city.



   EMERGENCY FORCES. All city governmental and private sector agencies,
volunteers, facilities, equipment, trained manpower, and other resources
required to perform civil preparedness functions.



   LOCAL EMERGENCY. The existence of a disaster within the city limits,
when the situation is or is likely to be beyond the capability and resources
of the city as determined by the Mayor and which requires the combined
efforts of other political subdivisions.



   REGULATIONS. The orders, rules, and emergency procedures deemed
essential for civil preparedness.



   STATE OF EMERGENCY. The duly proclaimed existence of a disaster within
the state, except a disaster resulting in a state of war emergency which is
or is likely to be beyond the capabilities and resources of any single
county, city, or town and requires the combined efforts of the state and the
political subdivision.



   STATE OF WAR EMERGENCY. The situation which exists immediately whenever
the nation is attacked or upon receipt by the state of a warning from the
federal government indicating that such an attack is imminent.



(Prior Code, § 3-5-2)



§ 30.67  CIVIL PREPAREDNESS ORGANIZATION.



   By action of the Council, an emergency operations plan is adopted
annually, in part to identify the organization for civil preparedness for
natural or human-made disasters. This plan is published in joint with the
city and Maricopa County Emergency Management, and is in support of the
Maricopa County Emergency Operations Plan. It is in accordance with A.R.S.
§§ 26-301 et seq. and the Maricopa County Civil Defense Resolution dated
July 12, 1971. Three copies of the adopted plan shall be kept at the City
Clerk’s office.



(Prior Code, § 3-5-3)



§ 30.68  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Council:



      (1)   Shall have the power to make, amend, and rescind
regulations, not inconsistent with regulations promulgated by the Governor,
necessary for civil preparedness, which regulations shall have the full
effect of this subchapter when a copy is filed in the office of the Clerk.
Existing ordinances and regulations, or ordinances and regulations issued
under authority of A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter 2, in conflict therewith, are
suspended during the time and to the extent that they are in conflict;



      (2)   May appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain
and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for civil preparedness
purposes; and



      (3)   In the absence of specific authority in state emergency
plans and procedures, the Council shall take emergency measures as deemed
necessary to carry out the provisions of A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter 2.



   (B)   In a state of war emergency, the Council may waive procedures
and formalities required by law pertaining to the performance of public work,
entering into contracts, incurring obligations, employing permanent and
temporary workers, utilizing volunteer workers, renting equipment, purchasing
and distributing supplies, materials, and facilities, and appropriating and
expending public funds when the Council determines and declares that strict
compliance with those procedures and formalities may prevent, hinder, or
delay mitigation of the effects of the state of war emergency. The city shall
be exempt during the emergency from budget limitations prescribed by A.R.S.
§ 42-303.



Statutory reference:



   The statute cited in this division has been repealed and replaced by
A.R.S. §§ 42-17104 through 42-17106



   (C)    The Mayor, in addition to the powers granted by other
provisions of the law or city ordinance (see § 32.043), may, by
proclamation, declare an emergency or a local emergency to exist. The
proclamation may be rescinded by a majority of the Council after 24 hours.



   (D)   (1)   The Director is responsible in non-emergency periods
to act on behalf of the Mayor and Council to develop a readiness for the
city’s civil preparedness and for coordinated operations in disaster
situations.



      (2)   During emergencies, the Director shall act as the
principal advisor or aide to the Mayor on emergency operations. His or her
major responsibility is to assure coordination among emergency forces and
with higher and adjacent governments, by assuring that the emergency
operations coordination functions effectively. He or she shall assist the
Mayor in the execution of operations, plans, and procedures required by the
emergency.



      (3)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive disaster
basic plan which shall be adopted and maintained by resolution of the Council
upon the recommendations of the Director. In the preparation of this plan as
it pertains to city organization, it is the intent that the services,
equipment, facilities, and personnel of all existing departments and agencies
be used to the fullest extent.



   (E)   The disaster plan shall be considered supplementary to this
subchapter and shall have the effect of law whenever emergencies, as defined
in this subchapter, have been proclaimed.



(Prior Code, § 3-5-4)



§ 30.69  MUTUAL AID.



   In periods of local emergency, as declared pursuant to this subchapter,
the city is hereby granted full power to provide mutual aid to any affected
area in accordance with local ordinances, resolutions, emergency plans, or
agreements therefore. The city may request from state agencies mutual aid
including personnel, equipment, and other available resources to assist the
city during the local emergency in accordance with emergency plans or at the
direction of the Governor.



(Prior Code, § 3-5-5)



§ 30.70  IMMUNITY OF CITY AND REPRESENTATIVES THEREOF.



   (A)   The city shall not be liable for any claim based upon the
exercise or performance of, or the failure to exercise or perform, a
discretionary function or duty on the part of the city or any employee of the
city, except willful misconduct, gross negligence, or bad faith of any such
employee, in carrying out the provisions of A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter 2.



   (B)   The immunities from liability, exemptions from laws,
ordinances and rules, all pensions, relief, disability worker’s
compensation, and other benefits which apply to the activity of officers,
agents, or employees of the city when performing their respective functions
within the limits of the city shall apply to them to the same degree and
extent while engaged in the performance of any of their functions and duties
extraterritorially under the provisions of this subchapter, excepting willful
misconduct, gross negligence, or bad faith.



   (C)   Volunteers duly enrolled or registered for services in a local
emergency, a state of emergency, or a state of war emergency in carrying out,
complying with, or attempting to comply with, any regulations issued pursuant
to A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter 2, or any local ordinance, or performing any of
their authorized functions, duties, or training for the performance of their
authorized functions or duties, shall have the same degree of responsibility
for their actions and enjoy immunities as officers and employees of the state
and its political subdivisions performing similar work.



(Prior Code, § 3-5-6)



CHAPTER 31:  OFFICERS



Section



Generally



   31.01   Officers



   31.02   Additional officers



   31.03   Bond



   31.04   Vacancies; holding more than one office



   31.05   Additional powers and duties



   31.06   Appointment of Council member as officer



Specific Officers



   31.20   City Manager



   31.21   City Clerk



   31.22   Police Chief



   31.23   City Engineer



   31.24   City Attorney



   31.25   City Judge



   31.26   Fire Chief



GENERALLY



§ 31.01  OFFICERS.



   There are hereby created the offices of City Manager, City Clerk,
Police Chief, City Engineer, City Attorney, Fire Chief, and City Judge. The
Manager and Judge shall be appointed by the Council and shall serve at the
pleasure of the Council except as provided in § 33.19.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-1)  (Res. R05-04-13, passed 4-28-2005; Ord. O05-04-05,
passed 5-12-2005)



§ 31.02  ADDITIONAL OFFICERS.



   The Council may appoint and remove from time to time such other
officers as it may deem necessary and that are not provided for in this code
or state statute.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-2)



§ 31.03  BOND.



   The Council may require each officer of the city to give bond for the
due discharge of his or her duties in such sums and with such security as it
may direct and approve as determined by resolution. The city shall pay the
costs of the bond. Nothing in this section shall preclude the city from
obtaining a blanket bond pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. § 9-302.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-3)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 9-274



§ 31.04  VACANCIES; HOLDING MORE THAN ONE OFFICE.



   Any vacancy that shall occur in any city office shall be filled by
appointment by the Council, provided that one person may hold more than one
office and that, at the discretion of the Council, the functions of a city
official may be validly performed and discharged by a deputy or another city
official, or an otherwise qualified individual not holding office but
employed at the pleasure of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-4)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 9-274



§ 31.05  ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.



   In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this code, each
officer shall have such further powers, perform such further duties, and hold
such other office as may be provided by the Council through ordinance,
resolution, or order.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-5)



§ 31.06  APPOINTMENT OF COUNCIL MEMBER AS OFFICER.



   No member of the Council shall be appointed as an officer of the city
for two years following resignation from the Council or upon completion of
the Council member’s term of office.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-6)



SPECIFIC OFFICERS



§ 31.20  CITY MANAGER.



   (A)   Office created. The Office of the City Manager is hereby
created and established. The City Manager shall be appointed by the Council
wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive ability and
qualifications and shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council.



   (B)   Bond. The City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond
to be approved by the Council in such sum as may be determined by the
Council, and the bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of
the duties imposed upon the Manager as herein prescribed. Any premium for the
bond shall be a proper charge against the city. Nothing in this division
shall preclude the city from obtaining a blanket bond pursuant to the
provisions of A.R.S. § 9-302.



   (C)   Compensation. The Manager shall receive such compensation as
per contract.



   (D)   Removal procedure. The Manager may be removed as per contract.



   (E)   Powers and duties. The City Manager shall be the
administrative head of the city government under the direction and control of
the Council, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter. He or she shall
be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all affairs of
the city. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head and
not as a limitation thereof, he or she shall have the following additional
powers and duties:



      (1)   General administrative supervision. Execute, on behalf
of the Council, general administrative supervision and control of the affairs
of the city;



      (2)   Appointment and removal authority. Appoint, remove,
suspend, promote, and demote all employees of the city, except where such
authority is specifically granted to the Council herein. The power of
appointment and removal of officers and employees is subject to all
applicable personnel ordinances, rules, and regulations. The City Manager
shall exercise the authority delegated to him or her by the City Council to
prescribe the duties and compensation of and to appoint, remove, suspend, and
demote the City Engineer, Fire Chief, and Chief of Police, subject to all
applicable personnel ordinances, rules, and regulations;



      (3)   Attendance at Council meetings. Attend meetings of the
Council with the duty of reporting on or discussing any matter concerning the
affairs of the departments, boards, services, or activities under his or her
supervision upon which the Council shall be informed;



      (4)   Coordination of administrative functions. Coordinate the
administrative functions and operations of the various boards, divisions, and
services of the city government and, on its behalf, carry out policies,
rules, regulations, and ordinances adopted by it, relating to the
administration of the affairs of the departments, boards, divisions, or
services;



      (5)   Budget. Cause to be prepared and submitted to him or her
by each department, board, division, or service of the city government
itemized annual estimates of expenditures required by them for capital
outlay, salaries, wages, and miscellaneous operating costs, to tabulate the
same into a preliminary consolidated municipal budget and submit the same to
the Council annually on the date specified by them, with his or her
recommendations as to any increases, decreases, cancellations, transfers, or
changes in any of the items included in the preliminary budget;



      (6)   Recommendations to Council. Analyze and supervise the
functions, duties, and activities of the various departments, boards, and
services of the city government and of all employees thereof, and to make
such recommendations to the Council with reference thereto, as, in his or her
judgment, will result, if made effective, in the highest degree of efficiency
in the overall operation of the city government;



      (7)   Development of improvement projects and programs.
Develop and organize necessary improvement projects and programs and aid and
assist the Council and the various departments and boards in carrying the
same through to successful conclusion;



      (8)   Public relations. Serve as a public relations officer of
the city government and endeavor to adjust all complaints filed against any
employee, department, or service thereof to the end that every effort may be
made to satisfy all citizens that their city government is being operated in
their behalf with the highest degree of efficiency;



      (9)   Property manager. Authorized to negotiate and commit the
city, upon approval by Council, to act in any act required of a property
manager.



      (10)   Additional duties. Perform such other duties as may be
required of him or her by the Council, not inconsistent with the laws of the
state or the ordinances of the city.



   (F)   Limitations upon responsibility. The City Manager shall not
exercise any policy making or legislative functions whatsoever, nor attempt
to commit or bind the Council or any member thereof to any action, plan, or
program requiring official action of the Council. It is not intended by this
section to grant any authority to, or impose any duty upon, the City Manager
which is vested in or imposed by general law or city ordinances in any city
commission, board, officer, or employee except as herein specifically set
forth.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-1)  (Res. R05-04-13, passed 4-28-2005; Ord. O05-04-05,
passed 5-12-2005; Ord. O10-10-16, passed 10-14-2010; Ord. O11-04-09, passed
4-28-2011; Res. R18-02-04, passed 2-22-2018; Ord. O18-02-03, passed
2-22-2018; Ord. O18-06-06, passed 6-19-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish, see A.R.S. § 9-303



§ 31.21  CITY CLERK.



   (A)   Appointment. The Clerk shall be appointed by the Council and
shall report directly to the Council. The Mayor shall act as the direct
supervisor of the Clerk for purposes of day-to-day supervision.



   (B)   Bond. The Clerk shall be covered under a bond pursuant to §
31.03 of this Code.



   (C)   Compensation. The Clerk shall receive such compensation as
directed by the Council.



   (D)   Removal. The Clerk may be suspended, demoted, or removed, with
or without cause, upon a majority vote of the Council.



   (E)   Records. The Clerk shall keep a true and correct record of all
business transacted by the Council and any other records that either pertain
to the business of the city or that the Council directs. The Clerk shall
number, plainly label, and file separately in a suitable cabinet all
resolutions, ordinances, notices, deeds, surveys, leases, paid and unpaid
vouchers, inventories, letters, orders, and other documents of whatever
nature.



   (F)   Public inspection of records. The Clerk shall keep convenient
for public inspection all public records and public documents under his or
her control, as provided by state statute.



   (G)   Minutes. The Clerk shall prepare or cause to be prepared all
minutes of Council proceedings and ensure their correctness and accuracy.



   (H)   Ordinances, resolutions, budgets, and notices. The Clerk shall
process, record, file, publish, and, if required by state statute, post all
ordinances, resolutions, budgets, and notices that may be passed by the
Council.



   (I)   Duties as Treasurer. The Clerk shall hold the Office of City
Treasurer.



   (J)   Election Official. The Clerk shall be the City Election
Official and perform those duties required by state statute.



   (K)   Administrative duties. The Clerk shall perform those
administrative responsibilities and duties that are conferred upon him or her
by the Mayor or Council in addition to those specified in this code and state
law.



   (L)   Notary public. The Clerk shall be, or shall become within 60
days of taking office, a notary public in the State of Arizona.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-2)  (Ord. O10-10-16, passed 10-14-2010; Ord. O11-04-09,
passed 4-28-2011; Res. R18-02-04, passed 2-22-2018; Ord. O18-02-03, passed
2-22-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see A.R.S. § 9-274



§ 31.22  POLICE CHIEF.



   The Chief of Police shall perform such duties as may be required of him
or her by law and as the City Manager may deem necessary.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-3)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 9-271



§ 31.23  CITY ENGINEER.



   The Engineer shall have charge of the city streets, sewers, and
waterworks and shall perform such duties as may be required of him or her by
law and such other duties as the City Manager may deem necessary.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-4)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 9-271



§ 31.24  CITY ATTORNEY.



   (A)   Appointment. The City Attorney shall be appointed by the City
Council and shall report directly to the City Council. The Mayor shall act as
the direct supervisor of the City Attorney for purposes of day-to-day
supervision.



   (B)   Bond. The City Attorney shall be covered under a bond pursuant
to § 31.03 of this code.



   (C)   Compensation. The City Attorney shall receive such
compensation as per contract.



   (D)   Removal procedure. The City Attorney may be removed, with or
without cause in accordance with the contract terms, upon a majority vote of
the full City Council.



   (E)   Powers and duties. The City Attorney shall act as the legal
counselor and advisor of the Council and other city officials and, as such,
shall give his or her opinion in writing when requested. He or she shall
draft all deeds, contracts, conveyances, ordinances, resolutions, and other
legal instruments when required by the Council or the City Manager. He or she
shall approve as to form, in writing, all drafts of contracts and all
official or other bonds before final approval or acceptance thereof by the
Council. He or she shall return, within ten work days, all ordinances and
resolutions submitted to him or her for consideration by the Council, with
his or her approval or disapproval as to form noted thereon, together with
his or her reasons therefor. He or she shall oversee and direct the
prosecution and defense of all suits, actions, or causes where the city is a
party, criminal or civil, and shall report to the Council, when required, the
condition of any suit or action to which the city is a party.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-5)  (Ord. O10-10-16, passed 10-14-2010)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 9-271



§ 31.25  CITY JUDGE.



   The City Judge shall be the presiding officer of the City Court and
shall be appointed by the Council and shall perform those functions necessary
to the maintenance of the City Court as provided by state statute.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-6)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 22-402



§ 31.26  FIRE CHIEF.



   The City Fire Chief shall perform such duties as may be required of him
or her by law and as the City Manager may deem necessary.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-7)



CHAPTER 32:  MAYOR AND COUNCIL



Section



Council



   32.001   Elected officers



   32.002   Corporate powers



   32.003   Duties of office



   32.004   Vacancies in Council



   32.005   Compensation



   32.006   Oath of office



   32.007   Bond



   32.008   Financial disclosure statement



   32.009   Qualifications of office



Council Procedure



   32.020   Regular meetings



   32.021   Special meetings



   32.022   Meetings to be public



   32.023   Quorum



   32.024   Agenda



   32.025   Order of business



   32.026   Committees and commissions



   32.027   Voting



   32.028   Suspension of rules



Mayor



   32.040   Direct election of Mayor



   32.041   Vice Mayor



   32.042   Acting Mayor



   32.043   Powers and duties of the Mayor



   32.044   Absence of Mayor



   32.045   Failure to sign documents



   32.046   Compensation



Election



   32.060   Primary election



   32.061   Non-political ballot



   32.062   General election nomination



   32.063   Canvass; election to office



   32.064   Candidate financial disclosure



   32.065   Election dates



   32.066   Initiatives and referendums



Ordinances, Resolutions, and Contracts



   32.080   Prior approval



   32.081   Introduction



   32.082   Requirements for an ordinance



   32.083   Effective date of ordinances, resolutions, and franchises



   32.084   Signatures required



   32.085   Publishing required



   32.086   Posting required



COUNCIL



§ 32.001  ELECTED OFFICERS.



   (A)   The elected officers of the city shall be six Council members
and one directly elected Mayor in accordance with § 32.040. The Mayor and
Council members shall constitute the Council and shall continue in office
until assumption of duties of office by their duly elected successors.
Council members shall serve four-year overlapping terms in the manner
provided by state statute.



   (B)   No person who has served either as Mayor or as a Council
member for a total of three four-year terms shall be eligible to hold either
office thereafter.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-1)  (Ord. O18-02-04, passed 2-22-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Composition of City Councils, see A.R.S. §§ 9-271 et seq.



§ 32.002  CORPORATE POWERS.



   The corporate powers of the city shall be vested in the Council and
shall be exercised only as directed or authorized by law. All powers of the
Council shall be exercised by ordinance, resolution, order, or motion.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-2)



§ 32.003  DUTIES OF OFFICE.



   The Mayor and members of the Council shall assume the duties of office
at the first regularly scheduled meeting in the month of December following
the election at which the Mayor or Council Member was elected



(Prior Code, § 2-1-3)  (Ord. O08-09-16, passed 9-25-2008)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 9-232



§ 32.004  VACANCIES IN COUNCIL.



   Vacancies shall be filled pursuant to the procedures provided in state
law.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-4)  (Ord. O05-08-07, passed 8-25-2005)



§ 32.005  COMPENSATION.



   The compensation of Council members shall be fixed from time to time by
resolution of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-5)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 9-274



§ 32.006  OATH OF OFFICE.



   Immediately prior to assumption of the duties of office, each Council
member shall, in public, take and subscribe to the oath of office.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-6)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 28-232



§ 32.007  BOND.



   Prior to taking office, every Council member shall execute and file an
official bond, enforceable against the principal and his or her sureties,
conditioned on the due and faithful performance of his or her official
duties, payable to the state and to and for the use and benefit of the city
or any person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act or default
of the officer in his or her official capacity. A person so injured or
aggrieved may bring suit on the bond under provisions identical to those
contained in A.R.S. § 38-260. Bonds shall be in a sum as shall be provided
by resolution and the premium for the bonds shall be paid by the city.
Nothing in this section shall preclude the town from obtaining a blanket bond
pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. § 9-302.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-7)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 9-302



§ 32.008  FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT.



   The Mayor and each Council member shall file by January 31 of each year
a financial disclosure statement in a form and with such information as
provided by resolution of the Council and pursuant to state law.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-8)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. §§  38-541 through 38-545



§ 32.009  QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICE.



   No person shall be qualified to be Mayor or a member of the City
Council unless:



   (A)   At the time of the election such person is at least 18 years
of age, is a qualified elector of the City of El Mirage, and has resided in
the City of El Mirage for not less than one year preceding the election, or
if an area has been annexed to the city for a period of less than one year
next preceding the election has resided in such area for one year next
preceding the election.



   (B)   Such person is at all times during his or her term of office a
resident and qualified elector of  the City of El Mirage.



(Ord. O08-09-16, passed 9-25-2008)



COUNCIL PROCEDURE



§ 32.020  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Council shall meet regularly, at least once per month, at
such times and at such places as prescribed in the Regularly Scheduled
Council Meetings calendar adopted annually by the Council.  Notices and
agendas of such meetings shall be posted pursuant to statute in such public
places as the Council may set by resolution, and the places of such posting
shall be kept on file with the City Clerk.



   (B)   The Council shall adopt by ordinance an annual schedule of
Regularly Scheduled Council Meetings for each calendar year no later than the
December Regular Council meeting before the next calendar year.



   (C)   The regular meetings of the Common Council shall be held at
the El Mirage Council Chambers located at 10000 N. El Mirage Road in El
Mirage, Arizona, unless otherwise changed to another location by the Mayor or
by three members of Council giving not less than 72 hours notification of the
change of location to the public by posting notice of change in the locations
where the agenda is posted and providing personal notice of the change to all
other Council members not less than 24 hours before the beginning of the
meeting.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-1)  (Ord. O06-05-07, passed 5-25-2006; Ord. O09-04-02,
passed 4-9-2009; Ord. O09-04-03, passed 4-9-2009; Ord. O-16-10-09, passed
10-4-2016; Res. R18-06-07, passed 6-19-2018; Ord. O18-06-05, passed 6-19-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 9-233



§ 32.021  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Mayor, upon his or her own motion in writing, shall
convene the Council at any time after giving at least 24-hours’ notice of
the meeting to members of the Council and the general public. The City
Manager, upon the written request of three members of the Council shall
convene the Council after giving at least 24-hours’ notice of the meeting
to members of the Council and the general public.



   (B)   The notice shall include the location, date, hour, and purpose
of the special meeting.



   (C)   In the case of an actual emergency, a meeting may be held upon
the notice as is appropriate to the circumstances.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-2)  (Ord. O17-12-15, passed 12-5-2017; Res. R18-06-07,
passed 6-19-2018; Ord. O18-06-05, passed 6-19-2018)



§ 32.022  MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC.



   All proceedings of the Council shall be open to the public, except
that, upon approval by a majority vote of the Council, the Council may meet
in a closed executive session in the manner provided by state law.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-3)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. §§  38-431 through 38-431.09



§ 32.023  QUORUM.



   A majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum for transacting
business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel the
attendance of absent members.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-4)



§ 32.024  AGENDA.



   Prior to each Council meeting, or on or before a time fixed by the
Council for preparation and distribution of an agenda, whichever is earlier,
the Clerk shall collect all written reports, communications, ordinances,
resolutions, contracts, and other documents to be submitted to the Council,
prepare an agenda according to the order of business, and furnish each
Council member, the Mayor, the City Manager, and the City Attorney with a
copy.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-5)



§ 32.025  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   The Mayor or, in his or her absence, the Vice Mayor, in consultation
with the City Manager, shall set the agenda and order of the meeting. The
Mayor or any two Councilmembers are required to submit an item for placement
on a council meeting agenda for discussion and/or action to the City Clerk by
Tuesday prior to the meeting. Exceptions to include, but are not limited to
addendum or changing items to be added within time limitations pursuant to
state law.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-6) (Ord. O10-05-07, passed 5-27-2010; Ord. O11-07-11,
passed 7-14-2011; Res. R18-06-07, passed 6-19-2018; Ord. O18-06-05, passed
6-19-2018)



§ 32.026  COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS.



   The Council may create such boards, committees, and commissions,
standing or special, as it deems necessary. They shall consist of as many
members and shall perform such duties as the Council may require and shall
exist at the pleasure of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-7)



§ 32.027  VOTING.



   (A)   The Mayor shall vote as a member of the Council.



   (B)   Upon the request of any member, the ayes and nays upon any
question shall be taken and entered in the minutes.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-8)



§ 32.028  SUSPENSION OF RULES.



   Any of the provisions of this subchapter may be temporarily suspended
in connection with any matter under consideration by the Mayor or a majority
of the Council, except that this section shall not be construed to permit any
action that is contrary to state statutes.



(Prior Code, § 2-4-9)



MAYOR



§ 32.040  DIRECT ELECTION OF MAYOR.



   Beginning with the election to be held on March 12, 2002, the Mayor
shall be directly elected by the qualified electors.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-1)



§ 32.041  VICE MAYOR.



   At the first regular meeting after the general election, the Council
shall designate one of its members as Vice Mayor, who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Council. The Vice Mayor shall perform the duties of the Mayor
during his or her absence or disability.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-2)



Statutory reference:



   Powers during local emergency, see A.R.S. § 26-311B



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 9-236



§ 32.042  ACTING MAYOR.



   In the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the
Council may designate another of its members to serve as acting Mayor who
shall have all the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Mayor during
the absence or disability.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-3)



§ 32.043  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.



   The powers and duties of the Mayor shall include the following.



   (A)   He or she shall be the chief executive officer of the city.



   (B)   He or she shall be the Chairperson of the Council and preside
over its meetings. He or she may make and second motions and shall have a
voice and vote in all its proceedings.



   (C)   He or she shall enforce the provisions of this code.



   (D)   He or she shall execute and authenticate, by his or her
signature, such instruments as the Council or any statutes, ordinances, or
this code shall require.



   (E)   He or she shall make such recommendations and suggestions to
the Council as he or she may consider proper.



   (F)   He or she may, by proclamation, declare a local emergency to
exist due to fire, conflagration, flood, earthquake, explosion, war, bombing,
or any other natural or human-made calamity or disaster or in the event of
the threat or occurrence of riot, rout, affray, or other acts of civil
disobedience which endanger life or property within the city. After
declaration of an emergency, the Mayor shall govern, by proclamation, and
impose all necessary regulations to preserve the peace and order of the city.
At the earliest possible time, the Mayor shall obtain ratification of the
declaration of an emergency from the Council. The proclamation may include
but shall not be limited to:



      (1)   Imposition of a curfew in all or any portion of the city;



      (2)   Ordering the closing of any business;



      (3)   Closing to public access any public building, street, or
other public place; and/or



      (4)   Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement
agencies and organizations within or without the political subdivision for
assistance.



   (G)   He or she shall perform such other duties required by state
statute and this code as well as those duties required as chief executive
officer of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-4)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. §§ 9-236, 26-311B



§ 32.044  ABSENCE OF MAYOR.



   The Mayor shall not absent himself or herself from the city for a
greater period than 15 days without the consent of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-5)



§ 32.045  FAILURE TO SIGN DOCUMENTS.



   If the Mayor refuses or fails to sign any ordinance, resolution,
contract, warrant, demand, or other document or instrument requiring his or
her signature for five days consecutively, then a majority of the members of
the Council may, at any regular or special meeting, authorize the Vice Mayor
or, in his or her absence, an acting Mayor to sign the ordinance, resolution,
contract, warrant, demand, or other document or instrument which when so
signed shall have the same force and effect as if signed by the Mayor.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-6)



§ 32.046  COMPENSATION.



   The compensation of the Mayor shall be fixed from time to time by
resolution of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-2-7)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 9-274



ELECTION



§ 32.060  PRIMARY ELECTION.



   Any candidate who shall receive, at the primary election a majority of
all ballots cast shall be declared to be elected to the office for which he
or she is a candidate effective as of the date of the general election, and
no further election shall be held as to that candidate (A.R.S. § 9-821.01(D)
through (F)). If more candidates receive a majority of ballots cast than
there are offices to be filled, then those equal in number to the offices to
be filled receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected.



(Prior Code, § 2-3-1)  (Ord. O08-09-16, passed 9-25-2008; Res. R18-06-07,
passed 6-19-2018; Ord. O-18-06-05, passed 6-19-2018)



§ 32.061  NON-POLITICAL BALLOT.



   Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of support
for a candidate.



(Prior Code, § 2-3-2)  (Res. R18-06-07, passed 6-19-2018; Ord. O-18-06-05,
passed 6-19-2018)



§ 32.062  GENERAL ELECTION NOMINATION.



   If the office of Mayor or any seat on the Council is not decided at the
primary election held for the office in accordance with § 32.060, then as to
the office or offices, a general municipal election shall be held. The only
candidates to be placed on the ballot at the general municipal election,
shall be those not elected at the primary election, shall be equal in number
to twice the number to be elected to any given office or less than that
number if there be less than that number named on the primary election
ballot, and persons who receive the highest number of votes for the
respective offices at the primary election; provided that if there be any
person who, under the provisions of this section, would have been entitled to
become a candidate for any office except for the fact that some other
candidate received an equal number of votes therefore, then all such persons
receiving an equal number of votes shall likewise become candidates for such
office. The candidate who receives the highest number of votes at the general
election for an office shall be declared elected to the office.



(Prior Code, § 2-3-3)  (Ord. O08-09-16, passed 9-25-2008)



§ 32.063  CANVASS; ELECTION TO OFFICE.



   The Council shall canvass the results of primary, general, and special
elections at a special meeting held not less than six days nor more than 20
days after the election.



(Prior Code, § 2-3-4)  (Ord. O08-09-16, passed 9-25-2008)



§ 32.064  CANDIDATE FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.



   Each candidate for the office of Council member shall file a financial
disclosure statement when the candidate files a nomination paper. The
statement shall contain such information as required by resolution of the
Council pursuant to state law.



(Prior Code, § 2-3-5)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 38-545



§ 32.065  ELECTION DATES.



   Commencing with the 2006 election, the primary and general elections
will be held on the dates prescribed in A.R.S. § 16-204(B) for the fall
(September and November) elections.



(Ord. O04-07-25, passed 7-22-2004)



§ 32.066  INITIATIVES AND REFERENDUMS.



   (A)   Power reserved; time of election. There is reserved to the
qualified electors of the city the power of the initiative and the referendum
as prescribed by the state constitution. Any initiative or referendum matter
shall be voted on at the next ensuing primary or general election.



   (B)   Number of signatures.



      (1)   The total number of registered voters qualified to vote
at the last municipal election, whether regular or special, immediately
preceding the date upon which any initiative petition is filed shall be the
basis upon which the number of qualified electors of the city required to
file an initiative petition shall be computed.



      (2)   The basis upon which the number of qualified electors of
the city required to file a referendum petition shall be as determined by
state law.



   (C)   Time of filing.



      (1)   Initiative petitions shall be filed at least four months
prior to the election at which they are to be voted upon.



      (2)   Referendum petitions shall be filed within 30 days of
the adoption of the ordinance or resolution to be referred. If the City Clerk
is unable to provide petitioners with a copy of the ordinance or resolution
at the time of application for an official number or on the same business day
of the application, the 30 day period shall be calculated from the date such
ordinance or resolution is available.



   (D)   Sample ballots and publicity pamphlets. The following
procedures relating to sample ballots and publicity pamphlets are hereby
adopted for conducting elections at which an initiative or referendum is to
be voted upon:



      (1)   A publicity pamphlet shall be mailed by the City Clerk
to each household within the city in which a registered voter resides. The
mailing shall be made before the earliest date for receipt by registered
voters of any requested early ballot for the election at which the measure is
to be voted on. If the pamphlet is not mailed before the earliest date for
receipt of a requested early ballot, the Clerk shall provide a notice with
the early ballots stating when the pamphlets will be mailed and where and
when the pamphlets may be accessed or viewed. The deadline for mailing is not
less than ten days prior to the election to which the measure is to be voted
on.



      (2)   Arguments supporting and opposing propositions appearing
on the ballot shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk by 5:00 p.m.
not less than 90 days prior to the election at which the propositions are to
be voted upon. If time does not permit compliance with the 90 day deadline
for a referendum, the City Clerk may establish a separate deadline for filing
referendum ballot arguments. Arguments supporting or opposing propositions
appearing on the ballot shall meet the following requirements:



         (a)   Arguments must relate to the propositions proposed
by initiative or referred by referendum which will appear on the ballot.



         (b)   Arguments must identify the proposition to which
they refer and indicate whether the argument is in support of or opposition
to the proposition.



         (c)   Arguments may not exceed 300 words in length.



         (d)   Arguments must contain the original signature of
each person sponsoring it. Arguments submitted by organizations shall be
signed by two executive officers of the organization, or if the argument is
sponsored by a political committee it must be signed by the committee's
chairman or treasurer. All persons signing documents shall indicate their
residence or post office address and a telephone number, which information
shall not appear in the publicity pamphlet.



         (e)   No person or organization shall submit more than
one argument for each proposition to be voted upon.



         (f)   Each argument shall be accompanied by a deposit in
the amount established in the current fiscal year fee schedule to offset
proportional cost of printing. This requirement shall not be waived on any
account.



(Ord. O19-04-03, passed 4-2-2019; Res. R19-04-07, passed 4-2-2019)



ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, AND CONTRACTS



§ 32.080  PRIOR APPROVAL.



   All ordinances, resolutions, and contract documents shall, before
presentation to the Council, have been reviewed as to form by the Attorney
and shall, when there are substantive matters of administration involved, be
referred to the person who is charged with the administration of the matters.
That person shall have an opportunity to present his or her objections, if
any, prior to the passage of the ordinance, resolution, or acceptance of the
contract. No contract shall be valid unless approved by the Council at a
public meeting.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-1)



§ 32.081  INTRODUCTION.



   Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action
by the Council shall be introduced and sponsored by a member of the Council,
except that the Attorney, the Manager, or the Clerk may present ordinances,
resolutions, and other matters or subjects to the Council, and any member of
the Council may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that the ordinance,
resolution, matter, or subject be adopted; otherwise, they shall not be
considered.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-2)



§ 32.082  REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ORDINANCE.



   Each ordinance should have but one subject, the nature of which is
clearly expressed in the title. Whenever possible, each ordinance shall be
introduced as an amendment to this code or to an existing ordinance, and, in
such case, the title of the sections to be amended shall be included in the
ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-3)



§ 32.083  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, AND FRANCHISES.



   No ordinance, resolution, or franchise shall become operative until 30
days after its passage by the Council and approval by the Mayor, except
measures necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, or
safety of the city, but such an emergency measure shall not become
immediately operative unless it states in a separate section the reason why
it is necessary that it should become immediately operative, and unless it is
approved by the affirmative vote of three-fourths of all the members elected
to the Council, taken by ayes and nays.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-4)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 19-142B



§ 32.084  SIGNATURES REQUIRED.



   Every ordinance passed by the Council shall, before it becomes
effective, be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-5)



§ 32.085  PUBLISHING REQUIRED.



   Only such ordinances, resolutions, motions, regulations, or proceedings
of the Council shall be published as may be required by state statutes or
expressly ordered by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-6)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 7, Art. 2



§ 32.086  POSTING REQUIRED.



   Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture, or other
punishment shall, after passage, be posted by the Clerk in three or more
public places within the city and an affidavit of the person who posted the
ordinance shall be filed in the office of the Clerk as proof of posting.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-7)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 9-813



CHAPTER 33:  CITY COURT



Section



General Provisions



   33.01   City Court established; jurisdiction



Presiding Officer



   33.15   Presiding judge; appointment; judges pro tempore;
qualification; Judicial Selection Advisory and Review Board



   33.16   Powers and duties



   33.17   Removal of City Judge from office



   33.18   Compensation of judges



   33.19   Term



   33.20   Hearing officers



   33.21   Juvenile Hearing Officer



   33.22   Duties of management, City Council; City Manager



Proceedings of Court; Conduct of Business



   33.35   When open; transaction of certain business on non-judicial
days



   33.36   Jurisdiction generally



   33.37   Writs and processes; records



   33.38   Juries



   33.39   City Court; general fees



   33.40   Court enhancement and security fee; City Court Enhancement
and Security Fund



   33.41   Reimbursement for jail costs



   33.42   Waiver of costs of indigents



   33.43   Special fees



Home Detention and Electronic Monitoring Program



   33.50   Home Detention and Electronic Monitoring Program



   33.51   Definitions



   33.52   Eligibility



   33.53   Provider required



   33.54   Requirements of the Home Detention and Electronic Monitoring
Program



   33.55   Exemptions from requirements



   33.56   Terminating participation in the program



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 33.01  CITY COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION.



   There is hereby established in the city a City Court which shall have
jurisdiction of all violations of this code, and jurisdiction concurrently
with justices of the peace of precincts in which the city is located of
violation of laws of the state committed within the limits of the city. The
City Court is established pursuant to the Arizona Constitution and A.R.S. §
22-402, and shall be known as the “City Court of the City of El Mirage,
Maricopa County, State of Arizona”.



(Prior Code, Art. 5-1)



PRESIDING OFFICER



§ 33.15  PRESIDING JUDGE; APPOINTMENT; JUDGES PRO TEMPORE; QUALIFICATION;
JUDICIAL SELECTION ADVISORY AND REVIEW BOARD.



   (A)   Presiding Judge: appointment. The presiding officer of the
City Court shall be the Presiding City Judge who shall be appointed by the
City Council.



   (B)   Judges pro tempore. The Presiding Judge may appoint qualified
persons to serve as judges pro tempore as are required by the City Court. The
Judge shall be compensated in an amount established by the Presiding Judge,
on a contractual or hourly basis, shall not be eligible for any benefits as a
full-time employee, and shall be appointed for a term as set forth by the
Presiding Judge for a term of not more than two years.



   (C)   Qualification. All judges of the City Court, regular or pro
tempore, shall be attorneys at law, admitted to the practice of law by the
Supreme Court of the State of Arizona, and have at least five years practice
of law; have sufficient experience and temperament to preside over cases in
the Municipal Court; and continue to meet all qualifications as may be
established by the Arizona Supreme Court or as required by law for judges.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-1)  (Ord. O11-08-14, passed 8-25-2011; Ord. O16-11-11,
passed 11-1-2016)



§ 33.16  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The powers and duties of the Presiding Judge shall include:



      (1)   The powers and duties set forth and conferred upon him
or her under the provisions of the state’s Constitution and statutes, this
code, and the ordinances and resolutions of the city;



      (2)   The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered each
action and the proceedings of the Court therein;



      (3)   The responsibility for fixing and receiving all bonds
and bails and receiving all fines, civil sanctions, penalties, fees, and
other monies as provided by law;



      (4)   Payment of all fees, civil sanctions, fines, penalties,
and other monies collected by the Court to the Treasurer; and



      (5)   Not withstanding any other provisions of the city code,
management and administration of the City Court as a separate and independent
branch of government in accordance with fiscal policies established by the
City Council in the adoption of the budget and city personnel policies and
procedures consistent with applicable state and federal constitutional
mandates, statutes, and rules of the Arizona Supreme Court.



   (B)   The authority of the Presiding Judge pursuant to state law to
manage and expend monies collected or granted pursuant to statute is hereby
expressly affirmed. Further, the authority of the Presiding Judge to manage
the Court budget in his or her sole discretion is also hereby expressly
affirmed.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-2)



§ 33.17  REMOVAL OF CITY JUDGE FROM OFFICE.



   (A)   The Council may suspend, remove, or otherwise sanction the
City Presiding Judge or any Assistant Associate City Judge for cause,
including but not limited to:



      (1)   If the City Judge pleads guilty or no contest or is
found guilty of a crime punishable as a felony under any law of the state or
a federal law, or of any other crime that involves moral turpitude under the
law;



      (2)   If the Judge has a disability that seriously interferes
with the performance of the Judge’s duties and that is, or is likely to
become, permanent; and



      (3)   If the Judge engages in actions that constitute willful
misconduct in office, willful and persistent failure to perform the Judge’s
duties, habitual intemperance, or conduct prejudicial to the administration
of justice that brings the judiciary and judicial office into disrepute.



   (B)   Pursuant to § 33.15(D)(5), the Council may refer to the
Judicial Review Board any verified complaints or allegations of serious
misconduct by a sitting judge which may support disciplinary action by the
Council.



      (1)   The Board, upon receipt of such complaint or
allegations, shall investigate as necessary to determine the validity
thereof, and thereafter make recommendations to the council on what action,
if any, is appropriate.



      (2)   The Council shall not take action under this section
until after receiving a recommendation from the Board, except that matters
which are deemed to be an emergency may be considered by the Council without
the necessity of such recommendation.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-4)  (Ord. O11-08-14, passed 8-25-2011)



§ 33.18  COMPENSATION OF JUDGES.



   The annual salary of the Presiding Judge and for any associate judicial
position shall be set by the City Council at a percentage of the annual
salary payable to a judge of the Superior Court and, in addition thereto, the
Presiding Judge shall be entitled to employee benefits as provided for by the
City of El Mirage.  Such compensation shall be adjusted bi-annually on the
anniversary date of the Judge’s initial appointment.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-5)  (Ord. O11-08-14, passed 8-25-2011)



§ 33.19  TERM.



   (A)   The Presiding Judge of the City Court shall be appointed for a
term of four years after due recommendation by the Judicial Selection
Advisory and Review Board and approval by the City Council. The beginning and
end of the Judge’s term shall be dated as of the date of the appointment.



   (B)   In the event that the Judge under consideration is subject to
reappointment for an additional term, the reappointment of the Presiding
Judge shall only be considered by the City Council after receiving the report
of the Judicial Selection Advisory and Review Board.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-6)  (Ord. O11-08-14, passed 8-25-2011)



§ 33.20  HEARING OFFICERS.



   The Presiding Judge may appoint one or more hearing officers to preside
over civil traffic violation cases when the appointment of the hearing
officers is necessary to assure prompt disposition of civil traffic violation
cases. Hearing officers may hear and dispose of civil traffic violation cases
under supervision of the Presiding Judge. The hearing officers shall either
serve without salary or compensation, or be compensated in an amount
established by the Presiding Judge on a contractual or hourly basis, shall
not be eligible for any benefits as a full-time employee, and shall be
appointed for a term as set forth by the Presiding Judge for a term of not
more than one year.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-7)



§ 33.21  JUVENILE HEARING OFFICER.



   The appointment by the Presiding Judge of the Juvenile Court in
Maricopa County of all judges of the City Court, regular and pro tempore, to
serve as juvenile hearing officers, is hereby approved.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-8)



§ 33.22  DUTIES OF MANAGEMENT, CITY COUNCIL; CITY MANAGER.



   (A)   The City Council shall provide for the financial, physical,
personnel, and consulting requirements of the City Court and may adopt
additional ordinances as may be deemed necessary for the consistent
implementation of this code.



   (B)   The City Manager and Presiding Judge shall confer, in good
faith, in all efforts to reconcile any conflicts of authority between
branches of government. Pursuant to case law, the final authority over all
judicial functions within the City Court is hereby expressly reserved unto
the Presiding Judge.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-9)



PROCEEDINGS OF COURT; CONDUCT OF BUSINESS



§ 33.35  WHEN OPEN; TRANSACTION OF CERTAIN BUSINESS ON NON-JUDICIAL DAYS.



   The City Court shall always be open, except on non-judicial days and on
such non-judicial days, it may transact such business within its jurisdiction
as is authorized by law to be transacted by courts of justice of the peace,
relative to businesses within its jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 5-3-1)



§ 33.36  JURISDICTION GENERALLY.



   The City Court shall, within the territorial limits of the city, have
and exercise jurisdiction as follows.



   (A)   It shall have and exercise exclusive original jurisdiction of
all proceedings of a criminal nature for the violation of any ordinance of
the city, and of every action of a civil nature for the enforcement of a
penalty, or the recovery of a penalty or forfeiture imposed by any ordinance
of the city for violation thereof, or for neglect to perform any duty by any
ordinance imposed, and of every action for the collection of any license,
fine, or penalty due from any person to the city, and required to be paid, or
which is due and collectible under the ordinance of the city.



   (B)   The City Court shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the
justices of the peace, in the precincts where the city is established, over
all violations of the laws of the state committed within the limits of the
city; the concurrent jurisdiction shall be subject to the rules of civil
procedure applicable to trials before justices of the peace.



(Prior Code, § 5-3-2)



§ 33.37  WRITS AND PROCESSES; RECORDS.



   (A)   The Presiding Judge, and any assistant or pro-tem judge, shall
be entitled and authorized to issue and cause to be served any and all writs
and processes, and he or she shall have full authority to hear and determine
all matters properly coming before the Court. The writs and processes to be
used shall be similar to those used by justices of the peace in cases of a
similar nature, and proper record shall be kept of the issuance of writs and
processes and returns and of any kind and all other actions taken relative
thereto, and the actions of the Court thereon. The police of the city are
hereby authorized and directed to execute and serve any and all writs and
processes issued out of the City Court by the Judge, and proper return shall
be made by the officer to the same extent as is required of constables and
sheriffs in the service and execution of similar papers.



   (B)   The City Court shall have a seal with the words “Seal of the
City Court of El Mirage, Maricopa County, Arizona”. The seal shall be kept
by the City Court Clerk and shall be used to authenticate official documents
of the City Court, including and without limitation, the City Court Clerk’s
certification of true and conformed copies of City Court records.



   (C)   The City Court Clerk shall charge the certification fee as
provided for by the Arizona Supreme Court for execution of the City Court
seal.



(Prior Code, § 5-3-3)



§ 33.38  JURIES.



   (A)   Jury formation. The formation and summoning of juries in the
City Court shall be done in the same manner as provided for by law in courts
of record, in accordance with the provisions of A.R.S. § 22-426. Each juror
in the City Court shall be paid as provided by law.



Statutory reference:



   The statute cited in this division has been repealed. Current
provisions for selecting a jury, see A.R.S. Rules Crim. Proc. Rule 18.5



   (B)   Reasonable resource protection fee.



      (1)   The reasonable resource protection fee shall be assessed
to cover administrative costs incurred as a result of the unnecessary
expenditure of otherwise available resources due to unreasonable delay,
prolongation, or duplication occasioned by litigants.



      (2)   The resource protection fee shall be in an amount of not
more than actual costs involved, and not to exceed $1,000 per event, and may
be assessed against litigants or their counsel, but shall not be assessed
against any person representing a political subdivision of the state.



      (3)   This fee is intended to include, without limitation, the
following:



         (a)   In the case of a plea to the City Court on the day
of a scheduled jury trial, the fees may include all jury-related costs
including, but not limited to:



            1.   Fees paid to jurors who have appeared in
person; and



            2.   Mailing costs incurred by the City Court to
summon the jurors for that trial.



         (b)   In the case of a plea to the City Court on the
calendar call day which falls within the week of the scheduled jury trial,
the fee shall be limited to the actual cost of the City Court to summon the
jurors for that particular case.



(Prior Code, § 5-3-4)



§ 33.39  CITY COURT; GENERAL FEES.



   (A)   Default fee. The City Court shall assess the defendant a
default fee of $40 for each default judgment entered in a civil traffic
violation upon failure to appear or failure to pay a civil sanction, unless
the default judgment is set aside under Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure in
civil traffic violation cases.



   (B)   Collections. A defendant who defaults in his or her obligation
for the payment of monies owed or due to the City Court including, but not
limited to, restitution, fines, sanctions, surcharges, assessments,
penalties, bonds, costs, and fees, is liable for any fees and charges
assessed by a collection agency that is licensed pursuant to A.R.S. §§
32-1021 et seq., and that is engaged by the City Court to collect and enforce
the payment. The collection fees and charges assessed by the collection
agency shall be added to the sum or sums due from and chargeable against the
defendant.



   (C)   Records search. In all matters involving copies requested of
the City Court, the Clerk of the City Court is authorized to charge any
research and copy fee as authorized by the Arizona Supreme Court.



   (D)   NSF/insufficient funds. The City Court shall assess each
person a service fee of $25 for each dishonored check or bank draft tendered
by or on behalf of the person to the City Court.



   (E)   Fee review. The Presiding Judge and city staff shall review
the fees in this subchapter every two years beginning from the date of the
enactment of this code and make recommendations to the City Council regarding
the continuance of fees, amendments thereto, or discontinuation thereof.



(Prior Code, § 5-3-5)



§ 33.40  COURT ENHANCEMENT AND SECURITY FEE; CITY COURT ENHANCEMENT AND
SECURITY FUND.



   (A)   In addition to any other fee or assessment authorized by law,
a court enhancement and security fee of $25 shall be imposed by the City
Court on each order or agreement to pay any fine, sanction, penalty, or
assessment, or to participate in any Court-authorized diversion program. The
court enhancement and security fee shall not be imposed on civil parking
violations. The court enhancement and security fee shall be collected by the
City Court for deposit into the City Court Enhancement and Security Fund. A
judge or hearing officer shall not waive all or any part of the fee unless
payment of the fee violates a finding of the Court pursuant to § 33.42 of
this code.



   (B)   A City Court Enhancement and Security Fund is established for
the exclusive purpose of enhancing City Court processes and security. Monies
in the Fund shall supplement, not supplant, funds provided to the City Court
through the city budget process. Interest earned on the monies in the Fund
shall be credited to the City Court Enhancement and Security Fund. The City
Court shall administer the Fund and may make expenditures from the Fund for
the purposes approved in this section.



   (C)   The City Court shall conduct a biennial review of the
effectiveness of this subchapter at meeting the City Court's needs. The City
Court shall report any findings from the periodic review to the City Council.
The first review shall take place no later than two years from the effective
date of this section.



(Prior Code, § 5-3-6)  (Ord. O10-08-12, passed 8-26-2010)



§ 33.41  REIMBURSEMENT FOR JAIL COSTS.



   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a misdemeanor criminal
offense in the City Court and sentenced to a term of incarceration in the
county jail or any other detention facility as authorized by law, may as a
part of any fine imposed by the City Court in connection with the sentencing,
be required to reimburse the city for all or any part of the actual expenses
the city has or will incur to the county or other authorized detention
authority by reason of the incarceration. The maximum amount ordered for
reimbursement under this section shall not exceed the number of days the
misdemeanant is actually incarcerated in the county jail or detention
facility, multiplied by the prevailing per diem rate charged to the city at
the time that the misdemeanant is actually incarcerated.



   (B)   No person who has been found by the City Court to be indigent
may be subject to the provisions of this section.



   (C)   In addition to any other remedies which may be allowed by law,
the City Attorney is authorized to institute civil legal proceedings in any
court of competent jurisdiction to recover any fee owing under this section.



(Prior Code, § 5-3-7)



§ 33.42  WAIVER OF COSTS OF INDIGENTS.



   (A)   No person shall be required to pay any fee under this code who
is determined as a matter of fact and law to be indigent. Prior to
determining that a person is indigent for the purposes of this section, the
City Court shall require a sworn statement from the defendant seeking a
waiver of such fees as are authorized, which includes the following
information.



      (1)   All income received by the defendant from any source on
a monthly basis;



      (2)   The defendant’s monthly expenses;



      (3)   A list of assets owned by the defendant of all real and
personal property with designations of fair market value; and



      (4)   A list of debts owed by the defendant.



   (B)   The fees required under this code shall be waived by the City
Court if the defendant establishes by sworn statement or otherwise that they
receive assistance from one or more of the following government programs:



      (1)   Food stamps 7 U.S.C. §§ 2011 through 2029; and/or



      (2)   The general assistance program under A.R.S. §§ 42-231
et seq.



   (C)   The City Court may also waive the fees required by this code
if the Court expressly finds that the defendant has an income which is
insufficient or barely sufficient to meet the daily essentials of life and
includes no surplus disposable income that could be budgeted for payment of
the fees.



   (D)   The City Court shall order the defendant to pay any assessed
fees if, at any time prior to the entry of the final judgement, the City
Court determines after notice to the defendant and a hearing that the
defendant no longer meets the eligibility requirements of division (B) above.



   (E)   A defendant who has been granted a waiver of any fees due to
indigence has an affirmative duty to promptly notify the City Court of any
change in his or her financial circumstances during the pendency of an action
that impacts the ability to pay the fees.



(Prior Code, § 5-3-8)



§ 33.43  SPECIAL FEES.



   (A)   Warrant fee. The City Court shall assess an administrative fee
of $200 for the issuance of a warrant due to the failure of a defendant to
appear or pay any fine, fee, or restitution imposed by the City Court or the
failure of a defendant to comply with any other sanction or any other order
regarding probation, counseling, or other diversion programs.



   (B)   DUI investigation fee. (Reserved)



   (C)   Blood analysis fee. (Reserved).



   (D)   Domestic Violence Prevention Fund. (Reserved).



(Prior Code, § 5-3-9)



HOME DETENTION AND ELECTRONIC MONITORING PROGRAM



§ 33.50  HOME DETENTION AND ELECTRONIC MONITORING PROGRAM.



   If a person is sentenced to jail confinement by the City Court, the
Judge may substitute home detention and electronic monitoring for a portion
of the jail term as provided by this section.



(Ord. O11-03-07, passed 3-10-2011)



§ 33.51  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ELECTRONIC MONITORING DEVICE. Equipment able to continuously confirm
the location of the person to whom it is issued.



   HOME DETENTION AND ELECTRONIC MONITORING PROGRAM (PROGRAM).  An
alternative sentencing option which allows an incarcerated person to be
released from jail, with the requirement that the person wear an electronic
monitoring device and to conform to Court-ordered requirements.



   PROVIDER.  A person or company which has entered into a contract with
the City to provide the following services:



      (1)   Issuance of electronic monitoring devices;



      (2)   Continual monitoring of such devices; and



      (3)   Furnishing of testing for alcohol and/or drug use.



(Ord. O11-03-07, passed 3-10-2011)



§ 33.52  ELIGIBILITY.



   A person is eligible for the Home Detention and Electronic Monitoring
Program if:



   (A)   The person is eligible under A.R.S. § 9-499.07; and



   (B)   The person has been sentenced under A.R.S. § 28-1381(K) or §
28-1382(D) or (E) and has satisfied the requirements of those sections; and



   (C) The Judge states at the time of sentencing that the person is
eligible for the program; and



   (D)   The person does not constitute a risk to himself or other
members of the community; and



   (E)   The person does not have a history of violent behavior.



(Ord. O11-03-07, passed 3-10-2011)



§ 33.53  PROVIDER REQUIRED.



   Before any person may participate in the Home Detention and Electronic
Monitoring Program, the City shall have entered into a contract with one or
more providers to implement the program, with the provider contractually
required to properly monitor the person and notify the City Court.



(Ord. O11-03-07, passed 3-10-2011)



§ 33.54  REQUIREMENTS OF THE HOME DETENTION AND ELECTRONIC MONITORING
PROGRAM.



   (A)   Except as provided in § 33.56 below, a person participating
in the program shall, as ordered by the Court, comply with A.R.S. § 9-499.07.



   (B)   The Court shall require that the person shall pay the fees set
forth in A.R.S. § 9-499.07 unless the Court finds that the person is unable
to pay some or all of the fees.



   (C)   The person shall serve a minimum of 15 consecutive days in
jail before being released to serve the balance of their sentence in the
program.



   (D)   Except as provided in § 33.55 below, the person shall remain
at home during the hours specified by the Court.



   (E)   The person shall submit to drug and alcohol testing as
directed by the Court.



(Ord. O11-03-07, passed 3-10-2011)



§ 33.55  EXEMPTIONS FROM REQUIREMENTS.



   With the prior written approval of the Court, a person participating in
the program may be permitted to:



   (A)   Be employed outside the home;



   (B)   Complete community work service for the Court;



   (C)   Attend classes at accredited educations institutions;



   (D)   Attend funerals and religious services; and/or



   (E)   Attend medical appointments.



(Ord. O11-03-07, passed 3-10-2011)



§ 33.56  TERMINATING PARTICIPATION IN THE PROGRAM.



   (A)   The Court shall terminate a person's participation in the
program, and require the person to complete the balance of their jail
sentence in jail, if the Court finds:



      (1)   The person has failed to successfully comply with any
term of the person's sentence, including requirements of the program, payment
of fines, completion of counseling, and the like;



      (2)   The person left the premises of their home without the
prior permission of the Court or the provider, during a time when the person
is required to be on the premises; or



      (3)   The Court, in its discretion, or the City, by
legislative or administrative act, terminate the program.



   (B)   Termination from the program will proceed according to the
processes established for hearings on orders to show cause:



      (1)   The court shall issue a summons or warrant for the
person participating in the program to appear and show cause why they should
not be terminated;



      (2)   If the person fails to appear in response to the
summons, or after having appeared the person has failed to show good cause
otherwise, the person shall be terminated from the program.



   (C)   Upon termination from the program, the person shall serve the
balance of their remaining term of incarceration by jail confinement.



(Ord. O11-03-07, passed 3-10-2011)



CHAPTER 34:  CITY ORGANIZATIONS



Section



Police Department



   34.01   Created; composition



   34.02   Compensation of officers



   34.03   Department rules and regulations



   34.04   Duties of Police Department



   34.05   Duties of Police Chief



   34.06   Answering calls outside the city



   34.07   Injuring police dogs



Fire Department



   34.20   Created; composition



   34.21   Departmental duties and responsibilities



   34.22   Compensation



   34.23   Duties of Chief



   34.24   Appointment and duties of firefighters



   34.25   Entry upon property



   34.26   Equipment



   34.27   Policies for providing Fire Department services outside the
city



   34.28   Acknowledgment of right-of-way



   34.29   Fire alarms



   34.30   Orders of Fire Chief



   34.31   Participation in the fire/EMS automatic aid system



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 34.01  CREATED; COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created a Police Department for the city which shall
consist of a Chief of Police and as many police officers and support
personnel as may from time to time be deemed necessary by the City Manager
for the safety and good order of the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-1)  (Res. R05-04-13, passed 4-28-2005; Ord. O05-04-05,
passed 5-12-2005)



§ 34.02  COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS.



   The Chief of Police shall be compensated as determined by the City
Manager. All other uniformed, commissioned police officers and non-sworn
employees shall be compensated as approved in a renewable memorandum of
understanding (MOU) between and with the police union members and the
Council. The Chief of Police shall not receive any perquisites, commissions,
or compensation for his or her services as Chief of Police, except as the
City Manager may prescribe.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-3)  (Res. R05-04-13, passed 4-28-2005; Ord. O05-04-05,
passed 5-12-2005)



§ 34.03  DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Police Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with
such Departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be reviewed
by the City Attorney, approved by the City Council, and implemented by the
Chief of Police; provided, however, that the Chief of Police may designate
rules, procedures, and regulations for employees pursuant to commonly
accepted law enforcement standards.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-4)



§ 34.04  DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   It is the duty of the Police Department, under the direction
of the Chief of Police, to:



      (1)   Enforce this code and the statutes of the State of
Arizona and the United States within jurisdictional limits as conferred by
law and to arrest and charge the violators thereof and take any other
appropriate lawful action necessary to investigate possible violations of the
code and preserve the public peace, safety, and welfare;



      (2)   Render an account of the Police Department, its duties
and receipts as may be required by the City Manager, and keep records of the
office open to inspection by the City Manager at any time, except those
records as may be exempt by state or federal law or for investigative
purposes; and



      (3)   Perform such additional lawful duties as may be required
by the City Manager.



   (B)   Any peace officer or duly authorized agent of the city may
stop and detain a person as is reasonably necessary to investigate an actual
or suspected violation of any provision of this code, and to serve a copy of
the traffic complaint for any alleged civil or criminal violation of this
code.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-5)  (Res. R05-04-13, passed 4-28-2005; Ord. O05-04-05,
passed 5-12-2005)



§ 34.05  DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.



   (A)   The Police Chief shall be responsible for, and cause to be
prepared and submitted by him or her, itemized annual estimates of
expenditures required by the City Manager for capital outlay, salaries,
wages, and miscellaneous operating costs; to tabulate the same into a
preliminary consolidated budget and submit the same to the City Manager
annually on the date specified by the City Manager with his or her
recommendations as to any increases, decreases, cancellations, transfers, or
changes in any of the items included in the preliminary budget.



   (B)   The Police Chief shall supervise the expenditure of all
Departmental purchasing of all supplies, goods, wares, merchandise,
equipment, and materials which may be required for the orderly operation of
the Department, subject to the approval of the City Manager.



   (C)   The Police Chief shall perform such other duties as may be
required of him or her by the City Manager not inconsistent with the laws of
the state or the ordinances of the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-6)  (Res. R05-04-13, passed 4-28-2005; Ord. O05-04-05,
passed 5-12-2005)



§ 34.06  ANSWERING CALLS OUTSIDE THE CITY.



   The members of the Police Department of the city are duly authorized to
answer calls for aid and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the city,
whenever the Chief of Police, in his or her discretion, shall deem it
necessary to protect lives and property.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-7)



§ 34.07  INJURING POLICE DOGS.



   (A)   While a police dog is on duty or discharging any lawful police
function, it is unlawful to and no person shall:



      (1)   Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly kill, injure,
torment, kick, strike, stone, interfere with, or tamper with the police dog;
or



      (2)   Cause or direct any animal to attack or otherwise
interfere with the police dog.



   (B)   A police officer may destroy an animal attacking a police dog
if no lesser means are reasonably available to prevent injury to the police
service dog.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 34.20  CREATED; COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created a full service Fire Department for the city
which shall consist of a paid Fire Chief, fire battalion chiefs, fire
captains, fire engineers, firefighters, paramedics, fire prevention officers,
public education specialist, support and administrative staff in number as
may be deemed necessary from time to time by the Fire Chief, and approved by
the City Council, to fulfill the duties and responsibilities of the Fire
Department in providing public safety services to the city.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-1)



§ 34.21  DEPARTMENTAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The Fire Department shall provide a full range of public
safety services including fire prevention, public safety education, incident
or fire suppression, rescue, basic and advanced emergency medical services,
special operations, and other services that may be deemed necessary for
public safety and welfare. Services shall be performed by professional
firefighters and staff, including state-certified emergency medical
technicians and paramedics as appropriate.



   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      INCIDENT. Any situation where Fire Department staff are call to
or engaged in service delivery.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-2)



§ 34.22  COMPENSATION.



   The Fire Chief, other chief officers, and non-commissioned staff shall
be compensated as determined by the Manager. All other uniformed,
commissioned firefighters shall be compensated as approved in a renewable
memorandum of understanding (MOU) between and with the firefighter union
members and the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-3)  (Res. R05-04-13, passed 4-28-2005; Ord. O05-04-05,
passed 5-12-2005)



§ 34.23  DUTIES OF CHIEF.



   It is the duty of the Chief to:



   (A)   Be accountable to the City Manager for the personnel, morale,
and general efficiency of the Fire Department;



   (B)   Direct the operations of the Fire Department subject to the
rules and regulations thereof;



   (C)   Be present at all fires or other major incident, if possible,
and plan and direct the mitigation thereof. During the progress of an
incident, the authority of the Fire Chief shall be absolute in all matters
directly concerning the mitigation of the incident and disposition of
property endangered by it;



   (D)   Conduct suitable drills or instruction in the operation and
handling of equipment, first aid and rescue work, salvage, a study of
buildings in the city, water supplies, and all other matters generally
considered essential to good fire department services and safety of life and
property from fire;



   (E)   Assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of
arson by investigating or causing to be investigated the cause, origin, and
circumstances of all fires;



   (F)   Inspect buildings and premises and serve written notice upon
the owner or occupant to abate, within a specified time, any and all fire
hazards that may be found. For the purpose of conducting the inspection, the
Chief is hereby empowered to enter any and all buildings and premises within
the city at any reasonable hour. Any person served with a written notice
shall comply and notify the Chief of his or her compliance within a
reasonable time;



   (G)   Keep complete records of all incidents, inspections, apparatus
and equipment, personnel, and other information about the work of the
Department open to the City Manager inspection and furnish to the City
Manager that information upon request;



   (H)   Make a complete annual report, in writing, to the City Manager
within the time limits set by the City Manager. The report shall include the
information specified in division (G) of this section, together with
comparative data for previous years and recommendations for improving the
effectiveness of the Department;



   (I)   Enforce or cause to be enforced all ordinances, laws, and
regulations of the city and state, insofar as they pertain to fire and safety;



   (J)   Demote, dismiss, or expel any officer or member of the
Department for neglect or refusal to perform Departmental duties, subject to
the right of any members so demoted, dismissed, or expelled to appeal to the
City Manager; and



   (K)   Recruit, test, and select both uniformed commissioned and
non-uniformed members of the Fire Department.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-4)  (Res. R05-04-13, passed 4-28-2005; Ord. O05-04-05,
passed 5-12-2005)



§ 34.24  APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF FIREFIGHTERS.



   The Council shall provide for the employment of as many firefighters as
may from time to time be deemed necessary for the safety and welfare of the
city. The Fire Chief shall select qualified firefighter candidates from a
current, certified eligibility list. Firefighters and officers shall be
subject to supervision of the Fire Chief and perform duties and assignments
as necessary and directed by the Fire Chief.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-5)



§ 34.25  ENTRY UPON PROPERTY.



   It is lawful for any firefighter acting under the direction of the
Chief or another officer in command to enter upon property that is on fire or
involved in any incident deemed an emergency or hazard to the public’s
safety, or on property adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or
other property and no person shall hinder, resist, or obstruct any
firefighter in the discharge of his or her duty as provided in this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 34.26  EQUIPMENT.



   The Department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other
equipment as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and
properly protect life and property from fire. Recommendations concerning
apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by the Chief, and after approval
pursuant to the budget process, the apparatus and equipment shall be
purchased in such manner as may be designated by this code. All equipment of
the Department shall be safely and conveniently housed in such place or
places as may be designated by the City Manager. No person shall use any fire
apparatus or equipment for any private purpose, nor shall any person
willfully take away or conceal any article used in any way by the Department.
No person shall enter any place where the fire apparatus is housed or handle
any apparatus or equipment belonging to the Department unless accompanied by
or having special permission of an officer or authorized member of the
Department. No fire apparatus and equipment shall be hired out or permitted
to be used for non-official business.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-7)  (Res. R05-04-13, passed 4-28-2005; Ord. O05-04-05,
passed 5-12-2005)



§ 34.27  POLICIES FOR PROVIDING FIRE DEPARTMENT SERVICES OUTSIDE THE CITY.



   (A)   The Council may enter into agreements or contracts to furnish
Fire Department services outside the city or enter into mutual and automatic
aid agreements, and the Fire Department is authorized to render Fire
Department services pursuant to the terms of the agreements or contracts.



   (B)   The city shall collect the cost of any Fire Department
services rendered outside the city, for special events and to areas not
covered by a contractual agreement for Fire Department services. The cost for
these services shall be determined by the Fire Chief using the current local
standard rates as a minimum basis and as approved through the budget process.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-8)  (Res. R05-04-13, passed 4-28-2005; Ord. O05-04-05,
passed 5-12-2005)



§ 34.28  ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   All motor equipment of the Department shall have right-of-way over all
other traffic when responding to an alarm. No unauthorized vehicle shall
follow within 500 feet of any apparatus belonging to the Department nor park
any vehicle or otherwise cause any obstruction to be placed within 20 feet of
the driveway entrance to any fire station or other place where fire apparatus
is stored and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire
station within 75 feet of the entrance or within 15 feet of any fire hydrant.
No person shall drive any vehicle over fire hose except upon specific orders
from the Chief or other officer in charge where the hose is used.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 34.29  FIRE ALARMS.



   Suitable arrangements or equipment shall be provided for citizens to
turn in an alarm and for notifying the Department so that they may promptly
respond. It is unlawful for any person knowingly to turn in or cause to be
turned in a false alarm.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 34.30  ORDERS OF FIRE CHIEF.



   It is unlawful for any firefighter or citizen to refuse to obey an
order issued by the Fire Chief or another officer in command pursuant to his
or her authority.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 34.31  PARTICIPATION IN THE FIRE/EMS AUTOMATIC AID SYSTEM.



   The Fire Department shall, by contract, participate in the valley-wide
Fire Department automatic aid computer aided dispatch system. This system
provides automatic assistance to and from valley fire departments by way of a
central dispatch center providing a full range of responses regardless of
jurisdictional boundaries. This system may also include joint training;
purchasing; and other efforts as may be deemed necessary. This automatic aid
system may include a minimum standard for operational and command procedures,
staffing, apparatus, tools and equipment, communications equipment, training,
and safety to ensure consistency in the system.



(Prior Code, § 4-2-12 ) (Ord. O04-05-15, passed 5-27-2004)



CHAPTER 35:  TAX CODE



Section



   35.01   Adoption of tax code; amendments



§ 35.01  ADOPTION OF TAX CODE; AMENDMENTS.



   The Tax Code of the City of El Mirage, 2009 edition, is set out in full
in the attachment to this chapter. No format or stylistic changes have been
made. Amendments to this Tax Code are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein in full.




TAX CODE
Please click to view the attachment in PDF.




(Prior Code, Chapter 9)  (Ord. O06-11-20, passed 1-11-2006; Res. 6-11-32,
passed - -2006; Ord. O08-03-04, passed 3-27-2008; Res. R08-03-10, passed
3-27-2008; Res. R09-08-28, passed 8-27-2009)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter




         50.   WATER





         51.   SEWERS





         52.   SANITATION





         53.   STORM WATER QUALITY PROTECTION




CHAPTER 50:  WATER



Section



General Provisions



   50.001   Management of system



   50.002   Receipts and deposits



   50.003   Thermal expansion



Application for Service



   50.015   Application for water and other utility services



   50.016   Grounds for rejection of application



   50.017   Violation of application provisions



Deposit



   50.030   Deposit required



   50.031   Payment responsibility



Discontinuance of Service



   50.045   Notice required; voluntary termination of service



   50.046   Discontinuance under certain conditions



Rates and Bills



   50.060   Water rates



   50.061   Minimum rate



   50.062   Utility services billing; unified billing; payment



   50.063   Billing disputes



   50.064   Unoccupied units liable



   50.065   Commencement and application of charges



   50.066   Deposits; service connection charges; interruption fees



Meters



   50.080   General provisions



   50.081   Installation fee



   50.082   Meter readings



Consumer Responsibilities



   50.095   Consumer water facilities



   50.096   Damage to water facilities



   50.097   Right-of-way



   50.098   Installation of lines



   50.099   Protection of city property



   50.100   Prohibited uses



   50.101   Commercial use



   50.102   Sprinkling restrictions



   50.103   Waste of water



   50.104   Inspections



   50.105   Theft of water



Backflow Prevention and Cross-prevention Control



   50.120   Purpose



   50.121   Backflow prevention required



   50.122   Hazard potential



   50.123   Backflow prevention methods; list



   50.124   Backflow prevention methods required



   50.125   Backflow assembly installation requirements



   50.126   Installation of backflow prevention assemblies for fire
systems



   50.127   Inspections



   50.128   Permit required



   50.129   Tests, maintenance, records



   50.130   Modification of backflow prevention requirements



   50.131   Discontinuance of water service



   50.132   Administrative appeal



   50.133   Violation a civil infraction



   50.134   Retroactive application



   50.135   Fees; rules and regulations



   50.136   Backflow and Cross-Connection Manual incorporated by
reference



Liability



   50.150   Interruption of service



   50.151   Liability limited



   50.152   Regulations part of contract



   50.153   Unauthorized use; tampering; damages



 



   50.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.001  MANAGEMENT OF SYSTEM.



   The City Manager shall have the immediate control and management of all
things pertaining to the city water system and shall cause to be performed
all acts that may be necessary for the prudent, efficient, and economical
management and protection of the water system, subject to the approval and
confirmation of the Council. The Council shall have the power to prescribe
such other and further rates, rules, and regulations as it may deem necessary.



(Prior Code, § 14-1-1)



§ 50.002  RECEIPTS AND DEPOSITS.



   The Clerk shall keep a correct account of all receipts, make out all
bills for water and materials furnished to consumers, collect the same, and
deposit the proceeds so collected to the credit of the city and in accordance
with the direction of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 14-1-2)



§ 50.003  THERMAL EXPANSION.



   (A)   Thermal expansion is the build-up of water pressure in a water
system due to the addition of heat. In extreme cases, thermal expansion has
caused water heater explosions that have resulted in great property damage
and the loss of lives.



   (B)   Thermal expansion is an important factor to consider whenever
a backflow assembly is installed on a plumbing system that supplies a
hot-water system. The backflow assemblies do not allow built up pressure in a
water system to be back pressured and dissipated back into the water supply
mains, contributing to the danger of a water heater explosion due to thermal
expansion.



   (C)   (1)   The chances of thermal expansion increase
dramatically whenever a water heater is old or not well maintained. Usually,
the first few times that a properly working temperature and pressure (T & P)
valve is activated on a water heater, it can be relied upon to guard against
thermal expansion. However, a T & P valve is not designed to be used
repeatedly in this manner. In addition, T & P valves can be removed or
altered and made inoperable by an uninformed property owner, and can also be
affected by scale build up.



      (2)   There are three general types of products used to
protect against thermal expansion. An expansion tank installed on the hot
water system is one option. A second, less expensive option is a toilet tank
ball cock product designed to vent water in the event of a line pressure
build-up. This may require the installation of a pressure-reducing valve if
line pressures regularly exceed 80 PSID. A third type of product would be a
pressure relief valve on the cold water feed line to the water heater. A
drain line would be needed here if the valve is installed indoors. Replacing
old T & P valves is also a good idea, but not as effective as one of the
above products.



(Prior Code, § 14-11-2)



   (D)   Ideally, the T & P valve should be considered as a back up to
one of these other products. In actuality, however, many people rely strictly
on their water heater’s T & P valve to handle any occasional excess
pressure build up. In all cases, but especially where the T & P valve is the
only safety feature in use, it is recommended that the T & P valve should be
exercised at least once a year and replaced at least every five years.



   (E)   The greatest potential for thermal expansion problems would be
from a poorly maintained water heater on a small water line with a backflow
assembly installed just upstream of it. All maintenance personnel need to be
encouraged to make sure their water heaters and T & P valves are maintained
in good condition, checked regularly, and replaced every five years.



(Prior Code, § 14-11-3)



APPLICATION FOR SERVICE



§ 50.015  APPLICATION FOR WATER AND OTHER UTILITY SERVICES.



   Applications for water, sewer and sanitation services provided by the
city (hereinafter “utility services”) shall be made, in person, at the
city hall or by alternative means set by the city. The owner of the property,
as reflected in the records of the Maricopa County Assessor’s Office, or
the owner’s authorized representative, evidenced by a notarized
power-of-attorney or Arizona Department of Real Estate Licensee’s listing
agreement executed by the owner, or a tenant/lessee providing a duly executed
lease or rental agreement may apply for utility services to be provided by
the city. If the ownership of a recent transferee of property is not
reflected in the County Assessor’s records, ownership may be established by
a fully executed sales agreement or other documentation acceptable to the
city.



(Prior Code, § 14-2-1)  (Ord. O10-06-08, passed 6-24-2010; Ord. O11-02-04,
passed 2-10-2011)



§ 50.016  GROUNDS FOR REJECTION OF APPLICATION.



   The city may reject any application for water service for any good and
sufficient reason including the following: service not available under a
standard rate; service which involves excessive service expense; service
which may affect the supply to other consumers; service to the premises until
all charges against the premises then due and payable to the city shall have
been paid, whether on account of water service connection, meter
installation, billing for water previously supplied to the same premises,
whether used by the applicant or against the premises for which water service
is requested.



(Prior Code, § 14-2-2)



§ 50.017  VIOLATION OF APPLICATION PROVISIONS.



   For violation of any of the provisions relating to application for
service, the city shall, at the expiration of 15 days after mailing written
notice to the last known address of the consumer and providing an opportunity
for a hearing, at its option, remove the meter and discontinue service. Where
the meter is thereafter reinstalled, the consumer shall first pay to the city
a reinstallation charge which shall be set by resolution of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 14-2-3)



DEPOSIT



§ 50.030  DEPOSIT REQUIRED.



   A deposit shall be charged for water service to be provided to any
premises before the service commences. The amount of the deposit shall be set
by resolution of the Council. Deposits shall be non-interest bearing and
shall be refunded to the consumer upon discontinuance of service and payment
of charges, provided that charges may be deducted from the security deposit
before the refund is made.



(Prior Code, § 14-3-1)



§ 50.031  PAYMENT RESPONSIBILITY.



   The individual in whose name the deposit is made receiving water and
other utility services from the city shall be responsible for payment of all
bills incurred in connection with the services furnished by the city to the
property.



(Prior Code, § 14-3-2)  (Ord. O10-06-08, passed 6-24-2010; Ord. O11-02-04,
passed 2-10-2011)



DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE



§ 50.045  NOTICE REQUIRED; VOLUNTARY TERMINATION OF SERVICE.



   Any person who desires to discontinue the use of water or other
utilities provided by the city shall file written notice with the city at
least three working days in advance of intended termination of service.
Responsibility for water consumed is determined by final meter reading on the
requested date of service disconnection. Until a written request to
discontinue service is received, the premises shall be deemed occupied by the
consumer and customer's liability for service charges continued.



(Prior Code, § 14-4-1)  (Ord. O10-06-08, passed 6-24-2010)



§ 50.046  DISCONTINUANCE UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS.



   The city may discontinue water service under any of the following
conditions:



   (A)   To prevent fraud or abuse;



   (B)   Disregard of city rules pertaining to water service;



   (C)   Emergency repairs;



   (D)   Insufficient supply caused by factors outside the control of
the city;



   (E)   Legal process;



   (F)   Direction of public authorities;



   (G)   Local emergency requiring emergency measures;



   (H)   Tampering with meter by the consumer; and/or



   (I)   Nonpayment of bill as provided in § 50.062.



(Prior Code, § 14-4-2)



RATES AND BILLS



§ 50.060  WATER RATES.



   The Council shall, by resolution, determine water rates for consumers
both inside and outside the city limits.



(Prior Code, § 14-5-1)



§ 50.061  MINIMUM RATE.



   Service for a time period less than a month shall be charged at the
minimum monthly rate or for the actual usage, whichever is greater.



(Prior Code, § 14-5-2)



§ 50.062  UTILITY SERVICES BILLING; UNIFIED BILLING; PAYMENT.



   (A)   Water meters shall be read once per month, and a separate bill
shall be rendered for each meter and mailed to the owner of the property.



   (B)   Charges for utility services shall be billed on one unified
bill issued once per month. The bill shall be mailed to the owner at the
address of the property at which the utility services are provided unless the
owner requests, in writing, the bill be mailed to an alternative address.
Charges for utility services are due and payable when rendered and shall
become delinquent if not paid by the due date stated on the bill. A late fee
in an amount set by resolution of Council shall be charged on all delinquent
payments for utility services. Service may be terminated for nonpayment at
any time after payment is delinquent. The city reserves the right to vary the
dates or length of billing period, temporarily or permanently, if necessary
or desirable. All delinquent accounts may be referred to collection at any
time at the option of the city.



   (C)   Prior to terminating service for nonpayment of amounts due,
the city will mail written notice of the city's intent to terminate service,
stating the date of termination, to the consumer at the address to which
bills are sent. A customer who receives a notice of intent to terminate
service may, prior to the scheduled date of termination set forth in the
notice, request a hearing with the City Manager or his or her designee to
dispute the termination. A request for a hearing shall be made in person to
the city by the property owner or the property owner's designated
representative.



   (D)   A consumer's water, sewer and/or sanitation service may be
disconnected for nonpayment of a bill for water, sewer and/or sanitation
service rendered at a previous location served by the city or at the request
of the City of Surprise for non-payment of sewer or sanitation charges past
due and owing to the City of Surprise.



   (E)   Fees. The fees set forth herein shall apply in the City of El
Mirage. The amount of each fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.



      (1)   Late fee: A late fee shall be added to a customer's
utility bill for each month the outstanding balance is unpaid.



      (2)   Disconnect fee: A fee shall be added if service is
disconnected due to delinquent payment. This fee shall be collected prior to
reestablishment of services to said property.



      (3)   Establishment fee: A fee shall be added to connect
service at properties with existing utility services. This fee shall be
collected prior to establishing services to said property.



      (4)   Emergency turn-on/turn-off and after hours fee: A fee
shall be charged per event unless at least 24 hours advance notice is given.
This fee will be waived if the problem is determined to be on the city side
of the meter.



      (5)   Same day fee: A fee shall be charged per event for
services requested by the customer to be performed on the same business day.



      (6)   Hydrant meter install and relocate fee: A fee shall be
charged to install or relocate a hydrant meter.



      (7)   Door hanger fee: A fee shall be charged for delivery of
payment reminder notification to the property address.



      (8)   Collections fee: A fee will be added to all delinquent
accounts referred to an outside collection agency.



      (9)   Meter testing fee: A fee will be charged for requesting
a special testing of a meters accuracy.



      (10)   Tampering fee: A fee will be charged whenever someone
is found to have tampered with water or sewer facilities.



      (11)   Returned check fee: A fee will be assessed for all
checks returned due to insufficient funds.



   (F)   Limitation on recovery for utility services (water, sewer and
sanitation). Recovery of amounts owed or credits due under this subchapter
shall be limited to the 36-month period immediately preceding the date of the
most recent billing by the city. However, the city may extend the period when
necessary to ensure that charges for water services are just and reasonable
in conformity with state statutes.



(Prior Code, § 14-5-3)  (Ord. O00-02-05, passed - - ; Ord. O10-06-08,
passed 6-24-2010)



§ 50.063  BILLING DISPUTES.



   Any customer who believes the amount of his or her utility bill is
incorrect may dispute the amount of the bill by submitting, in person, a
written dispute of the bill to the city. The filing of a dispute does not
extend the delinquency date for payment of the bill or exempt the customer
from delinquency penalties and related fees if payment is delinquent. If a
dispute is upheld, the city will reimburse any overpayment.



(Prior Code, § 14-5-4)  (Ord. O10-06-08, passed 6-24-2010)



§ 50.064  UNOCCUPIED UNITS LIABLE.



   The minimum charges for residential units shall apply regardless of
whether the residential unit is occupied or unoccupied.



(Prior Code, § 14-5-5)



§ 50.065  COMMENCEMENT AND APPLICATION OF CHARGES.



   The city shall commence service charges for a consumer when the water
meter is installed and the connection is made, regardless of whether water is
used or not, and the charges shall continue to accrue until the account  is
properly closed by the consumer in writing at city hall.



(Prior Code, § 14-5-6)



§ 50.066  DEPOSITS; SERVICE CONNECTION CHARGES; INTERRUPTION FEES.



   (A)   All utility customers, prior to securing service, shall place
a deposit along with applicable establishment fees with the city in a sum to
be determined by resolution of the Council.



   (B)   The developer/property, subject to city approval, shall be
responsible for installing new water connections, including tapping water
mains, installing water service lines, valves and meter boxes or meter
vaults. It is the developer's/property owner's responsibility to pay all
other associated city fees prior to the city installing a water meter.



   (C)   A charge, as set by resolution of the Council, shall be made
for each turn on or turn off of water for residential units and commercial
units.



(Prior Code, § 14-5-7) (Ord. O10-06-08, passed 6-24-2010; Ord. O16-01-01,
passed 1-5-2016)



METERS



§ 50.080  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   All water sold by the city shall be metered by meters which
shall be owned and maintained by the city.



   (B)   The city may install a water meter on the property line or on
the consumer’s property in such location as deemed necessary and which is
conveniently accessible by a meter reader.



   (C)   Water pipes and equipment belonging to the consumer shall be
so arranged to permit the placing of a single water meter for that property
convenient to the city. If the water pipes and equipment belonging to the
consumer are not arranged to permit the placement of a meter and additional
meters are required, each such additional meter shall be considered as an
additional account and shall be so billed.



   (D)   When two or more meters are installed on the same premise for
different consumers, they shall be closely grouped and each meter shall be
clearly marked as to the consumer to which it belongs.



(Prior Code, § 14-6-1)



§ 50.081  INSTALLATION FEE.



   Fees for water meter installations shall be established by resolution
of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 14-6-2)



§ 50.082  METER READINGS.



   (A)   Water meters shall be read once per month and a water usage
for each separate bill shall be rendered for each meter and mailed to the
owner of the property or the owner's authorized representative.



   (B)   If a water meter fails to operate and a reading cannot be
taken, the customer's water usage will be determined based on the average
monthly water usage at the property of the highest three months of water
usage for said property in the previous 12 months.



   (C)   In the event any condition (including, but not limited to,
dogs, locked gates, overgrown vegetation) on the premises that prevents the
reading of a water meter, the customer's water usage will be determined based
on the highest water usage at the property in the previous 12 months. The
owner is responsible for correcting said condition within 30 days of
notification from the city. The city will correct and bill for the cost of
corrective actions if no action is taken by the owner.



   (D)   Any customer may request the city perform a special testing of
the customer's water meter upon the payment of a deposit in an amount to be
set by resolution of the Council. If the special test indicates that the
meter or reading was inaccurate by more than 3%, the deposit shall be
returned to the customer and the billing adjusted accordingly; otherwise, the
deposit shall be retained by the city as a charge for the special meter
testing.



   (E)   If the results of a meter test reflects greater than a 3%
inaccuracy, the city shall replace the meter at no cost to the customer.



(Prior Code, § 14-6-3) (Ord. O10-06-08, passed 6-24-2010)



CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITIES



§ 50.095  CONSUMER WATER FACILITIES.



   The consumer shall have complete responsibility for the installation
and maintenance of adequate water facilities on the premises, and the city
shall not in any way be responsible for the installation, maintenance,
inspection, or damage of the facilities or damage caused by any defect in the
facilities on the consumer’s premises. In addition, the facilities shall be
maintained by the consumer in full compliance with any and all rules and
regulations of the city in addition to applicable state statutes.



(Prior Code, § 14-7-1)



§ 50.096  DAMAGE TO WATER FACILITIES.



   Any damage to the city water system on the consumer’s premises shall
be repaired or replaced by the consumer. In the event the consumer fails to
make the repair or replacement, the city may do so and the cost of such shall
be added to the consumer’s bill. If the charges are not paid, water service
may be discontinued.



(Prior Code, § 14-7-2)



§ 50.097  RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   Each consumer shall provide to the city such easement and right-of-way
as are necessary to provide water service to that consumer.



(Prior Code, § 14-7-3)



§ 50.098  INSTALLATION OF LINES.



   The city may refuse to provide service unless the lines or piping are
installed on the premises so as to prevent cross-connections or backflow.



(Prior Code, § 14-7-4)



§ 50.099  PROTECTION OF CITY PROPERTY.



   The consumer shall guarantee proper protection for city property placed
on his or her premises and shall permit access to it only to authorized
representatives of the city.



(Prior Code, § 14-7-5)



§ 50.100  PROHIBITED USES.



   No occupant or owner of any building into which water is introduced
will be allowed to supply water to other persons or families or for use on
any other property. The city reserves the right to shut off the supply for
abuses of water privileges after providing written notice and an opportunity
for a hearing to the consumer.



(Prior Code, § 14-7-6)



§ 50.101  COMMERCIAL USE.



   Any water service for commercial use shall not be included in a
residential service account and shall have a separate meter and connection.



(Prior Code, § 14-7-7)



§ 50.102  SPRINKLING RESTRICTIONS.



   In case of water shortage or scarcity, the Council may, by resolution,
place any restrictions which it deems necessary upon the use of water for
irrigation or sprinkling purposes.



(Prior Code, § 14-7-8)



§ 50.103  WASTE OF WATER.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently
permit or cause the escape or flow of water in such quantity to cause
flooding, or to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous
condition to such traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets of the
city.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently
permit or cause the escape or flow of irrigation water in such quantity as to
cause flooding, to impede traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets
of the city through the failure or neglect to properly operate or maintain
any irrigation structure, delivery ditch, or waste ditch in which the person
has a vested right or interest, or through the willful or negligent failure
of the person to accept irrigation water after it has been ordered by him or
her.



   (C)   Any person engaged in activities such as the washing of cars,
boats, and so forth shall use a water bucket and shall keep any water sprayed
from a hose to the least amount possible. Under no circumstances may a person
allow water to run continuously from a hose into the street.



   (D)   No person draining a swimming pool or backwashing a swimming
pool filter shall allow the water to run into the street. All such water must
either be entirely contained on the person’s property, or in the
alternative, pumped directly into the sewer line where it can be recaptured.



   (E)   All persons owning property which has plants which must be
watered shall design their landscaping in such a way to ensure that when
watering, the water does not escape their property.



   (F)   Special events utilizing water, such as charity car washes or
a Firefighter’s Muster, shall not be allowed except upon the express
permission of the city. Any person requesting a permit shall make written
application on a form provided by the city, and shall fulfill any reasonable
conditions placed on the issuance of the permit as the city may require. The
applications shall be filed with the City Clerk, reviewed by the Building
Inspector, and sent to the Council for approval. Prior to the issuance of any
permit, the applicant will be advised of the city’s goal to conserve water
and that the applicant will be expected to operate the special event in the
way that will use the least water.



   (G)   Consumers shall prevent unnecessary waste of water and keep
all water outlets closed when not in actual use. All water outlets, including
those used in conjunction with hydrants, urinals, water closets, bathtubs,
and other fixtures, must not be left running for any purpose other than the
use for which they were intended. In addition to the penalty provided herein
for code violations, the water supply may be turned off where any such waste
occurs after providing written notice and an opportunity for a hearing to
consumer.



(Prior Code, § 14-7-9)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.104  INSPECTIONS.



   Whenever, in the judgment of the City Manager or his or her designee,
it is deemed necessary, he or she may inspect the premises or buildings of
any water consumer for the purpose of examining the condition of all pipes,
motors, meters, and water fixtures, or the manner in which the water is used.
He or she shall be vigilant to protect and remedy all abuses, whether from
waste or other improper use of water.



(Prior Code, § 14-7-10)



§ 50.105  THEFT OF WATER.



   A person commits theft punishable under this code if, without lawful
authority, the person knowingly obtains water without paying or diverts water
to his or her own or another’s benefit without authority to do so, or
tampers with a water meter in such a manner as to alter or damage the meter
or obtain any water without payment.



(Prior Code, § 14-7-11)



BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-PREVENTION CONTROL



§ 50.120  PURPOSE.



   All provisions for this subchapter shall be interpreted to give effect
to the following purposes for which it is enacted:



   (A)   To protect the public potable water supply of the City of El
Mirage from the possibility of contamination or pollution by preventing the
backflow of contaminants and pollutants into the public potable water supply
system;



   (B)   To promote the elimination or control of existing
cross-connections, actual or potential, with a customer’s internal potable
water system, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and



   (C)   To provide for a continuing program of cross-connection
control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public
potable water supply system.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-1)



§ 50.121  BACKFLOW PREVENTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be utilized or
installed at every service connection to a customer’s water system or at
any usage point in the water system when the Water Department
(“Department” herein) determines that the potable water supplied by the
city may be subject to contamination, pollution, or other deterioration in
sanitary quality as a result of conditions within the customer’s water
system.



   (B)   The backflow assembly to be utilized or installed shall be
determined by the Department. The method required by the Department shall be
sufficient to protect against the potential degree of hazard, as determined
by the Department, to the public potable water supply from the customer’s
water system.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-2)



§ 50.122  HAZARD POTENTIAL.



   The degree of hazard potential to the public potable water supply and
system from a customer’s water supply system shall be determined using the
following hazard factors.



   (A)   Contamination. Any condition, device or practice which, in the
judgment of the Department, may create a danger to the health and well-being
of the potable water customers.



   (B)   Cross-connection. An actual or potential plumbing-type
connection that is not properly protected by an approved backflow prevention
assembly.



   (C)   Hazard. An actual or potential threat which may cause severe
damage to the physical facilities of the public potable water supply system
to which may have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in
the system.



   (D)   Pollution. An actual or potential threat to the physical
facilities of the public potable water supply system or to the public potable
water supply which, although not dangerous to health, would constitute a
nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable, or could cause damage to the
system or its appurtenances.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-3)



§ 50.123  BACKFLOW PREVENTION METHODS; LIST.



   (A)   A backflow prevention method shall be any assembly or other
means designed to prevent backflow. The following are the recognized backflow
prevention methods which the Department may require under § 50.121 or §
50.124.



      (1)   Air gap. The unobstructed vertical distance through the
free atmosphere between the opening of the pipe or faucet supplying potable
water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device. An approved air gap shall
be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe or faucet and in no case
less than one inch.



      (2)   Reduced pressure principle assembly (hereinafter
“RPA”). An assembly containing two independent acting approved check
valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent
pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves, and at
the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include
properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves located at
each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located test cocks.



      (3)   Double check valve assembly (hereinafter “DCVA”). An
assembly composed of two independently acting, approved check valves,
including tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly
and fitted with properly located test cocks.



      (4)   Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (hereinafter
“PVB”). An assembly containing an independently operating, loaded check
valve and an independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the
discharge side of the check valve. The assembly shall be equipped with
properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves located at
each end of the assembly.



   (B)   A backflow prevention assembly may be approved by the
Department if it has received the approval of the Foundation for
Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern
California and has conformed to the 1991 Edition of the UPC.



   (C)   The Department shall maintain a list of approved backflow
prevention assemblies, by type and manufacturer. The list shall be available
to any customer required to install a backflow prevention assembly.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-4)



§ 50.124  BACKFLOW PREVENTION METHODS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Whenever the following items exist or activities are conducted
on premises served by the public potable water system, a potential hazard to
the public potable water supply shall be presumed, and a backflow prevention
method of the type specified herein for that item or activity must be
utilized or installed at each service connection for that premise. The type
and size of the assembly shall be determined by the Department. The basis for
these requirements is contained in the Manual of Backflow Prevention and
Cross-Connection Control Program as is further set forth in § 50.136.



      (1)   Cooling tower, boiler, condenser, chiller, and other
cooling systems utilizing potable water: RPA.



      (2)   Tank, vessel, receptacle, and all other water
connections including mobile units without approved air gap (except emergency
vehicle and private swimming pools): RPA.



      (3)   Icemaker (other than a residential service): RPA.



      (4)   Water cooled equipment, boosters, pumps, or autoclaves:
RPA.



      (5)   Water treatment facilities and all water processing
(other than residential water softeners): RPA.



      (6)   Bottle washer, bedpan washer, garbage can washer: RPA.



      (7)   Pesticide, herbicide, fertilizer, and chemical
applicators (other than typical in-home use): RPA.



      (8)   Aspirator: RPA.



      (9)   Commercial dishwasher, food processing, and/or
preparation equipment, carbonation equipment, or other food service processes
utilizing potable water: RPA.



      (10)   Decorative fountain, baptismal, or any location water
is exposed to atmosphere: RPA.



      (11)   X-ray equipment, plating equipment, or any other
photographic processing equipment utilizing potable water: RPA.



      (12)   Auxiliary water supply and/or connections to unapproved
water supply systems: RPA.



      (13)   Reclaimed water customers: RPA.



      (14)   Recreational vehicle dump stations (sewer), or any
other locations where potable water may be exposed to bacteria, virus, or
gas: RPA.



      (15)   Any premises on which chemicals, oils, solvents,
pesticides, disinfectants, cleaning agents, acids, or other pollutants and/or
contaminants are handled in a manner by which they may come in direct contact
with potable water, or there is evidence of the potential to contact potable
water (other than typical, infrequent in-home applications): RPA.



      (16)   Materials and piping systems unapproved by the Uniform
Plumbing Code (UPS) or Environmental Protection Agency for potable water
usage (for fire systems see the following listings: 20, 21, and 22):
Contaminant: RPA Pollutant: CDVA.



      (17)   Separately metered or unprotected irrigation systems,
and construction water services: RPA or PVB - Pollutant: CDVA.



      (18)   Any premises where a cross-connection is maintained or
where internal backflow protection is required pursuant to the Uniform
Plumbing Code: RPA.



      (19)   Multi-metered properties with more than one meter
connected to another or any building three stories or greater than 34 feet in
height from service level: DCVA.



      (20)   Fire Systems - American Water Works Association Classes
1 and 2 systems constructed of a piping material not approved for potable
water pursuant to the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the city: as
required by the City of El Mirage.



      (21)   Fire Systems-American Water Works Association Classes
3, 4, 5, 6: DCVA or RPA as allowed. Backflow assemblies with detectors may be
required by the Department for certain installations.



      (22)   Fire systems which require backflow protection and
where backflow protection is required on the industrial/domestic service
connection that is located on the same premises, both service connections
will have adequate backflow protection for the highest degree of hazard
affecting either system: RPA - (Requirement may be waived by the Department).



   (B)   When two or more of the activities listed above are conducted
on the same premises and served by the same service connection or multiple
service connections, the most restrictive backflow prevention method required
for any of the activities conducted on the premises shall be required to be
utilized or installed at each service connection. The order of most
restrictive to least restrictive backflow prevention methods shall be as
follows:



      (1)   Air gap (most restrictive);



      (2)   Reduced pressure principle assembly (RPA);



      (3)   Double check valve assembly (DCVA); and



      (4)   Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (PVB) (least
restrictive).



(Prior Code, § 14-10-5)



§ 50.125  BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed by the
customer, at the customer’s expense, and in compliance with the standards
and specifications adopted by the city, at each service connection as close
to the service connection as possible and on private property unless
otherwise authorized. The assembly shall have a diameter at least equal to
the diameter of the supply piping or service connection as required by UPC.



   (B)   The assembly shall be in an accessible location approved by
the Department. The reduced pressure principle assembly, pressure vacuum
breaker assembly, and the double check valve assembly shall be installed
above ground.



   (C)   When a customer desires a continuous water supply, two
backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed parallel to one another at
the service connection to allow a continuous water supply during testing of
the backflow prevention assemblies. When backflow prevention assemblies are
installed parallel to one another, the sum of the cross-sectional areas of
the assemblies shall be at least equal to the cross-sectional area of the
service connection.



   (D)   No person shall alter, modify, bypass, or remove a backflow
prevention assembly without the approval of the Department.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-6)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.126  INSTALLATION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES FOR FIRE SYSTEMS.



   In addition to the requirements of § 50.124, the following shall also
apply:



   (A)   Fire protection systems consist of sprinklers, hose
connections, and hydrants. Sprinkler systems may be dry or wet, open or
closed. Systems of fixed-spray nozzles may be used indoor or outdoors for
protection of flammable liquid and other hazardous processes. It is standard
practice, especially in cities, to equip automatic sprinkler system with Fire
Department pumper connections.



      (1)   A meter (compound, detector check) should not normally
be permitted as part of a backflow prevention assembly. An exception may be
made, however, if the meter and backflow prevention assembly are specifically
designed for that purpose.



      (2)   For cross-connection control, fire protection systems
shall be classified on the basis of water source and arrangement of supplies
as follows:



         (a)   Class 1 - Direct connections from public water
mains only; no pumps, tanks, or reservoirs; no physical connection from other
water supplies; no antifreeze or other additives of any kind; all sprinkler
drains discharging to atmosphere, dry wells, or other safe outlets. For
minimum protection, see § 50.124;



         (b)   Class 2 - Same as Class 1, except that booster
pumps may be installed in the connections from the street mains. Booster
pumps do not affect the potability of the system; it is necessary; however,
to avoid drafting so much water that pressure in the water main is reduced
below 20 psi. For minimum protection, see § 50.124;



         (c)   Class 3 - Direct connection from public water
supply main plus one or more of the following: elevated storage tanks, fire
pumps taking suction from above-ground covered reservoirs, or tanks; and
pressure tanks (all storage facilities are filled or connected to public
water only, the water in the tanks to be maintained in a potable condition).
Otherwise, Class 3 systems are the same as Class 1. Class 3 systems will
generally require minimum protection (approved double-check valves) to
prevent stagnant waters from backflowing into the public potable-water system;



         (d)   Class 4 - Directly supplies from public mains
similar to Classes 1 and 2, and with an auxiliary water supply on or
available to the premises; or an auxiliary supply may be located within 1,700
feet of the pumper connection. Class 4 systems will normally require backflow
protection at the service connection. The type (air gap or reduced pressure)
will generally depend on the quality of the auxiliary supply;



         (e)   Class 5 - Directly supplies from public mains, and
interconnect with auxiliary supplies, such as: pumps taking suction from
reservoirs exposed to contamination, or rivers and ponds, driven wells,
mills, or other industrial water system; or where anti-freeze or other
additives are used. Class 4 and 5 systems normally would need maximum
protection (air gap or reduced pressure) to protect the public potable water
system; and



         (f)   Class 6 - Combined industrial and fire protection
systems supplied from the public water mains only, with or without gravity
storage or pump suction tanks. Class 6 system protection would depend on the
requirements of both industry and fire protection, and could only be
determined by a survey of the premises.



   (B)   When a backflow prevention assembly is required for a water
service connection supplying water only to a fire system, the assembly shall
be installed on the service line in compliance with standard specifications
adopted by the City of El Mirage. (Installation of DCVA’s or DDCVA’s in a
vertical position on the riser may be allowed on fire systems with the
Department’s approval.)



(Prior Code, § 14-10-7)



§ 50.127  INSPECTIONS.



   A customer’s water system shall be available at all times during
business operations for premises inspection by the Department. The inspection
shall be conducted to determine whether any cross-connection or other hazard
potentials exist and to determine compliance with this subchapter and
modifications, if any, pursuant to § 50.130.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-8)



§ 50.128  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Installation permits for the installation of all backflow prevention
assemblies required by the Department shall be obtained from the Department
prior to installation. A separate permit shall be obtained for each required
backflow prevention assembly to be installed, including any replacement.



   (A)   Notification. It shall be the duty of the person doing the
work authorized by the permit to notify the Department, orally or in writing,
that the system is ready for inspection. The notification shall be given not
less than 24 hours before the work is to be inspected and shall be given only
if there is reason to believe that the work done will meet UPC and current
USCS standards, as are referenced in the Backflow Prevention Manual.



   (B)   Stop orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the
provisions of the UPC or this code, the Department or an authorized
representative may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any
persons engaged in doing or causing the work to be done, and any such person
shall forthwith stop the work until authorized by the Department to proceed
with the work.



   (C)   Suspension or revocation. The Department or any employee may,
in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this code,
whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect
information supplies, or in violation of any ordinance or regulations of any
provision of the UPC or this code.



   (D)   Permit fee. A fee will be required on all backflow
preventions. The fee for the permit is $39.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-9)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.129  TESTS, MAINTENANCE, RECORDS.



   (A)   The customer shall be responsible for testing and servicing
backflow prevention assemblies at least once a year. If the testing reveals
the assembly to be defective or in unsatisfactory operating condition, the
customer shall be responsible for any necessary repairs, including
replacement or overhaul of the assembly, if necessary, which will return the
assembly to satisfactory operating condition.



   (B)   If the Department or a customer learns or discovers, during
the interim period between tests, that an assembly is defective or in
unsatisfactory operating condition, the customer shall be responsible for any
necessary repairs, including replacement or overhaul of the assembly, if
necessary, which will return the assembly to satisfactory operating condition.



   (C)   The annual testing shall be performed by an individual
certified to conduct the testing by the American Water Works Association
agency, approved by the Department, and licensed by the American Water Works
Association (AWWA) unless otherwise authorized by the Department.
Additionally, the Department reserves the right to require further
examination and/or qualifications for recognition as an approved tester. A
list of certified, approved, and recognized individuals will be maintained by
the Department and will be available upon request to all persons required to
install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly. A certification issued to
a backflow prevention assembly tester may be revoked or suspended for
improper testing, maintenance, reporting, or other improper practices.



   (D)   The tester shall be responsible for providing the results of
all tests and all servicing, repairs, overhauls, or replacements of the
backflow prevention assembly to the Department.



   (E)   Fire systems shall not be out of service for more than eight
consecutive hours due to testing, maintenance, or repairs. The City of El
Mirage Fire Department having jurisdiction, shall be issued 24-hour notice
prior to shut-off and immediate notice of re-connection. Fire system flow
test shall be performed in conjunction with the backflow assembly testing on
all fire systems.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-10)



§ 50.130  MODIFICATION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION REQUIREMENTS.



   If the Department determines, after inspection of the customer’s
system, that a backflow assembly less restrictive than that required in §
50.124 will provide adequate protection of the public potable water supply
from the degree of hazard potential by the customer’s water system, the
Department may, at its sole discretion, modify the requirement of § 50.124
accordingly. A written record of the modification shall be maintained by the
Department.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-11)



§ 50.131  DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE.



   (A)   If the Department discovers that a customer has not installed
a required backflow assembly or that a backflow assembly has been improperly
tested or maintained, bypassed or removed, or that an unprotected
cross-connection exists in the customer’s water system, the water service
to that service connection shall be disconnected if the situation is not
remedied within the time specified in the notice sent to the customer as
required by this section. The service shall not be restored until the
condition is remedied.



   (B)   Water service to a fire sprinkler system shall not be subject
to disconnection under this section. If a situation, which would otherwise
result in discontinuance of water service in division (A) of this section, is
not remedied within the time provided in the notice sent to the customer,
multiple violations will accrue for each day the violation continues.



   (C)   Prior to disconnecting any water service because a condition
set forth in division (A) of this section exists, the Department shall issue
a notice to the customer describing the condition and notifying the customer
that the condition must be remedied within 45 days from the initial
inspection date. If there is no immediate action on the part of the customer,
a second notice will be sent 30 days after the initial inspection date
stating that water service will be disconnected within 15 days of the second
notice. If there is still no action, a turn off notice shall be sent to the
customer stating that service will be disconnected on date certain
(approximately seven days from the date of the turn off notice). For retrofit
notification procedures, see § 50.134.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-12)



§ 50.132  ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL.



   (A)   An administrative appeal may be requested whenever a violation
or dispute of any of the requirements of this subchapter is determined,
whether during construction or at the plan review stage, and the applicant
wishes to appeal the decision of the staff because of code interpretation,
unreasonable hardship, or other acceptable reasons.



   (B)   The appeal may be made to the Backflow Cross-Connection
Hearing Committee as follows.



      (1)   The applicant shall file a written appeal on the forms
provided by the Department.



      (2)   The appeal will be heard within seven days, at a
regular, specified time.



      (3)   The Hearing Committee shall consist of the Public Works
Director, and the Mayor. Additional inspectors or other technical persons may
be added for a particular appeal, at the discretion of the Department.



      (4)   Adequate information shall be provided by the applicant
in order to fully describe the conditions in question.



      (5)   The applicant may, but is not required to, personally
attend the meeting.



      (6)   There shall be no further appeal following the
Committee’s decision which shall be binding on the city and the applicant.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-13)



§ 50.133  VIOLATION A CIVIL INFRACTION.



   If the Department discovers a cross-connection problem has occurred
which results in contamination of the public water system, the City of El
Mirage will forward a written cross-connection incident report within five
business days to the local health authority containing the following
information:



   (A)   Date and time of discovery of the unprotected cross-connection;



   (B)   Nature of the cross-connection problem;



   (C)   Affected area;



   (D)   Cause of the cross-connection problem;



   (E)   Public health impacts;



   (F)   Dates and texts of any public health advisories issued;



   (G)   Corrective action taken; and



   (H)   Date of completion of corrective action.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-14)



§ 50.134  RETROACTIVE APPLICATION.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all new water
customers or users and all water customers or users existing prior to the
enactment date of this subchapter. Non-compliance may result in
discontinuance of water service without further notice.



   (B)   Backflow prevention assemblies installed prior to enactment of
this subchapter, and which do not comply with the requirements set forth
herein, shall be replaced with assemblies which comply with the standards set
forth herein.



   (C)   The initial backflow assembly installation permit fee required
by § 50.135 shall be waived by the Department for retrofit premises only.



   (D)   Meters documented as running backwards or contamination
conditions as defined in § 50.122 shall be immediately addressed under §
50.131, and the provisions of § 50.131(A) shall not apply to them.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-15)



§ 50.135  FEES; RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The fee for any permit required pursuant to the terms of this
subchapter shall be established and modified by Council resolution from time
to time. The water user will be responsible for initial testing after
installation. Fees shall be payable at the time of obtaining a permit.



   (B)   The Department may adopt from time to time, rules and
regulations required to enforce the provisions of this subchapter.



   (C)   All such rules and regulations shall have the force and effect
of law. Violation of same shall be considered a violation of city code and
prosecuted as such.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-16)



§ 50.136  BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTION MANUAL INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   All information and technical requirements not specifically
set forth in this subchapter (standard details and the like) will be a matter
of public record and will be contained in the following document.



   University of Southern California



   Manual of Cross-Connection Control published by:



   Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research,
University of Southern California



   Dated June, 1988, or the latest revision thereto.



   (B)   The manual is adopted by this reference as part of this
subchapter and shall be available to the public during the Department’s
normal business hours for inspection and purchase. Three copies of the manual
shall be kept on file in the City Clerk’s office.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-17)



LIABILITY



§ 50.150  INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.



   The City of El Mirage shall notify the consumer in advance of any
anticipated interruption of service when advance notice is possible. The city
shall not be responsible for any interruption of water service caused by
forces beyond its control.



(Prior Code, §§ 14-8-1 and 14-11-1)



§ 50.151  LIABILITY LIMITED.



   No liability shall attach to the city for any injury or damages that
may result from turning on or shutting off the water in any main service
connection or pipe; or the restriction of use or discontinuance of any water
service, or any failure of the water supply, regardless of any notice or lack
of notice thereof. The city shall not be held liable, in any respect, for the
condition, defects, failure, or use of any pipe, connection, fixture, or
appurtenance not belonging to the city, or any premises, or for loss or
damage resulting therefrom.



(Prior Code, §§ 14-8-2 and 14-11-2)



§ 50.152  REGULATIONS PART OF CONTRACT.



   All regulations contained in this subchapter or adopted pursuant to
same shall be considered a part of the contract of every consumer/occupant
taking water service from the city, and the consumer/occupant taking water
service shall be considered as having expressly consented to be bound
thereby. Consumers outside the city limits shall, upon application for water
service, be required to sign a statement agreeing to the regulations set
forth in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 14-11-3)



§ 50.153  UNAUTHORIZED USE; TAMPERING; DAMAGES.



   (A)   Any person who engages in the unauthorized use of water
services shall be subject to a tampering fee set by resolution of Council,
criminal charges, and charges for the estimated amount of water used for each
occurrence of unauthorized use of water services. Unauthorized use of water
services shall mean the taking of service by:



      (1)   Turning or attempting to turn service on without
authority;



      (2)   Connecting or attempting to connect directly into
service or hydrant without a meter;



      (3)   Intentionally or knowingly connecting or attempting to
connect directly to other properties or service connections;



      (4)   Intentionally or knowingly modifying or attempting to
modify a meter or service apparatus so as to cause loss or reduction in
consumption registration; or



      (5)   Intentionally or knowingly modifying or attempting to
modify a service connection to by-pass a meter.



   (B)   A tampering fee assessed pursuant to this section shall be
charged against the premises, and no water service shall be provided to the
premises until the tampering fee is paid in full. The provisions of this
section shall not preclude the filing of criminal charges or criminal
penalties.



   (C)   Charges for damages and/or special services will be assessed
based upon materials and/or labor plus a 15% administrative fee. The charges
for damages and special services shall be assessed against the premises, and
the supply of water to such premises shall be withheld until such sum is
paid. The provisions of this section shall not preclude the filing of
criminal charges or criminal penalties.



   (D)   The city is hereby authorized to disconnect water service to
any premises served in violation of this section.



   (E)   Investigation of criminal charges for theft of water services
and damages to city property shall be investigated by the City of El Mirage
Police Department.



(Ord. O10-06-08, passed 6-24-2010)



§ 50.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   It shall be a civil infraction punishable by a fine of up to
$1,000 for each day a violation of any provision of §§ 50.120 through
50.136 continues. If the violation consists of a failure to obtain a permit
for installation or inspection of a backflow device, the fine shall be a
minimum of $250 for the first violation, $500 for a second violation,
and$1,000 for a third violation. If the violation consists of a failure to
timely report the results of testing or retesting of a backflow device, the
fine shall be minimum of $450 per day for each working day a violation
continues.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-14)



   (C)   Theft of water fines will be on a case by case basis from $0
to $500 per day per occurrence. The fines will be assessed and billed by the
Water Department.



(Prior Code, § 14-10-18)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   51.001   Definitions



Rules and Regulations



   51.015   Application for service



   51.016   Charges and fees



Extension Policy



   51.030   Extension policy



Department and Consumer Responsibilities



   51.045   Sewer Department responsibilities and liabilities



   51.046   User responsibility



   51.047   Interference with Sewer Department or Building Inspector;
digging up streets without permit



   51.048   Unsanitary disposal of excrement prohibited



   51.049   Private sewage systems



   51.050   Tampering with equipment prohibited



   51.051   Permit required



   51.052   Application



   51.053   Inspection and approval by Sewer Department or Building
Inspector



   51.054   Records to be kept by Sewer Department



   51.055   Fees



Use of Public Sewers



   51.070   Prohibited substances and discharge limitations



   51.071   Interceptors required



   51.072   Authority of Sewer Department to establish permissible
limits, and impose charges



   51.073   Preliminary treatment



   51.074   Control manholes



   51.075   Special agreements with industrial concerns



   51.076   Right of entry for inspection



   51.077   Discharges to be reported



   51.078   Tests and analyses



   51.079   Remedies



Sewer Service Charges



   51.090   User charge formula



   51.091   Determination of wastewater quantity



   51.092   Determination of wastewater quality



   51.093   Other user charge provisions



   51.094   Other sewer service charges



   51.095   Payment of bills and charges



   51.096   Distribution of sewage system revenues and utilization of
funds



Industrial User and Pretreatment Requirements



   51.110   General industrial user requirements



   51.111   Specific industrial user requirements



   51.112   Authority of the Sewer Department



   51.113   Confidential information



   51.114   More stringent to control



Accidental Discharge



   51.125   Permittee provides protection



   51.126   Permittee shall notify city of accidental discharge



   51.127   Permittee will notify employees



   51.128   Permittee shall label potential accidental discharge points



Sewer Development Fees



   51.140   Purpose



   51.141   Fees; collection; exemptions; disposition



   51.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVED LABORATORY PROCEDURES. The measurements, tests, and analyses
of the characteristics of water and wastes in accordance with analytical
procedures as established in 40 C.F.R. part 136 as revised.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (B.O.D.). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20°C expressed in milligrams per liter.



   BRANCH SEWER. A sewer which receives sewage from lateral sewers from a
relatively small area.



   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the sewer
connection or other place of disposal.



   CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Federal categorical pretreatment standards issued
in accordance with § 307 of the Clean Water Act.



   CITY. The City of El Mirage, Arizona.



   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.



   DEVELOPER. Any person engaged in the organizing and financing of a
sewage collecting system within an area contributing to a trunk sewer of the
city sewer system. Such may be either a subdivider or a legally constituted
improvement district.



   DOMESTIC WASTE. A typical, residential-type waste which requires no
pretreatment under the provisions of this chapter before discharging into the
sanitary sewer system, excluding all commercial, manufacturing, and
industrial wastes.



   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage, and sale of products.



   INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE. Any introduction into the POTW of a non-domestic
pollutant which:



      (1)   Is produced by a source which would be subject to any
categorical standards or pretreatment requirements if such source were to be
discharged to the POTW; and



      (2)   Contains any substance or pollutant for which a
discharge limitation or prohibition has been established by any categorical
standard or pretreatment requirement.



   INDUSTRIAL USER.



      (1)   Any non-residential user of the sewer system which
discharges more than the equivalent strength of 25,000 gallons per day of
domestic wastes;



      (2)   Any non-residential user of the sewer system which
either discharges or produces a waste which potentially could be discharged
to the POTW which would be subject to any categorical standard or
pretreatment requirement;



      (3)   Has control over the disposal of a waste as described in
divisions (1) and (2) above; and/or



      (4)   Has the right of possession and control over any
property which produces a waste as described in division (1), (2), or (3)
above.



   INDUSTRIAL USER PERMIT or PERMIT. The permit granted by the city which
each industrial user must first obtain prior to causing or allowing any
industrial discharge to the POTW.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Liquid wastes from industrial users.



   INTERFERENCE. Inhibition or disruption of the sewer system, treatment
process, or operations as the result of the discharge of any pollutant
capable of causing or significantly contributing to the:



      (1)   Violation of any NPDES permit standard which has been
imposed on the city;



      (2)   City’s inability to reasonably allow the maximum
benefit reuse of POTW residuals; or



      (3)   City’s ability to reasonably provide the least
expensive method of disposal for POTW residuals.



   LATERAL SEWER. A sewer which receives sewage from one or more branch
sewers as tributaries.



   MAIN SEWER. A sewer which receives sewage from one or more branch
sewers as tributaries.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, or other body of
surface or groundwater.



   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   POTW. Publicly-owned treatment works, and includes all facilities for
collecting, transporting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage, which
are owned and/or operated, in whole or in part, by the city and which provide
the city with wastewater collection and disposal services.



   PRETREATMENT. The physical, chemical, biological, or other treatment of
any industrial discharge prior to discharge to the POTW, for the purpose of:



      (1)   Reducing the amount or concentration of any pollutant;



      (2)   Eliminating the discharge of any pollutant; or



      (3)   Altering the nature of any pollutant characteristic to a
less harmful state.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. Garbage that has been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-fourth
inch in any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer controlled by public authority.



   REPLACEMENT. Those expenditures made for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories, and/or appurtenances during the useful life of the
treatment works which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance
of the treatment works for which they were designed and constructed.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer connected to the POTW which carries sewage and
to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments together with
such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.



   SEWER CONNECTION. The connection to the public sewer and the extension
therefrom of the sewer to the property line at the alley or the curb line of
the street, whichever is applicable, depending on the location of the public
sewer.



   SEWER CONNECTION FEE. The initial sewer connection charge as set forth
in § 51.016 and shall apply to all sewer connections to the public sewer.



   SEWER DEPARTMENT. Those officers and agents of the city supervising
sewer operations for the city.



   STANDARD METHODS. The procedure as described in the most current
edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
published by the American Health Association, or the most current edition of
Manual of Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes published by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.



   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   TRUNK SEWER. A sewer which receives sewage from many tributary main
sewers and serves as an outlet for a large territory.



   USER. Any person, entity, lot, parcel of land, building, premises,
municipal corporation, or other political subdivision that discharges,
causes, or permits the discharge of wastewater into the sewage system.



   WASTEWATER. Any liquid- or water-carried pollutant, including an
industrial discharge, which is introduced into the sewage works from any
dwelling, commercial building, industrial facility, or institution or by any
user.



   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs either
continuously or intermittently.



(Prior Code, Art. 16-1)



RULES AND REGULATIONS



§ 51.015  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.



   (A)   No sewer connection to the city POTW shall be made by any
person or the city except upon approval of the city. A written application
for sewer connection shall be furnished to the city by the owner, as
reflected in the records of the Maricopa County Assessor's Office, of the
property to which sanitary sewer service is to be furnished or by the owner's
designated representative, evidenced by a notarized power-of-attorney signed
by the owner, or by such other alternative means as set by the city. If
ownership of a recent transferee of property is not reflected in the County
Assessor's records, ownership may be established by a fully executed sales
agreement or other documentation acceptable to the city.



   (B)   An initial sewer connection fee shall be required in addition
to a monthly charge for the sanitary sewer connection according to the rates
fixed by the city until the service is discontinued by order of the Public
Works Department or written order of the owner or the owner's designated
representative. A charge shall be made for re-application of service to an
existing connection. Any sewer connection fee is non-refundable. Sewer
connection fees will be waived by the city for all properties, both
residential and commercial, located within city limits that sign up for
connection for the POTW prior to July 1,1987, and whose use was in existence
prior to May 1, 1987.



(Prior Code, § 16-2-1) (Ord. O10-06-08, passed 6-24-2010)



§ 51.016  CHARGES AND FEES.



   The sewer connection fee and monthly charge shall be as determined from
time to time by resolution of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 16-2-2)



EXTENSION POLICY



§ 51.030  EXTENSION POLICY.



   (A)   When it becomes necessary to extend main sewers from a distant
point in order to serve a new development, the cost of the main extension
(hereafter “extension main”) will be the responsibility of the developer.
In no case will the developer be required to pay for an extension main
exceeding 18 inches in diameter. The city reserves the right to increase the
diameter of an extension main beyond 18 inches; in such case, the developer
shall pay only that portion of the cost as would have been incurred were an
18-inch extension main installed.



   (B)   Plans and specifications for all extension mains must be
approved by the City Engineer. Engineering costs incurred by the developer
for preparation of plans and specifications and staking of extension mains
may be included in repayment agreements pursuant to division (E) of this
section. The cost of branch sewers and lateral sewers within the boundaries
of the development shall not be eligible for inclusion in extension main
repayment agreements.



   (C)   Sealed bids for construction of extension mains shall be
submitted to the office of the City Manager. The city and developer, together
and separately, reserve the right to reject any and all bids. Construction
costs for extension mains shall be determined in advance of construction.
Upon completion, extension mains shall become the property of the city which
shall maintain exclusive control of connections.



   (D)   In the event any subsequent developer desires to connect onto
the extension main, the city shall enter into an agreement with subsequent
developer establishing an equitable and reasonable charge to permit the
connections. The charge shall be established giving due consideration to the
effective drainage area of the extension main and be computed on a per-acre
basis.



   (E)   Extension main connection charges as provided in division (D)
of this section shall be repaid to the original developer. The total of the
repayments shall not exceed the original construction cost. The period of any
repayment agreement negotiated pursuant to this section shall not extend
beyond 15 years from the date construction of the extension main has been
completed. No interest may be accrued to the original construction cost.



(Prior Code, Art. 16-3)



DEPARTMENT AND CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITIES



§ 51.045  SEWER DEPARTMENT RESPONSIBILITIES AND LIABILITIES.



   (A)   The Sewer Department shall not be responsible for the
installation, maintenance, or inspection of the user’s building sewer,
piping, or apparatus or for any defects therein.



   (B)   The Sewer Department shall have the right to refuse service,
unless the building sewer is installed in such manner as to prevent
cross-connections or backflow.



   (C)   Under normal conditions, the user shall be notified of any
anticipated interruption of service.



   (D)   The Sewer Department shall not be responsible for the
negligence of third persons or forces beyond the control of the Sewer
Department resulting in any interruption of service or damage to the property
of the user.



   (E)   The Sewer Department may refuse service to any prospective
user when the capacity of the POTW will not permit additional loads being
placed thereon.



   (F)   The Sewer Department may discontinue its service for the
following additional reasons:



      (1)   To prevent fraud or abuse; and



      (2)   The user’s willful disregard of or refusal to comply
with this chapter or other rules as may be adopted by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 16-4-1)



§ 51.046  USER RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Building sewer connections on the user’s premises shall be
so arranged as to provide service to one lot. If additional service is
required, it will be considered as a separate and individual account.



   (B)   The user’s building sewer line, sewer connection, and
apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the user, at the user’s
expense, in a safe and efficient manner and in accordance with the Sewer
Department’s rules and regulations and in full compliance with the
regulations of the State Department of Health Services.



   (C)   The user shall safeguard the Sewer Department’s property
placed on the user’s premises and shall permit access to it only by the
authorized representatives of the Sewer Department.



   (D)   In the event that any loss or damage to the property of the
Sewer Department or any accident or injury to persons or property is caused
by or results from the negligence or wrongful act of the user, his or her
agents, or employees, the cost of necessary repairs or replacements shall be
paid by the user to the Sewer Department and any liability otherwise
resulting shall be the responsibility of the user. The user agrees to
indemnify the city, its agents, and employees against any loss or liability
resulting therefrom. In addition, the amount of the loss or damage or the
cost of repairs may be added to the user’s bill, and, if not paid, service
may be discontinued as set forth herein.



   (E)   When service to a user shall require the laying of any city
sewer lines or the installation of any other city property on, under, across,
or over the user’s property, the user will grant to the city an easement,
right-of-way, or license for the installation.



(Prior Code, § 16-4-2)



§ 51.047  INTERFERENCE WITH SEWER DEPARTMENT OR BUILDING INSPECTOR; DIGGING
UP STREETS WITHOUT PERMIT.



   It is unlawful for any person:



   (A)   To interfere in any way with the officers of the City Sewer
Department or Building Inspector in the discharge of any of their duties,
either in the tapping of any sewer pipe, main, or lateral belonging to the
city, or in the laying or connecting of the pipe, main, or lateral;



   (B)   To dig up or cause to be dug up any street or alley in the
city for the purpose of connection with the sewer system of the city without
first obtaining a permit from the Sewer Department;



   (C)   Fail or neglect to replace the street or alley in its original
condition under the supervision of the Sewer Department and as required by
it, or to fail to supply the city with a performance bond or cash deposit, if
required by the Sewer Department, to guarantee the full, proper, and timely
street or alley repair; and



   (D)   Tapping of any sewer pipe, main, or lateral except in the
presence and under the inspection of a proper representative of the Sewer
Department.



(Prior Code, § 16-4-3)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.048  UNSANITARY DISPOSAL OF EXCREMENT PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited in
an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in
any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement or
other objectionable waste.



(Prior Code, § 16-4-4)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.049  PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Treatment of polluted wastes required. It shall be unlawful to
discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the city, any sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided, in accordance with
provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   Compliance with subchapter. Except as provided in this
subchapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain within the city any
privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage.



   (C)   When permitted; sanitation. Where a public sanitary or
combined sewer is not available within the city or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the city, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system, which complies with the provisions, recommendations,
and regulations of the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) and
the sanitary code of the county health department. Such installations must be
approved in writing by the City Engineer prior to requesting a permit from
the county. The private sewage disposal system shall be constructed,
maintained, and operated at all times in a sanitary manner.



   (D)   (1)   Discontinuance. Within 180 days after a public sewer
becomes available within 300 feet of and directly adjacent to any property
served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made
to the public sewer, at the property owner’s expense, and in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and
similar private sewage facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.



      (2)   Notwithstanding division (D)(1)  above and within 60
days of receiving an official notice from the city of noncompliance with
division (D(1), the property owner may petition the City Engineer to continue
operating and maintaining the private system upon providing the City Engineer
with a recent (no older than five years) inspection report conducted at the
property owner's expense, by a qualified firm or the County Health
Department, establishing the private system is operating properly and poses
no environmental problems or hazards. The inspection report shall include an
expiration date or a recommended date for re-inspection, at which time the
City Engineer may request a new inspection report. At any time the City
Engineer determines an inspection report to be inadequate, the property owner
will be given 180 days within which to connect to the public sewer and to
abandon the private system.



      (3)   At any time a private system, in an area serviced by
public sewer, (1) requires repairs or is modified and such repair or
modification requires a permit by the county or (2) creates an environmental
problem or hazard which is not repaired or which cannot be repaired without a
permit issued by the county, the property owner shall immediately make
modifications to connect to the public sewer and abandon the existing private
system(s) servicing the property.



      (4)   Any septic tank, cesspool or similar private sewage
disposal facilities abandoned pursuant to this section shall be filled with
suitable material in accordance with all applicable state and county
regulations.



(Prior Code, § 16-4-5)  (Ord. O11-01-03, passed 1-13-2011; Ord. O13-06-08,
passed 6-4-2013)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.050  TAMPERING WITH EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED.



   No person shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with
any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is the POTW.



(Prior Code, § 16-4-6)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.051  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any POTW without first obtaining a
written permit from the Sewer Department.



(Prior Code, § 16-4-7)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.052  APPLICATION.



   Upon issuance of a required permit to any person, each and every permit
issued shall be presented by the person to the Sewer Department and
application made for the building connection.



(Prior Code, § 16-4-8)



§ 51.053  INSPECTION AND APPROVAL BY SEWER DEPARTMENT OR BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   No building sewer will be connected to the POTW until it has been
inspected and approved by the Sewer Department or Building Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 16-4-9)



§ 51.054  RECORDS TO BE KEPT BY SEWER DEPARTMENT.



   The Sewer Department shall keep a record of all building and sewer
connections made and the purpose for which they are to be used, together with
the name of the owner of the property, his or her agent or representative.



(Prior Code, § 16-4-10)



§ 51.055  FEES.



   The fee for each building sewer connection for all users shall be set
by resolution of the City Council. Classes may be established for different
users, and different fees established for each class.



(Prior Code, § 16-4-11)



USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS



§ 51.070  PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES AND DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Except as provided in this section, no person shall discharge
or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes
into any public sewer:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F;



      (2)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas;



      (3)   Any garbage that is not properly shredded;



      (4)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, grits such as
brick, cement, onyx, carbide, or any other solid or viscous substance capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewer works;



      (5)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and
one-half or higher than nine or having any other corrosive property capable
of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the
POTW;



      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous
substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the POTW;



      (7)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle the materials at the sewage treatment plant;



      (8)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of
creating a public nuisance;



      (9)   Any water or wastewater greater than the following
parameters (mg/l):



 



Total grease, oil, and the like
 
100.0


Dissolved sulfides
 
0.5


Cyanide (amenable to chlorination)
 
0.2


Total cyanide
 
2.0


Arsenic
 
0.1


ChromiumVI
 
0.5


Barium
 
10.0


Copper
 
10.0


Boron
 
10.0


Lead
 
0.5


Cadmium
 
0.1


Manganese
 
0.5




 



      (10)   Any water or wastewater that has, in any way, been
diluted, as a substitute for pretreatment, for the purpose of obtaining
compliance with any categorical standard or pretreatment requirement imposed
by this subchapter except where dilution is expressly authorized by any
categorical standard;



      (11)   Any water or wastewater that could cause a violation of
any categorical standard or pretreatment requirements;



      (12)   Any water or wastewater that is transported from the
point of discharge to the POTW by any septic tank pumper, chemical waste
hauler, or similarly transported unless the transporter has first:



         (a)   Disclosed to the Sewer Department the origin,
nature, concentration, and volume of all pollutants to be discharged; and



         (b)   Obtained the consent of the Sewer Department to
discharge.



      (13)   Any water or wastewater which could cause interference
with POTW operations.



(Prior Code, § 16-5-1)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.071  INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Sewer Department, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units.



   (B)   Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.
They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with
easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gas tight and
watertight.



   (C)   Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall
be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.



(Prior Code, § 16-5-2)



§ 51.072  AUTHORITY OF SEWER DEPARTMENT TO ESTABLISH PERMISSIBLE LIMITS,
AND IMPOSE CHARGES.



   In addition to the discharge limitation contained herein, the city
shall have the authority to establish quantity of discharges and permissible
limits of concentration for various specific substances, materials, waters,
or wastewaters that can be accepted into the POTW, and to specify those
substances, materials, waters, or wastewaters that are prohibited from
entering the POTW. Each permissible limit so established shall be placed on
file with the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 16-5-3)



§ 51.073  PRELIMINARY TREATMENT.



   (A)   Required. Where necessary in the opinion of the Sewer
Department, any user of the POTW shall provide, at his or her expense, such
pretreatment as may be necessary to reduce objectionable characteristics or
constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in this subchapter.



   (B)   Approval. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed pretreatment facilities shall be submitted
for approval of the Sewer Department and the Arizona State Department of
Health Services. No construction of the facilities shall be commenced until
the approvals are obtained in writing.



   (C)   Maintenance of facilities. Where pretreatment facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.



(Prior Code, § 16-5-4)



§ 51.074  CONTROL MANHOLES.



   When required by the Sewer Department, the owner of any property served
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation and sampling
of wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Sewer
Department. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense
and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.



(Prior Code, § 16-5-5)



§ 51.075  SPECIAL AGREEMENTS WITH INDUSTRIAL CONCERNS.



   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial user whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore by
the industrial user.



(Prior Code, § 16-5-7)



§ 51.076  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION.



   (A)   Any authorized employee of the Sewer Department shall, upon
presentation of his or her credentials, have free access at all reasonable
hours to any commercial or industrial premises connected to the POTW for the
purpose of making an inspection of the premises to determine the nature and
quantity of wastes discharged to the POTW.



   (B)   Service people, industrial waste inspectors, sanitary
engineers, or other employees of the Sewer Department, whose duty it may be
to enter upon commercial or industrial premises to make inspections and
collect samples or measure the quantity of waste discharged to the POTW,
shall be provided with credentials to identify them as authorized
representatives for the Sewer Department.



   (C)   No person, except an authorized employee of the Sewer
Department, shall have or exhibit any credentials of the Sewer Department. It
shall be the duty of each employee of the Department, upon resignation or
dismissal, to deliver and surrender all credentials of the Department in his
or her possession.



(Prior Code, § 16-5-8)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.077  DISCHARGES TO BE REPORTED.



   Every user of the POTW system shall report to the Sewer Department
immediately any accident, negligent act, or other occurrence that occasions a
discharge to the POTW of any wastewater that exceeds the permissible limits
for such wastewater established by the Sewer Department.



(Prior Code, § 16-5-9)



§ 51.078  TESTS AND ANALYSES.



   All tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastewaters
shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods
for Examinations of Water and Sewage.



(Prior Code, §§ 16-5-6 and 16-5-10)



§ 51.079  REMEDIES.



   (A)   The Sewer Department shall have the authority to discontinue
water and/or sewer service to a premises for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Failure to pay a charge assessed by the Sewer Department
for unauthorized discharges;



      (2)   Failure to correct an unauthorized discharge as required
by the Sewer Department; and/or



      (3)   Discharging any unauthorized substances, materials,
water, or wastewater as prohibited by this subchapter or the Sewer Department.



   (B)   Before discontinuing water or sewer service as provided
herein, the Sewer Department shall give written notice to the user of the
discontinuance and an opportunity to appear before the Sewer Department or
designee on any disputed matter relative to the discontinuance of sewer
service. This section shall not prohibit the Sewer Department from
discontinuing water or sewer service if deemed immediately necessary to
protect public health and safety.



   (C)   Upon notice of the final determination by the Sewer Department
of an assessment owing or order to correct an unauthorized discharge, the
responsible party shall tender the fee assessed within ten days of the date
ordered or discontinue the unauthorized discharge as ordered by the Sewer
Department. In the event the unauthorized discharge is not corrected or the
assessment is not tendered, it is hereby declared to be, and is, a public
nuisance which may be abated by order of a court of competent jurisdiction
and its continued operation is unlawful. The remedy provided herein shall be
in addition to any other remedy authorized by this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 16-5-11)



SEWER SERVICE CHARGES



§ 51.090  USER CHARGE FORMULA.



   (A)   The POTW is primarily flow dependent. Therefore, the following
formula is used to calculate user charges.



 

Cu
 
=
 
Ct
 
×
 
Vu


Vt



 



   Where:



      Ct   =   Total operation and maintenance plus replacement
(O&M+R) costs per unit of time.



      Cu   =   A user’s charge for O&M+R per unit of time.



      Vu   =   Volume contribution from a user per unit of time.



      Vt   =   Total volume contribution from all users per unit
of time.



   (B)   In the event BOD, suspended solids, or other pollutant
concentrations from a user exceed the range of concentration of these
pollutants in normal domestic sewage, a surcharge added to the base charge
(above) will be levied. The surcharge will be computed by the formula below.



Cs = (Bc(B) + Sc(S) + Pc(P)) Vu



   Where:



      Cs   =   A surcharge for wastewaters of excessive strength.



      Bc   =   O&M+R cost for treatment of a unit of biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD).



      B   =   Concentration of BOD from a user above a base level.



      Sc   =   O&M+R cost for treatment of a unit of suspended
solids.



      S   =   Concentration of SS from a user above a base level.



      Pc   =   O&M+R cost for treatment of a unit of any
pollutant.



      P   =   Concentration of any pollutant from a user above a
base level.



      Vu   =   Volume contribution from a user per unit of time.



   (C)   Any other pollutant which causes an increase in the cost of
treatment will be assessed in a similar fashion.



 

Other Pollutant Rate
 
=
 
Total Cost to Treat Other Pollutant


Total Pounds of Other Pollutant



 



(Prior Code, § 16-6-1)



§ 51.091  DETERMINATION OF WASTEWATER QUANTITY.



   (A)   Adjustments shall be made to metered water consumption for a
12-month period beginning July 1 of each year to reflect sewer flow.



      (1)   The average metered water usage billed during the
preceding January, February, and March shall represent sewage flow for
residential customers, including multi-family.



      (2)   If the Sewer Department determines that adequate water
meter information is not available for billing a residential customer as
described above, then the customer will be charged the average monthly
billing for that user class.



      (3)   All non-residential use will be billed on the basis of
the actual metered water use.



   (B)   All users for which the water supply is from other suppliers
of water may furnish to the Sewer Department either a certified meter reading
of water delivered or a copy of the billings from the water supplier. The
Sewer Department shall have the exclusive authority to determine the adequacy
of this information and request additional documentation or tests if it finds
the information supplied inadequate. If the Sewer Department finds the
information adequate, the user’s charges will be calculated and the same
conditions will apply as if the city was the supplier of water to the user.



   (C)   Upon approval of the Sewer Department, any individual user
may, at his or her own expense and subject to the regulations of the
Department, install a separate meter in order to determine the quantity of
water actually entering the sewer system, and future sewer charges shall be
limited to that water actually entering the sewer system as so determined by
the Sewer Department.



   (D)   If, within ten days of billing, a user files a written
complaint with the Sewer Department alleging that a significant portion of
his or her water usage does not enter the sewer system, the Sewer Department
in accordance with written appeals procedure, will provide an opportunity for
the user to present his or her supporting documentation to the City Manager
or his or her designee to hear complaints.



   (E)   The Sewer Department shall have the authority to investigate
and evaluate user complaints and appeals from billing decisions of his or her
subordinates and may correct the billing to reflect what, in his or her
opinion, the correct billing should be, where he or she finds that a meter
has been misread or some other obvious billing error has occurred. If the
Sewer Department determines that a significant amount of water was used
during the winter months for lawns, shrubbery, or other non-sewer purposes,
he or she shall have the authority to make a corresponding reduction in the
sewer billing on all subsequent billings.



(Prior Code, § 16-6-2)



§ 51.092  DETERMINATION OF WASTEWATER QUALITY.



   (A)   Authority.  The Sewer Department shall have the authority to
make whatever tests are necessary to carry out a planned sampling program and
to make whatever analyses are needed for all commercial and industrial users.
The B.O.D. test shall be considered the standard test; however, C.O.D.
(“Chemical Oxygen Demand” means quantity of oxygen consumed from a
chemical oxidation of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or
wastewater, expressed in mg/l) or T.O.C. (“Total Organic Carbon” means
the total of all organic compounds expressed in milligrams per liter as
determined by the combustion-infrared method prescribed by approved
laboratory procedure) tests may be substituted in cases where it has been
determined by the Sewer Department that the B.O.D. test is not representative
of actual wastewater loading. Wastewater characteristics shall be determined
by the Department on the basis of monitored wastewater discharged, a
certified statement from the user, or on the best available data as to the
characteristics of the discharges.



   (B)   Variation of more than 2%.  Any change in the ongoing
process(es) employed by a user contributing industrial wastewater which
results in a variation of more than 25% in one or more of the effluent
loading concentrations shall be reported to the Department within 30 days of
the change.



   (C)   Sewer charge adjustment.  If it is determined through testing
that a significant variation exists between the user’s certified data and
the discharge characteristics monitored by the Department, the city may
adjust the sewer use charge based on the monitored data from the original
date of certification, unless written communication has occurred notifying
the Department of changes in loading and giving specific dates of changes.



   (D)   Designated discharge.  Where sampling and gauging of a
specific user is not practical for physical, economic, safety or other
reasons, the Sewer Department may designate values for concentrations of the
wastes discharged into the sewage system for all users in the same standard
industrial classification.



(Prior Code, § 16-6-3)



§ 51.093  OTHER USER CHARGE PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Biennial review. The Sewer Department will review, not less
often than every two years, the wastewater contribution of users and user
classes, the total costs of operation and maintenance of the POTW, and its
approved user charge system. The Sewer Department shall, at that time,
recommend a revision in the sewer service charge and user classes to
accomplish the following:



      (1)   Maintain a reasonable proportionate distribution of
operation and maintenance costs among users and user classes;



      (2)   Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation
and maintenance costs necessary to the proper operation and maintenance
(including replacement) of the treatment works; and



      (3)   Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to
the costs of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the
next year, and adjust the rate accordingly.



   (B)   Notification of users. Each user will be notified, at least
annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the user charge rate and
that portion of the total charges which are attributable to user charges.



   (C)   Inconsistent agreements. The user charge system set forth in
this subchapter is applicable to all agreements or contracts between the city
and users including industrial users, other municipalities or federal
agencies or installations, and the terms of this subchapter shall take
precedence over any such agreements or contracts which are inconsistent with
the requirements of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 16-6-4)



§ 51.094  OTHER SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.



   In addition to the user charges described herein, the rate schedules
shall be sufficient to cover the following costs.



   (A)   A portion of the annual debt service costs for retirement of
sewer bonds will be charged to all customers served directly by the city’s
POTW. The Sewer Department shall make recommendations to the City Council at
least once every two years as to how these costs shall be proportioned among
the users. Charges to recover these costs will be called “other charges”.



   (B)   Adequate reserve funds to allow for reasonably expected
increases in the cost of providing services will be charged to all customers
served directly by the city’s POTW. The Sewer Department shall make
recommendations to the City Council as to the amount of reserve funds
necessary and as to how these funds shall be proportioned among the users.



   (C)   The costs of billing and collection and performing industrial
wastewater services shall be charged to customers on an equitable basis. The
Sewer Department shall make recommendations to the City Council as to how
these costs shall be proportioned among the users. Charges to recover these
costs will be called billing and collection charges and industrial wastewater
charges respectively.



(Prior Code, § 16-6-5)



§ 51.095  PAYMENT OF BILLS AND CHARGES.



   (A)   All sewer user accounts shall be carried on the books of the
city by the street address, tax parcel ID number and assigned account number.
All notices sent out by the city regarding sewer user accounts, and all
notices regarding any other matter pertaining to the use of the city POTW,
shall be sent to the street address of the property. Should the owner of the
property desire notices be sent to an alternative or additional address, the
owner shall submit a mailing address to the city's Customer Services
Division. To ensure proper delivery of notices, all errors in street
addresses should be promptly reported in writing to the city's Customer
Services Division.



   (B)   See also § 50.062.



(Prior Code, § 16-6-6)  (Ord. O10-06-08, passed 6-24-2010)



§ 51.096  DISTRIBUTION OF SEWAGE SYSTEM REVENUES AND UTILIZATION OF FUNDS.



   (A)   Financial management. The city will establish an adequate
financial management system which will accurately account for operation and
maintenance plus replacement (O&M+R) revenues, expenditures, and sewer system
debt service.



      (1)   The accounting system will segregate O&M+R revenues and
expenditures from other wastewater revenues and expenditures to assure
adequate revenues to properly operate and maintain the treatment works.



      (2)   The fund will have three accounts, one for O&M, one for
replacement costs, and one for debt service. The user charge rates will be
revised as needed to generate sufficient revenue to pay the total O&M+R and
debt service.



   (B)   Inconsistent agreements.



      (1)   The city may have pre-existing agreements which address:



         (a)   The reservation of capacity in the city’s
treatment plant; and/or



         (b)   The charges to be collected by the city in
providing wastewater treatment services or reserving capacity.



      (2)   The user charge system shall take precedence over any
terms of conditions of agreements or contracts between the grantee and users
(including industrial users, special districts, other municipalities, or
Federal agencies or installations) which are inconsistent with the
requirements of § 204(b)(1)(A) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1284).



   (C)   Wastewater treatment by-products. All revenue from the sale of
treatment related by-products shall be used to offset the cost of operation
and maintenance. User charges shall be proportionally reduced for all users.
Total annual revenues received from the sale of a by-product shall be
credited to the treatment works O&M cost no later than the fiscal year
immediately following their receipt.



(Prior Code, § 16-6-7)



INDUSTRIAL USER AND PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS



§ 51.110  GENERAL INDUSTRIAL USER REQUIREMENTS.



   All industrial users shall:



   (A)   Comply with the categorical standards, pretreatment
requirements, and all other requirements imposed by this subchapter;



   (B)   Comply with the orders of the Sewer Department designed to
implement the categorical standards, pretreatment requirements, and all other
requirements imposed by this subchapter;



   (C)   Within 90 days of the adoption of this subchapter and prior to
the discharge of wastewater to the POTW by any new user thereafter, file a
written notice with the Sewer Department which identifies the:



      (1)   Name and address of the existing or prospective users;



      (2)   Business location(s) serviced or to be served by the
POTW;



      (3)   Nature, concentration, and amounts of any substance
present, at or intended to be present at such business location(s) which, if
discharged to the POTW could constitute an industrial discharge; and



      (4)   Nature and concentration of all pollutants currently
discharged to the POTW from such business location(s).



   (D)   File an annual POTW user report with the Sewer Department by
the first of January of each year which provides an update to the information
obtained pursuant to division (C) above. This reporting requirement does not
apply to industrial users operating pursuant to an industrial user permit;



   (E)   Carry out and maintain an adequate record of all
self-inspection and self-monitoring activities necessary for the user to know
at all times whether or not the user is introducing any industrial discharge
to the POTW;



   (F)   Assist the Sewer Department to determine the exact nature,
concentration, and volume of any pollutant intended for discharge to the
POTW. Therefore, upon request, any industrial user shall promptly:



      (1)   Allow the examination and copying of all relevant
records or documents available to the user;



      (2)   Allow the inspection of all business locations served by
the POTW, including all pretreatment equipment, methods, and activities
utilized by the user at such locations;



      (3)   Install and maintain, at the user’s expense,
convenient and adequate monitoring and/or sampling point(s) needed by the
Sewer Department for monitoring and/or sampling purposes;



      (4)   Allow the taking and removal of samples from any
wastewater discharged or intended for discharge, to the POTW; and



      (5)   Provide the Sewer Department with any other information,
including, but not limited to, chemical analyses of wastewater and
architectural or engineering design data, drawings and the like, which are
reasonably needed by the Sewer Department for the purpose of determining the
user’s compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.



   (G)   Not cause an industrial discharge without having first
obtained, or applied for, an industrial user permit pursuant to the
requirements of this subchapter;



   (H)   Comply with the demand of the Sewer Department to immediately
halt any actual or threatened discharge to the POTW when the Sewer Department
has given notice that the actual or threatened discharge:



      (1)   Presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of any person or to the environment;
and/or



      (2)   Will cause interference with POTW operations.



   (I)   Immediately give notice to the Sewer Department of any
discharge, including an accidental discharge, which is in violation of any
categorical standard, pretreatment requirement, or permit condition imposed
by this subchapter. The notice shall also describe the:



      (1)   Location of the discharge;



      (2)   Known or estimated nature, concentration, and volume of
the discharged pollutant(s);



      (3)   Type of assistance desired from the city; and



      (4)   Corrective action(s) undertaken, being undertaken,
and/or to be undertaken by the user. Any user causing such a discharge shall
also initiate all appropriate corrective action(s) by the Sewer Department
which are needed to:



         (a)   Prevent any further injury to human health or
safety or to the environment, the POTW, and/or any other property;



         (b)   Promptly repair all or part of any injury or
damage caused by the discharge; and



         (c)   Ensure that such a discharge does not occur again.



   (J)   Pay all sewer fees charged by the city for the wastewater
collection and disposal services provided by the POTW pursuant to the
requirements of this subchapter. The service fees will apply equally to all
POTW users and will be determined by each user’s proportionate share of the
POTW operating and maintenance costs. In turn, the proportionate share will
be based on such factors as the strength, volume, and flow rate of wastewater
discharged to the POTW by each user;



   (K)   Reimburse the city for all extraordinary expenses reasonably
incurred by the city in insuring user’s compliance with the applicable
requirements of this subchapter. An extraordinary expense is any cost not
otherwise reimbursed from the normal collection of sewer fees. These
extraordinary expenses include, but are not limited to, the costs in:



      (1)   Issuing permits;



      (2)   Conducting inspection, surveillance, and monitoring
activities;



      (3)   Obtaining laboratory analyses of waste samples;



      (4)   Taking enforcement actions against users not in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter; and



      (5)   Carrying out any measure needed for the protection of
human health or safety, the environment, the POTW, or any other property in
order to correct or mitigate any harm caused by the violation of any
categorical standard or pretreatment requirement.



   (L)   Be financially responsible for all injury, damage, and/or loss
suffered by any person as a result of any industrial discharge, by the user,
which violates any categorical standard, pretreatment requirement, or permit
condition enforced pursuant to this subchapter. In particular, the user shall
be liable for the:



      (1)   Personal injury suffered by any person as a result of
the discharge;



      (2)   Costs reasonably incurred by any person in correcting or
otherwise mitigating any adverse environmental impact which resulted from the
discharge; and



      (3)   Economic loss and property damage suffered by any person
as a result of the discharge.



(Prior Code, § 16-7-1)



§ 51.111  SPECIFIC INDUSTRIAL USER REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   In addition to all other requirements, each industrial user
who discharges an industrial discharge into the POTW shall also:



      (1)   Obtain an industrial discharge permit from the Sewer
Department. Any application for a permit or an amended permit shall contain
the information specified in the application form or such other information
as may be requested by the Sewer Department. After the effective date of this
subchapter,  any person intending to commence any new industrial
discharge(s) or any additional industrial discharge(s) not already allowed
pursuant to an existing permit shall first obtain a new or an amended
industrial discharge permit, as applicable, from the Sewer Department prior
to initiating the discharge(s);



      (2)   Comply fully with all requirements and conditions of any
industrial user permit. Once a permit is issued, no industrial user shall:



         (a)   Make any new or increased industrial discharge; or



         (b)   Otherwise make any change in the nature of its
industrial discharge(s) if the change will cause any new or increased
industrial discharge.



      (3)   Provide all of the pretreatment necessary to comply with
the categorical standards and pretreatment requirements imposed by this
subchapter;



      (4)   Maintain a continuous discharge record which clearly
identifies the:



         (a)   Dates and times of all industrial discharges; and



         (b)   Nature, concentration(s), and volume(s) of all the
discharges.



      (5)   Provide the Sewer Department with all the same
self-monitoring reports and notices which the industrial user is required to
submit to any other authority in accordance with the provisions of 40 C.F.R.
§ 403.12. In particular, the industrial user shall meet the requirements of:



         (a)   Notices which must be filled within 180 days of
the adoption of any categorical standard, including a compliance schedule;



         (b)   Notices which must be filed within 90 days of any
final compliance date;



         (c)   Reports which must be filed by the industrial user
in June and December of each year;



         (d)   The immediate notice which must be given after a
slug load release of any industrial discharge;



         (e)   The sampling and analysis of pollutants discharged
to the POTW; and



         (f)   The maintenance of records by the industrial user.



   (B)   An industrial user with an industrial discharge permit issued
prior to the effective date of this subchapter shall file with the Sewer
Department within 90 days of the effective date of this subchapter a written
statement by an authorized agent of the permittee certifying that the
permittee is in compliance with the terms of this subchapter.



   (C)   If an industrial user with an industrial discharge permit
cannot provide the certification set forth in division (B), then the
industrial user shall submit an application for a new industrial permit which
shall include a proposed schedule for coming into compliance with the terms
of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 16-7-2)



§ 51.112  AUTHORITY OF THE SEWER DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   The Sewer Department is authorized to enforce user compliance
with the requirements of this subchapter. In carrying out this
responsibility, the Sewer Department has authority to:



      (1)   Issue or amend (as applicable) industrial user permits
within 60 days of receiving the application for the permit or amended permit.
Once issued, a permit:



         (a)   Will be for a period of time not to exceed two
years. A permit may be terminated by revocation by the Sewer Department or
upon voluntary surrender of the permit by the permittee at an earlier date;



         (b)   Is non-transferable by the permittee; and



         (c)   Will specifically identify all applicable
discharge prohibitions and limitations which the Sewer Department will
enforce.



      (2)   Incorporate the pertinent requirements of this
subchapter into every city contract with any user located outside of the
municipal jurisdiction of the city. The contracts may also provide for
liquidated damages and, if applicable, specific performance as remedies for
breach of contract;



      (3)   Receive and analyze all self-monitoring reports and
notices submitted by industrial users;



      (4)   Randomly sample and analyze effluent from users and
conduct those surveillance and inspection activities needed to identify,
independently of any information supplied by the users, occasional or
continuing non-compliance with any categorical standard or pretreatment
requirement;



      (5)   Investigate instances of non-compliance with any
categorical standard or pretreatment requirement when notice of any actual or
probable non-compliance has been received by the Sewer Department or any
representative of the Sewer Department;



      (6)   Notify users of non-compliance with categorical
standards or pretreatment requirements discovered by the Sewer Department.
The notice shall also contain a demand for any appropriate corrective action
which is necessary to meet the applicable requirements of this subchapter.
Any user will be allowed opportunity to respond to an order of the Sewer
Department before any enforcement action against the user is initiated,
unless the discharge is a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare,
in which case the Sewer Department may immediately disconnect service and
initiate enforcement action without giving notice;



      (7)   Comply with the public participation requirements of 40
C.F.R. part 25 in connection with the city’s enforcement of any national
pretreatment standards; and



      (8)   Impose appropriate penalties for non-compliance with any
of the requirements of this subchapter. The penalties may include any or all
of the following:



         (a)   Suspension or revocation of any industrial user
permit for the failure of an industrial user to comply with the pertinent
requirements of such permit;



         (b)   Termination of service;



         (c)   Restricting or otherwise limiting allowable
discharges; and/or



         (d)   Requesting that the City Attorney commence
criminal and/or civil action against any user violating any requirement of
this subchapter.



   (B)   The Sewer Department shall:



      (1)   Determine which actual or threatened discharge to the
POTW will cause interference with the POTW or will present (or may present)
an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare to any
person and/or to the environment;



      (2)   Abate any actual or threatened discharge which would
violate any categorical standard or pretreatment imposed by this subchapter.
In the minimum, the Sewer Department will be able to promptly plug or
disconnect any sewer service connection to the POTW; and



      (3)   Correct or mitigate any injury to the environment, the
POTW, or to any other property as a result of any discharge in violation of a
categorical standard or pretreatment requirement imposed by this subchapter.



   (C)   Annually publish, in a newspaper circulated in the city,
public notice of all industrial users who at least once during the preceding
12-month period were significantly violating any categorical standard or
pretreatment requirement imposed by this subchapter. The notification shall
also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the users during the
same 12-month period.



   (D)   (1)   Notify industrial users of applicable pretreatment
standards and any applicable requirements under §§ 204(b) and 405 of the
Clean Water Act (33. U.S.C. §§ 1284 and 1345) and subtitles C and D of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq. and §§
6941 et seq.).



      (2)   The Sewer Department shall file with the City Clerk
three copies of all federal statutes and regulations cited by this subchapter
in order to allow regulated users adequate opportunity to be informed of the
applicable federal requirements herein incorporated by reference.



(Prior Code, § 16-7-3)



§ 51.113  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits, and monitoring programs and
from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able
to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of the
information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. To claim this trade
secret protection, the user must specify at the time of submitting his or her
reports or information, that part he or she desires to protect.



   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions
of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available
upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this
chapter, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit,
state disposal system permit, and/or the pretreatment programs; provided,
however, that these portions of a report shall be available for use by the
city, the state, or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information.



(Prior Code, § 16-7-4)



§ 51.114  MORE STRINGENT TO CONTROL.



   Upon the effective date of any federal categorical pretreatment
standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if
more stringent than limitations imposed under this subchapter, shall
immediately supersede these limitations.



(Prior Code, § 16-7-5)



ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE



§ 51.125  PERMITTEE PROVIDES PROTECTION.



   Each permittee shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 16-8-1)



§ 51.126  PERMITTEE SHALL NOTIFY CITY OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.



   (A)   In order that timely countermeasures may be taken by the city
to minimize damage to the POTW and/or degradation of the receiving waters,
the permittee shall notify the city immediately upon accidentally discharging
wastes in violation of this subchapter.



   (B)   This notification shall be followed within 15 days of the date
of occurrence by a detailed written statement describing the causes of the
accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future
occurrence. The notification will not relieve the permittee of liability for
any expense, loss, or damage to the POTW, or for any fines imposed on the
city on account thereof, and/or for any enforcement action pursuant to this
occurrence.



(Prior Code, § 16-8-2)



§ 51.127  PERMITTEE WILL NOTIFY EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   In order that officers, agents, and employees of permittee
will be informed of the city’s requirements, permittee shall make available
to their employees copies of this subchapter together with such other
wastewater information and notices which may be furnished by the city from
time to time for the purpose of improving and making more effective water
pollution control.



   (B)   A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on the
permittee’s bulletin board advising officers, agents, and employees who to
call in case of an accidental discharge in excess of the limits authorized by
the permit.



(Prior Code, § 16-8-3)



§ 51.128  PERMITTEE SHALL LABEL POTENTIAL ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE POINTS.



   Any possible connection or entry point for a hazardous and/or
prohibited substance to the permittee’s plumbing or drainage system shall
be appropriately labeled to warn operating personnel against discharge of
such substance in violation of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 16-8-4)



SEWER DEVELOPMENT FEES



§ 51.140  PURPOSE.



   Due to the costs associated with the expansion of the city’s sewer
system, it is necessary to implement a method of direct cost recovery from
persons, firms, or corporations responsible for new physical development
within the city to provide a source of funding for the city’s continued
capital investment in the system.



(Prior Code, § 16-9-1)



§ 51.141  FEES; COLLECTION; EXEMPTIONS; DISPOSITION.



   (A)   A sewer development fee shall be charged by the city as
established by resolution of the City Council.



   (B)   The fee imposed shall be collected by the Building Safety
Director, who shall be charged with the administration of this subchapter.
The fee for each dwelling unit or, in the case of commercial and industrial
construction, the fee for connection shall be collected by the Building
Safety Director prior to the issuance of a building permit, and the fee with
respect to any mobile home or recreation vehicle space shall be collected
prior to the issuance of a construction permit for the development of a
mobile home or recreation vehicle park. The Building Safety Director shall
not issue a building permit or construction permit until the fees required
hereby have been paid.



   (C)   Any separate water meter installed for irrigation purposes
only will not be included in the calculation of the sewer development fee. In
addition, no sewer development fee will be collected for the installation of
fire lines provided the line is not served by a water meter.



   (D)   All revenue received from the sewer development fee shall be
deposited in the Sewage System Construction and Expansion Account and/or the
Sewage System Debt Service Account for the retirement of debt service, both
principal and interest, related to sewer system development.



(Prior Code, § 16-9-2)



§ 51.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person, entity, or user found guilty of violating any
provision of §§ 51.001 through 51.141 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $2,500
or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both the fine
and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate
offense punishable as herein above described.



(Prior Code, Art. 16-10)



   (C)   In addition to any criminal fine which may be imposed for
violation of any provision of §§ 51.070 through 51.079, any business,
person, or user shall be liable for all charges which may be assessed by the
Sewer Department for discharging wastewaters containing non-permissible
quantities of prohibited substances into the POTW. The Sewer Department is
authorized to assess charges based on the extra costs incurred by the city in
surveillance, sampling, and testing of the discharges, for additional
operating and maintenance expenses, or for any other action required to
identify, handle, process, or supplement normal activities due to the
unauthorized discharge of wastewater, plus overhead charges. Fines may also
be assessed on a case by case basis, from $0 to $10,000 per day per
occurrence.



(Prior Code, § 16-5-11)



CHAPTER 52:  SANITATION



Section



Garbage and Trash Collection



   52.01   Definitions



   52.02   Collection agency



   52.03   Collection hours



   52.04   Rates



Preparation of Refuse for Collection



   52.15   Preparation of refuse



   52.16   Location for pick up



   52.17   Lids and covers



   52.18   Use of containers



Other Methods of Garbage and Trash Removal



   52.30   Hauling refuse



   52.31   Vehicles and receptacles to be spill proof



   52.32   Spilled refuse



   52.33   Dumping refuse



   52.34   Burning prohibited



GARBAGE AND TRASH COLLECTION



§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL UNIT.Any real property from which refuse is generated, other
than a residential unit.



   GARBAGE. All putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes,
including all organic wastes that have been prepared for, or intended to be
used as, food or have resulted from the preparation of food, including all
such substances from all public and private establishments and residences.



   REFUSE. All garbage and trash.



   RESIDENTIAL UNIT. Any single structure used for housing one or two
families.



   TRASH. All nonputrescible wastes.



   VEGETATION MAINTENANCE. Any abatement of plant growth whether living or
dead, including but not limited to grass and weeds, on non-agricultural
property, shall be mowed rather than disked or plowed.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-1)



§ 52.02  COLLECTION AGENCY.



   The city, or other collectors authorized by the city, shall collect all
refuse within the city. No person, except as provided in this chapter, shall
collect or gather refuse within the city.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-2)



§ 52.03  COLLECTION HOURS.



   The hours of collection of refuse shall be designated by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-3)



§ 52.04  RATES.



   (A)   The Council shall from time to time by resolution fix the
rates and classifications for garbage and trash collection within the city
and shall make such other rules and regulations as may be necessary to
properly administer and enforce this chapter.



      (1)   Garbage rates:  Set by resolution of the City Council.



      (2)   Uncontained trash fees (trash, green waste, manure,
highway truck tires, appliances, passenger tires with rims, passenger car
tires, non-granted tires):  In addition to the current landfill charges,
customers shall be charged a service fee in an amount set by resolution of
the City Council.



      (3)   Uncontained trash service: This service is provided in
conjunction with the City of El Mirage Municipal Water Service. Only
customers with current water accounts are eligible to receive this service
unless a $200 cash deposit is paid to the city's Customer Services Division.
All tonnages are estimated and all payments are due and payable on a water
bill when service is rendered, or water service may be interrupted or
suspended.



   (B)   The amount for the purchase of a garbage container shall be
set by resolution of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 10-1-4) (Ord. O10-06-08, passed 6-24-2010)



PREPARATION OF REFUSE FOR COLLECTION



§ 52.15  PREPARATION OF REFUSE.



   All refuse shall be prepared for collection or disposed of as follows.



   (A)   Mandatory trash containers and payment per each household.
Upon payment of a non-refundable fee in an amount set by the City,
residential unit customers shall receive a City provided garbage container
and/or a recycling container compatible with the rapid-rail collection
system. All costs associated with replacing garbage and/or recycling
containers shall be the responsibility of the residential unit customer.  In
the event garbage generated by commercial unit customers is compatible with
the use of a rapid-rail garbage container and/or a recycling container, the
City may elect to allow the commercial unit customer to make payment of a
non-refundable fee in an amount set by the City, and the customer shall
receive the use of a City provided garbage container and/or recycling
container compatible with the rapid-rail collection system. All other
commercial unit customers shall provide their own dumpster-type containers
which must be compatible with the collection system then in use by the City.
All containers shall be kept in good repair and in a sanitary condition.
Containers found to be no longer serviceable through disrepair or maintained
in an unsanitary condition may be condemned by the City for further use.
Legal notice of a condemnation shall consist of a label or tag affixed to the
container, which tag shall contain the following wording:



      “The container to which this label is attached is no longer
serviceable through disrepair or is maintained in an unsanitary condition,
and for that reason it is condemned for further use. This label is notice
that the receptacle will be removed and destroyed by the city unless replaced
or placed in a satisfactory condition within 15 days from its date. You may
request a hearing as to the condition of the receptacle by calling telephone
#        ,or by writing to        at the address noted. If you
request a hearing, the receptacle will not be destroyed until completion of
the hearing and a determination by the hearing officer. All costs associated
with a hearing will be the responsibility of the non-prevailing party.  If
you do not request a hearing, the receptacle will be destroyed after 15 days
from the date of this notice. Dated this      day of      , 20    .
City of      , by        (authorized signature).”



   (B)   Brush. Brush shall be cut into such a size that one person can
readily load the individual pieces into a truck or chipper, be piled in neat
order with all long branches parallel to one another, and shall have all
metal or foreign materials removed to facilitate chipping.



   (C)   Appliances and vehicles. The customer shall remove or cause to
be removed all appliances, vehicles, or equipment classed as refuse from
their premises or the public right-of-way.



   (D)   Building materials. All owners, contractors, and builders of
structures shall, upon the completion of any structure, gather up and haul
away, at their sole cost and expense, all refuse of every nature,
description, or kind, which has resulted from the building of the structure,
including all lumber scraps, shingles, plaster, brick, stone, concrete, and
other building material, and shall place the lot and all nearby premises
utilized in the construction in a sightly condition. Residential customers
may dispose of small amounts of building materials from time to time,
providing it is placed in a container as described above and contains no
concrete, masonry, or soil.



   (E)   By-products. Any commercial or manufacturing establishment
which, by the nature of its operations, creates an unusual amount of
by-product refuse may be required by the city to dispose of its own wastes as
opposed to having the city provide the service.



   (F)   Dangerous waste. Dangerous wastes shall be placed in a proper
container, plainly marked “DANGER”. The city reserves the right to deny
service for certain dangerous wastes and to require the customer to properly
dispose of it by other means.



   (G)   Soil and concrete. Waste soil, concrete, masonry blocks, sod,
and rocks shall be disposed of by the owner, tenant, or occupant of the
premises.



(Prior Code, § 10-2-1)  (Ord. O11-08-13, passed 8-25-2011)



§ 52.16  LOCATION FOR PICK UP.



   Containers used for garbage, rubbish, and recycling shall be placed for
collection as follows:



   (A)   Containers shall be placed at the curb (not on the street) in
front of the premises except that at a corner lot containers may be placed at
the curb of the side street, if approved by the City Manager or his or her
designee. Containers shall be placed at least three feet from another
container and may not be placed on sidewalks or curbing in any manner as to
be hazardous to pedestrians or vehicles.



   (B)   Containers may be set out after 6:00 p.m. of the day preceding
regular collection and shall be removed from the curb by 6:00 a.m. of the day
after collection. Containers shall be stored between collections on or in the
premises in such a manner that they are not readily visible from the street.



(Prior Code, § 10-2-2) (Ord. O13-04-07, passed 4-16-2013)



§ 52.17  LIDS AND COVERS.



   The lids or covers of all containers shall, at all times, be kept
secure so that flies and other insects may not have access to the contents
and shall only be removed while the containers and receptacles are being
filled, emptied, or cleaned.



(Prior Code, § 10-2-3)



§ 52.18  USE OF CONTAINERS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be
deposited, any refuse in any container that he or she does not own or lease,
or is not entitled to use as a tenant or which the city or its agent has
otherwise assigned to an individual, entity, or an address.



   (B)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person not
authorized by the city to remove, collect or disturb the solid waste and
recyclables stored in such containers or to remove from a solid waste or
recycling container any solid waste or recyclables set out for collection and
disposal by the city or agents of the city or licensed solid waste haulers.
This prohibition does not apply to law enforcement officers acting within the
scope of their official duties.



(Prior Code, § 10-2-4) (Ord. O13-08-13, passed 8-20-2013) Penalty, see §
10.99



OTHER METHODS OF GARBAGE AND TRASH REMOVAL



§ 52.30  HAULING REFUSE.



   It is unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled any refuse
on or along any public street, avenue, or alley in the city, in violation of
any of the provisions in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 10-3-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.31  VEHICLES AND RECEPTACLES TO BE SPILL PROOF.



   It is unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled on or along
any public street in the city any garbage, unless the garbage is contained in
strong, watertight vehicles or vehicles with watertight receptacles,
constructed to prevent any of the garbage from falling, leaking, or spilling
and any odor from escaping.



(Prior Code, § 10-3-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.32  SPILLED REFUSE.



   Any person hauling any refuse along the streets of the city shall
immediately replace in the conveyance used for the hauling any refuse which
may fall upon any street.



(Prior Code, § 10-3-3)



§ 52.33  DUMPING REFUSE.



   It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any refuse
upon any public or private property within the city, except as specifically
permitted in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 10-3-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.34  BURNING PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to burn or attempt to burn refuse of
whatever manner within the city except in accordance with the provisions of
any permit that is issued by the county.



(Prior Code, § 10-3-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 53:  STORM WATER QUALITY PROTECTION



Section



   53.01   General powers and purpose



   53.02   Definitions



   53.03   Declaration of nuisance



   53.04   Prohibited practices



   53.05   Storm water management plans prepared by permit applicants



   53.06   Inspections



   53.07   Treatment devices



   53.08   Obligation to review



   53.09   Requirement to monitor, analyze, and remediate



   53.99   Penalty



§ 53.01  GENERAL POWERS AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The City Manager or his or her designee may regulate the use,
grading, paving, maintenance, and operation of public rights-of-way and
public storm drain systems so as to reduce, to the maximum extent
practicable, the addition of pollutants to storm water in quantities or
concentrations that could reasonably be expected to cause or contribute to
either a violation of an applicable water quality standard or any condition
of a storm water National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) or
Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (AZPDES) permit issued to the
city; or any other act that causes or contributes to damage to a public storm
drain system. The City Manager or his or her designee may regulate the use of
the public storm drain system through administrative rules, permits, and
other written forms of approval for activities that could release pollutants
or storm water to a public storm drain system.



   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as an assumption
by the City of El Mirage of any other person’s duties or responsibilities
arising under any applicable law, including the common law. Any activities of
the City Manager authorized by this subchapter are permissive rather than
mandatory.



   (C)   The City Manager or his or her designee will provide
implementation guidance to assist the public in complying with this
subchapter. This guidance may consist of fact sheets, policy and procedure
manuals, and other pertinent information relating to the development and
implementation of best management practices for storm water quality
protection.



(Ord. O06-07-12, passed 8-31-2006; Res. R06-07-20, passed - -2006)



§ 53.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICABLE WATER QUALITY STANDARD. Federal and state numeric or
narrative water quality criterion that limits the quantity or concentrations
of pollutants that may be present in navigable waters defined in 33 U.S.C. §
1362(7).



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). A schedule of activities, pollution
treatment practices or devices, prohibition of practices, general good
housekeeping practices, pollution prevention, waste minimization, educational
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices or devices
to prevent or reduce the amount of pollutants entering the public storm drain
system, surface water, air, land, or groundwater. BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
may include a physical, chemical, structural, or operational practice or
device that can help to achieve compliance with this chapter.



   DIRECT CONNECTION. Any pipe, conduit, or other conveyance that is
inserted into any part of the public storm drain system either temporarily or
permanently. DIRECT CONNECTIONS to the public storm drain system are
prohibited without permission of the City Manager or his or her designee.



   FIREFIGHTING ACTIVITIES. All emergency response activities that control
or extinguish fires. The phrase does not include the release of significant
materials that occur after an emergency situation has ended.



   MS4. Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System; public storm drain system.



   NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any real property that is actually or
intended to be used for commercial, industrial, agricultural, or recreational
purposes, including but not limited to the immediate vicinity of five or more
connected residential dwelling units, and residential subdivisions or
dwellings that have not been occupied by a bona fide purchaser or tenant.



   NPDES or AZPDES PERMIT. An authorization to discharge storm water
issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342 or 49 A.R.S. Chapter 2, Art. 3.1.



   PERMIT. Written authorization to engage in specific conduct or
activities that is issued pursuant to and in accordance with the particular
laws, rules, or ordinances governing that conduct or activity.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, or any other legal
entity, including their legal representatives, agents, or assigns.



   POLLUTANT. Solid, liquid, gaseous, or other substances that can alter
the chemical or physical properties of water, including but not limited to:
fluids, solid wastes, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, solvents, sludge,
petroleum and petroleum products, biological materials, radioactive
materials, sand, dirt, animal wastes, acids, and bases.



   POLLUTION. The presence of pollutants on land or in the storm water.



   POLLUTION PREVENTION. Operational procedures, processes, and
improvements in housekeeping or management techniques that reduce potential
or actual releases of pollutants to the environment including all air, water,
and land resources affected by those pollutants.



   PUBLIC STORM DRAIN SYSTEM also known as MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER
SYSTEM-MS4. All or any part of the publicly-owned storm drains, basins,
ditches, pipes, graded areas, and gutters located within easements,
rights-of-way, parks, streets, roads, highways, or in common areas of real
property leased from the City of El Mirage, that are used for collecting,
retaining, or conveying storm water.



   RELEASE. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
discharging, injecting, placing, leaching, dumping, or disposing into or on
any land in a manner that significant materials, pollutants, or storm water
that might come to be located in a public storm drain system.



   SIGNIFICANT MATERIALS. Any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance other
than storm water that can release pollutants, including but not limited to:
raw materials; fuels; solvents; detergents; finished materials; hazardous
substances designated under § 101(14) of the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. § 9601(14); any
chemical for which a report must be filed pursuant to § 313 of Title III of
the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, 42 U.S.C. § 11023;
fertilizers; pesticides; herbicides; and waste materials, including garbage,
trash, ashes, slag, yard waste, animal waste, and sludge.



   STORM WATER. Rainfall or snow melt runoff.



   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (SWMP). A document required by the City of
El Mirage from any person that proposes to or does conduct an activity on
non-residential property, or that proposes to or does conduct an activity for
a fee or charge on residential property, that has the reasonable potential to
affect the quality or quantity of storm water impounded upon or released from
the property that serves as a written guide for reducing, limiting, and
monitoring the reduction of pollutants that are discharged to the publicly
owned storm drain system.



   STRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). Any berm,
retention/detention basin, drywell, or other manmade object that is designed
to control the velocity, volume, and/or quality of storm water runoff.



(Ord. O06-07-12, passed 8-31-2006; Res. R06-07-20, passed - -2006)



§ 53.03  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.



   (A)   A public nuisance is anything which is injurious or obnoxious
to health or the environment, or is offensive to the senses, or is an
obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property by any considerable number of
persons, or which obstructs the free passage or use, in any customary manner,
of any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way.



   (B)   (1)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any
person to directly or indirectly release significant materials, pollutants,
or storm water without proper authorization in quantities, velocities, or
concentrations that may reasonably be expected to cause or contribute to:
damage to a public right-of-way or public storm drain system; a violation of
an applicable water quality standard; or a violation of any condition of a
storm water NPDES or AZPDES permit or that will effect the flow of or
obstruct traffic. As used in this section, proper authorization exists if an
activity affecting storm water is specifically authorized in:



         (a)   This chapter;



         (b)   An administrative rule, permit, plan approval, or
other authorization issued in compliance with this chapter; or



         (c)   A storm water NPDES or AZPDES permit.



      (2)   If a facility operating within the El Mirage City limits
has a NPDES or AZPDES storm water permit, they are required to submit a copy
to the City of El Mirage.



(Ord. O06-07-12, passed 8-31-2006; Res. R06-07-20, passed - -2006)



§ 53.04  PROHIBITED PRACTICES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, store, treat, or
dispose of storm water, pollutants, or significant materials in a manner that
creates a public nuisance as defined in § 53.03.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to release to a
publicly-owned right-of-way or public storm drain system any substance that
is not composed entirely of storm water except:



      (1)   Releases pursuant to a NPDES or AZPDES permit;



      (2)   Releases resulting from firefighting activities;



      (3)   Releases associated with authorized street and municipal
maintenance activities; and/or



      (4)   Releases of materials as provided in divisions (D) or
(E) of this section.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to, without good cause,
interfere with or prohibit any city employee from conducting any activities
in furtherance of the requirements of this chapter, including conducting
inspections and collecting samples.



   (D)   This section does not prohibit releases of storm water from
storm water retention or detention basins if a permit or approval is first
obtained from the City Manager or his or her designee. A person seeking such
a permit or approval shall demonstrate that the release is not reasonably
expected to cause or contribute to a public nuisance as defined in § 53.03.
Restrictions and chemical analyses may be required before a discharge permit
is issued by the City of El Mirage.



   (E)   This section does not prohibit releases, provided those
releases are not a significant source of pollutants to navigable waters and
are discharged in a manner that does not create a public nuisance as defined
in § 53.03, from: fire hydrant flushing; potable water systems, including
water line flushing; foundation or footing drains that are not contaminated
by pollutants; naturally occurring seeps, springs, wetlands, or riparian
areas; diverted stream flows and rising groundwater; non-agricultural
irrigation water and lawn watering; individual residential and
not-for-profit/charitable fundraising vehicle washing; residential
evaporative coolers and air conditioner condensate; dust control watering;
and city street sweeping activities.



(Ord. O06-07-12, passed 8-31-2006; Res. R06-07-20, passed - -2006)  Penalty,
see § 53.99



§ 53.05  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLANS PREPARED BY PERMIT APPLICANTS.



   (A)   Any person who conducts an activity on non-residential
property or conducts an activity for a fee or charge on residential property
that has the reasonable potential to affect the quality or volume of storm
water impounded upon or released from the property, regardless of whether it
is raining at the time, shall prepare a detailed written storm water
management plan as described in this section. There is a rebuttable
presumption that a storm water management plan is not required for activities
conducted within completely enclosed structures and in other areas that are
permanently inaccessible to contact with rainfall or other sources of water,
including run-on and runoff.



   (B)   All persons applying to any chapter of the El Mirage City Code
for authorization, permission, or a permit to perform or engage in an
activity that might affect the quality or volume of storm water impounded
upon or released from the property as a result of the activity for which
approval is sought shall prepare and submit a storm water management plan.



   (C)   A storm water management plan shall apply to all contiguous
land under common ownership or control, and shall specifically state the
address of each parcel of property subject to the plan. The plan shall
include seven sections unless a section is waived by the City Manager or his
or her designee. Section one shall describe the facility information such as
complete address, owner/operator name, telephone numbers of responsible
parties, and nature of business. Section two must list all materials and
chemicals found on the property, their quantity, how they will be used, and
disposal methods. Section three must include administrative Best Management
Practices (BMPs) describing the housekeeping strategies that are used to
reduce or eliminate storm water pollution. Section four shall describe a
spill control plan designed to identify the procedures that will be used to
clean up a spill, the location of the spill control kits, and the type of
spill control equipment; materials; personal protective equipment (PPE) that
will be used in the event of a spill cleanup. Section five must describe any
structural BMPs in place on the property that may include sealed concrete
berms, roofs, spill control pallets, over-pack drums, retention/detention
basins, or other devices to protect storm water from becoming polluted and
discharging offsite. Section six is a site drainage plan showing the
anticipated flows of storm water from the site. Section seven shall include a
checklist of BMPs used during inspections during a rain event to insure the
BMPs to protect storm water are working properly and a Storm Water
Certification/Authorization page to be signed by a duly authorized company
representative stating the information they supplied is correct to the best
of their knowledge; and any additional information concerning storm water
management and pollution prevention efforts that are or will be prepared to
comply with any rules or NPDES permits promulgated pursuant to the portions
of 40 C.F.R. part 122, that relate to discharges of storm water. The storm
water management plan shall be provided to the City Manager or his or her
designee. A storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as required by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) Region 9 may be
submitted in lieu of the storm water management plan although revisions may
be requested by the City Manager or his or designee before approval.



   (D)   A storm water management plan may apply to more than one
parcel of property so long as the activities on the properties are
sufficiently similar that the plan is appropriate.



   (E)   Permits, approvals, or other authorizations that require storm
water management plans as provided in this section shall not be issued until
the City Manager or his or her designee has received the applicable storm
water management plan. If significant materials are not at all times managed
in substantial compliance with the applicable storm water management plan, or
if the authorized activity causes or contributes to violations of this
chapter, the City Manager or his or her designee may modify or revoke the
permit, approval, or other authorization. There shall be an enforceable
commitment that the persons described in § 53.99(C) will update the storm
water management plan as necessary if activities at the affected property are
modified in a manner that may cause a material detrimental change in the
volume, velocity, or quality of storm water released offsite.



   (F)   A storm water management plan shall include, to the extent
applicable, practicable measures (Best Management Practices-BMPs) for:
managing litter; the use, storage, treatment, and disposal of significant
materials; the quantity, use, and disposal of pesticides and herbicides;
reducing the velocity of releases to a public storm drain system; the use of
landscape features to reduce the quantity and velocity of storm water that
may be released offsite; maintenance of retention/detention basins and other
structural BMPs or storm water management devices; maintenance and cleaning
of parking lots and buildings; ensuring that significant materials are not
exposed to direct contact with storm water; and documented employee and
contractor training. The storm water management plan must include, at a
minimum, quarterly inspections and inspections during rain events with a flow
of 0.1 inches or greater of all structural and non-structural BMPs to ensure
that all BMPs are functioning as per their intended uses. BMPs that are
insufficient to protect storm water runoff will be reviewed and repaired as
needed within ten days of the observation. A site plan indicating the
location of buildings, storage areas, stored materials and/or chemicals,
spill control stations, structural BMPs, loading/unloading docks, and the
direction of runoff shall be included. Storm water pollution prevention plans
that comply with a storm water NPDES permit and applicable requirements of 40
C.F.R. part 122 and this chapter may be used as part of the entire storm
water management plan required by this section.



   (G)   Upon request, the City Manager or his or her designee may
issue a determination that existing or proposed activities on
non-residential, or proposed activities for a fee or charge on residential
property, will be conducted in such a manner that a storm water management
plan is not required. A person seeking this determination shall submit all
information necessary to make the determination, including but not limited to
verification that the volume or quantity of water impounded upon or released
from the property has no reasonable potential to adversely affect a public
storm drain system or create a public nuisance. Any determinations made under
this section are valid only with respect to material conditions disclosed at
the time the determination is rendered, and may be conditioned on the
installation and maintenance of measures intended to prevent public nuisances.



   (H)   The City Manager or his or her designee may require structural
devices that will assist in reducing the pollutant loading from the facility.
The facility or property owner is responsible for installing and maintaining
any such device. Devices that are found to be inoperable or in disrepair will
be subject to a violation for allowing pass-through of potentially polluted
waters into the MS4.



   (I)   Temporary discharge permits issued by the city shall control
the volume, velocity, and quality of the discharge and meet other regulations
deemed necessary including the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
requirements.



   (J)   Applications to construct improvements shall contain plans and
specifications to control the volume and velocity of discharged storm water
based on current city storm drain design manual or more stringent regulations.



   (K)   The City Manager or his or her designee reserves the right to
require amendments to a storm water management plan as deemed necessary to
reduce or eliminate pollutant sources from reaching the publicly-owned storm
drain system or environment.



   (L)   A storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) that complies
with a storm water NPDES permit and applicable requirements of 40 C.F.R. part
122 may be used as part or all of the storm water management plan required by
this section.



   (M)   A storm water management plan or storm water pollution
prevention plan is not transferable to a new business or property owner. The
new business or property owner is required to submit a new storm water
management plan or storm water pollution prevention plan. Businesses and
properties under new ownership are also subject to re-inspection by the City
Manager or his or her designee.



(Ord. O06-07-12, passed 8-31-2006; Res. R06-07-20, passed - -2006)



§ 53.06  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The City Manager or his or her designee is authorized to enter
and inspect real property, structures, and buildings as necessary to assess
compliance with this chapter or storm water NPDES or AZPDES permit. These
inspections shall be conducted in accordance with applicable constitutional
or statutory requirements.



   (B)   Inspections conducted pursuant to this chapter may be expanded
to include items covered by other chapters of the El Mirage City Code that
relate to the quality or management of storm water.



   (C)   The City Manager or his or her designee may collect and
analyze samples of storm water and significant materials, install and require
the installation of storm water sampling and measurement devices, and examine
records concerning significant materials and storm water.



   (D)   The City Manager or his or her designee may require the
business owner/operator to install and maintain structural BMPs to control
storm water pollution as needed, including, but not limited to, storm water
type interceptors, sealed concrete berms, permanent awnings/roofs, and the
like. The City Manager or his or her designee will determine whether the
device(s) are acceptable based on the specific circumstances found within the
confines of the property. The device(s) may be changed at the discretion of
the City Manager or his or her designee if the potential pollutants or
processes are changed or altered at the facility.



(Ord. O06-07-12, passed 8-31-2006; Res. R06-07-20, passed - -2006)



§ 53.07  TREATMENT DEVICES.



   (A)   Where necessary in the opinion of the City Manager or his or
her designee, any person that seeks to use a direct connection to the MS4
shall provide, at their expense, such treatment devices, facilities, or
interceptors as may be necessary to reduce objectionable characteristics or
constituents of the released water to within the limits in this chapter.
Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed treatment devices, facilities, or interceptors shall be submitted
for the approval of the City Manager or his or her designee. No construction
of such treatment devices, facilities, or interceptors shall be commenced
until the written approval from the city is obtained. City approval of the
plans and inspection of construction shall not relieve the owner from
complying with the release limits set forth in this chapter or the Arizona
Surface Water Quality Standards as amended.



   (B)   Where treatment devices, facilities, or interceptors are used
in a direct connection to the public storm drain system, those devices,
facilities, or interceptors shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense. The owner shall
keep written records and documentation of all cleaning, repair, calibration,
and maintenance required to demonstrate compliance with this section. Records
shall be kept at the property upon which the treatment devices, facilities,
or interceptors are located for a minimum of three years and be made
available to the city upon request.



   (C)   Storm water type interceptors or other treatment devices shall
be provided for any commercial or industrial facility and other facilities
when, in the opinion of the City Manager or his or her designee they are
necessary for the proper handling of storm water containing sediments, oil,
and grease or any flammable wastes, sand, trash, and any other harmful
ingredients.



   (D)   All storm water interceptors or other storm water treatment
devices shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City Manager or his
or her designee and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection.



   (E)   Storm water interceptors and other treatment devices shall be
constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and
extreme changes in temperature and chemicals. They shall be of substantial
construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers. When
bolted covers are required, they shall be gastight and watertight.



(Ord. O06-07-12, passed 8-31-2006; Res. R06-07-20, passed - -2006)



§ 53.08  OBLIGATION TO REVIEW.



   Anyone encroaching upon the City of El Mirage right-of-way, which may
include streets or roads, is required to research the locations of all
utilities under the surface of the public right-of-away. Storm drain
structures are not blue staked as other utilities are; therefore, all
contractors shall research the locations of the publicly-owned storm drain
structures prior to any digging, drilling, excavating, and  the like. Storm
drain maps are available through the Public Works Department for a minimal
fee.



(Ord. O06-07-12, passed 8-31-2006; Res. R06-07-20, passed - -2006)



§ 53.09  REQUIREMENT TO MONITOR, ANALYZE, AND REMEDIATE.



   (A)   The City Manager or his or her designee shall have the
authority to require responsible parties of a facility who spill chemicals or
other pollutants offsite into the MS4 to clean up or remediate the spills
whether accidental or not. In the event that the responsible parties of a
business refuse to clean up or remediate the polluted discharge offsite into
the MS4, the city will attempt to clean up the spill and back-charge the
discharger for the cleanup effort based on the costs of the entire clean up
operation.



   (B)   Where a reasonable basis exists to conclude that a person
engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any property has violated
this chapter, the City Manager or his or her designee may require by written
notice that the person undertake, at their expense, such monitoring and
analyses and furnish the resulting reports to the City of El Mirage as deemed
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.



   (C)   Where a person engaged in any activity and/or owning or
operating any property has violated this chapter, the City Manager or his or
her designee may require by written notice that the person remediate or
restore, within a specified period of time, any property, conveyance, or
equipment contaminated by or otherwise adversely affected by the activities
giving rise to the violation.



(Ord. O06-07-12, passed 8-31-2006; Res. R06-07-20, passed - -2006)



§ 53.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The remedies specified herein are cumulative and the city
Manager or his or her designee, or the City Attorney, may proceed under these
or any other remedies authorized by law. In addition to any other authorized
remedies, a person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall be a separate offense.



   (B)   Any person having control over an activity or any real
property, or who causes, authorizes, facilitates, aids, or abets any
violation of any provision of this chapter, or who fails to abate any
nuisance or prohibited practice for which the person is responsible, is
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.



   (C)   The City Manager or his or her designee may issue a notice of
violation or other compliance/enforcement documentation to any person who has
violated or is in violation of this chapter. Failure to perform any act
required in the notice of violation shall be a separate violation for each
day the violation continues beyond the date of the notice.



   (D)   The transfer of ownership, possession, or control of real
property to another person does not relieve the transferor of responsibility
for violations of this chapter, as provided in division (B) of this section,
which occurred before the transfer unless the transferee accepts
responsibility for the violations.



   (E)   A person who violates this chapter is subject to a civil
action in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect a civil sanction of
not less than $50 nor more than $25,000 for each violation. Each day of each
violation shall constitute a separate civil offense.



   (F)   The owner of record of the property upon which a violation of
this chapter occurs shall be presumed to be a person having lawful control
over an activity or real property, unless it is demonstrated that another
person has knowingly and in good faith accepted responsibility for the
activity or property at issue. If more than one person is identified as the
owner of record, the persons shall be presumed to be jointly and severally in
lawful possession and control of activity or land.



   (G)   Any person, builder, contractor, or other agent who encroaches
into the right-of-way without researching (reviewing or purchasing maps) the
location(s) of the public owned storm drain system will be required to repair
or replace the damaged structures of the public owned storm drain system to
the satisfaction of the City Engineer or his or her designee.



   (H)   Any person causing or contributing to a violation of this
chapter or a permit issued in accordance herewith, shall notify the city
immediately upon learning of the events that resulted in the violation. This
notification shall be followed within five days by a detailed written
statement describing the cause of the violation and the measures being taken
to prevent reoccurrence. Neither the submission to city of the original
notification, nor the detailed written statement, will not relieve the person
of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the publicly owned storm
drain system, or for any fines imposed on or by the city on account thereof.



(Prior Code, § 22-1-10)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   ADMINISTRATION





         71.   TRAFFIC CONTROL





         72.   PARKING





         73.   OPERATION OF VEHICLES





         74.   OUTDOOR STORAGE OF DISMANTLED, ABANDONED, OR
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES





         75.   MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY REGULATIONS





         76.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES




CHAPTER 70:  ADMINISTRATION



Section



   70.01   Duty of Police Department



   70.02   Records of violations



   70.03   Police Department to investigate accidents



   70.04   Traffic accident studies



   70.05   Traffic accident reports



§ 70.01  DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Police Department under the direction of
the Police Chief to provide for the enforcement of the street traffic
regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to
street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents, and to assist in developing ways and means to improve
traffic conditions and to carry out all duties specially imposed upon the
Police Chief by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 13-1-1)



§ 70.02  RECORDS OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the
issuance of uniform traffic ticket and complaint forms, which are serially
numbered.



      (2)   The Chief of Police shall maintain a record of every
book and each citation contained therein issued to individual members of the
Police Department and shall require and retain a receipt for every book
issued.



   (B)   Every police officer issuing a traffic ticket and complaint
form shall deposit the original or a copy with a court having jurisdiction
over the offense.



   (C)   The City Judge shall keep or cause to be kept a record of
every traffic ticket or complaint or other legal form of charge deposited
with or presented to the court. The City Judge shall also keep a record of
every official action by the court thereon.



(Prior Code, § 13-1-2)



§ 70.03  POLICE DEPARTMENT TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS.



   It shall be the duty of the Police Department under the direction of
the Police Chief to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and assist in
the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or
contributing to the accidents.



(Prior Code, § 13-1-3)



§ 70.04  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.



   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the
Police Department shall conduct studies of the accidents and determine
remedial measures.



(Prior Code, § 13-1-4)



§ 70.05  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   (A)   The Police Department shall maintain a suitable system of
filing traffic accident reports.



   (B)   The Police Department shall receive and properly file all
accident reports required under state law or under any law of the city.



(Prior Code, § 13-1-5)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC CONTROL



Section



   71.01   Directing traffic



   71.02   Obedience to traffic regulations



   71.03   Traffic control devices



   71.04   Authority to designate crosswalks, establish safety zones,
and mark traffic lanes



   71.05   Authority to place and obedience to turning markers



   71.06   Authority to place and obedience to restricted turn signs



   71.07   One-way streets and alleys



   71.08   Regulation of traffic at intersections



   71.09   Drivers to obey signs



   71.10   Processions



   71.11   Restriction on certain vehicles



   71.12   Local speed limits



   71.13   Definitions



   71.14   Bicycles, non-motorized scooters, skates



   71.15   Motorized play vehicles; prohibition, regulations, violations



   71.16   Parking violations



 



   71.99   Penalty



§ 71.01  DIRECTING TRAFFIC.



   (A)   Police officers are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand, or signal.



   (B)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire,
may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the
immediate vicinity.



(Prior Code, § 13-2-1)



§ 71.02  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   It is unlawful, except as otherwise provided in this code, for any
person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this
chapter or willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer or of any Fire Department official.



(Prior Code, § 13-2-2)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.03  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   The City Manager or his or her designee shall place and
maintain traffic control devices, signs, and signals when and as required
under the traffic regulations of the city to make effective the provisions of
the regulations, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control
devices as may be deemed necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic laws
of the city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic.



   (B)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any
official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with
the traffic regulations of the city unless otherwise directed by a police
officer, subject to the exceptions granted in this chapter or by state law.



(Prior Code, § 13-2-3)



§ 71.04  AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS, ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES, AND
MARK TRAFFIC LANES.



   The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby authorized:



   (A)   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or
lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in
his or her opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the
roadway, and at such other places as he or she may deem necessary;



   (B)   To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at
such places as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of
pedestrians; and



   (C)   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavement at such places as
he or she may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic laws of the city.



(Prior Code, § 13-2-4)



§ 71.05  AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO TURNING MARKERS.



   (A)   The City Manager or his or her designee is authorized to place
markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the
course to be traveled by vehicles turning at the intersections, and the
course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as
prescribed by law.



   (B)   When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are
placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions
of the indications.



(Prior Code, § 13-2-5)



§ 71.06  AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.



   (A)   The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby authorized
to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make
a right, left, or U-turn and shall place proper signs at those intersections.
The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day
and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly
indicated on the signs, or the signs may be removed when the turns are
permitted.



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no
right, left, or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of any such sign.



(Prior Code, § 13-2-6)



§ 71.07  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   The Council shall, by resolution, designate any streets or
alleys which are to be limited to one-way traffic.



   (B)   When any resolution of the Council designates any one-way
street or alley, the City Manager or his or her designee shall place and
maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be
effective unless the signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of
lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement
of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 13-2-7)



§ 71.08  REGULATION OF TRAFFIC AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   The Council shall by resolution designate through streets,
intersections where stops are required, and intersections where vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way.



   (B)   When any resolution of the Council shall designate any through
street or intersection where vehicles are to stop or yield the right-of-way,
the City Manager or his or her designee shall erect and maintain the
appropriate signs at every location where a vehicle must stop or yield the
right-of-way.



(Prior Code, § 13-2-8)



§ 71.09  DRIVERS TO OBEY SIGNS.



   Whenever traffic signs are erected as provided in this chapter, every
driver of a vehicle shall obey the signs unless directed to proceed by a
police officer or a traffic control signal. No driver shall drive upon or
through any private property such as an oil station, vacant lot, or similar
property to avoid obedience to any regulation included in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 13-2-9)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.10  PROCESSIONS.



   (A)   No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be
held without first securing a permit from the Police Chief, and all such
requests for permits shall state the time, place of formation, proposed line
of march, destination, and such other regulations as the Police Chief may set
forth therein.



   (B)   A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles
shall be identified by such methods as may be determined and designated by
the Police Chief.



   (C)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion
and when the vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals
or the Police Chief.



   (D)   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as
near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the
vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.



(Prior Code, § 13-2-10)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.11  RESTRICTION ON CERTAIN VEHICLES.



   (A)   The Council may establish weight limits and restrictions for
certain roads and streets by resolution.



   (B)   Except as provided below, commercial vehicle traffic is
prohibited on designated streets in the City of El Mirage. The Chief of
Police is hereby empowered to determine which streets shall be designated
pursuant to this chapter and to post signs prohibiting commercial vehicle
traffic.



   (C)   Commercial vehicles may operate on the streets only for the
delivery and pickup of merchandise, materials, or equipment going to or from
a specific location on the streets or for municipal purposes. Commercial
vehicles must use the shortest and most direct route on the streets.



   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle used for commercial purposes,
whether or not in use as such at the particular time of an offense under this
chapter, having a gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or more.



      STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
right-of-way including the improved or unimproved shoulder or berm thereto.



(Prior Code, § 13-2-11)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.12  LOCAL SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation by the City Engineer that the speed limit permitted by
law on the following streets and/or intersections is greater than, or less
than, the speed which is reasonable and prudent under existing conditions,
and it is declared that the maximum speed limit on the streets set forth in
divisions (B) and (C) shall be set forth in this section.



   (B)   The streets listed in Chapter 76 shall have the prima facie
speed limits set forth in Chapter 76.



   (C)   Streets adjacent to all schools shall be designated as a
school zone and, with the exception of streets adjacent to high schools,
shall have a prima facie speed limit set at 20 mph. Streets adjacent to high
schools shall have a prima facie speed limit set at 30 mph.



      (1)   School zones shall be posed in accordance with the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways
established by the Federal Highway Administration.



      (2)   The speed limit between portable signs indicating that
“school is in session” and “stop when children in crosswalk” shall be
15 mph, unless otherwise provided by state law.



      (3)   The city and school district shall develop a “School
Route Plan” for each school.



      (4)   The school district shall apply to the city for
establishment of school crossings. The city will establish the school
crossing in accordance with the Arizona Revised Statutes, on the basis of an
engineering study.



(Prior Code, § 13-2-12)  (Ord. O00-05-09, passed 7-27-2000; Ord. O01-12-08,
passed 12-20-2001; Ord. O06-07-13, passed 8-31-2006)



§ 71.13  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BICYCLE. A device propelled by human power upon which a person may
ride, having two or more wheels, and including any device generally
recognized as a BICYCLE.



   BICYCLE LANE. The portion of the roadway set aside by the city for the
exclusive use of bicycles or other modes of travel where permitted by statute
or city code and so designated by appropriate signs and markings.



   SKATES. A shoe or boot with wheels and commonly known and marketed as
roller blades, roller skates, or in line skates.



   MOTORIZED PLAY VEHICLE.  A motorized play vehicle is a coaster,
skateboard, scooter, any other alternatively fueled device, or other
motorized vehicle that is self propelled by a gas or electric motor or
engine, and which is not otherwise defined in A.R.S. Title 28 as a motor
driven cycle, motorcycle, motorized wheelchair, electric personal assistive
mobility device, motorized electric or gas powered bicycle or tricycle, or
motor vehicle. MOTORIZED PLAY VEHICLE does not include battery operated
vehicles only able to travel under five mph, or motorized electric or gas
powered bicycles or tricycles that are equipped wit a helper motor that have
a maximum piston displacement of 49 cubic centimeters or less, and that may
also be self-propelled, and that are operated at speeds of less than 25 miles
per hour.



(Prior Code, § 13-2-13)  (Ord. O16-11-10, passed 11-1-2016)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. § 28-101



§ 71.14  BICYCLES, NON-MOTORIZED SCOOTERS, SKATES.



   Applicability of traffic laws; obedience to traffic signals and signs.



   (A)   All traffic laws shall apply to persons riding bicycles,
non-motorized scooters, and skates. Every person riding a bicycle, a
non-motorized scooter, or skates upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of
a vehicle by the laws of the state declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles, or by the traffic regulations of the city applicable to the driver
of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as
to those provisions which, by their nature, can have no application.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person operating a bicycle,
non-motorized scooter, or skates not to obey the instructions of official
traffic-control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (C)   It is unlawful to ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a
business district that is designated in some manner indicating that bicycles
are prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 13-2-14)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.15  MOTORIZED PLAY VEHICLES; PROHIBITION, REGULATIONS, VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle on any public
sidewalk, roadway, or any other part of a highway, or on any bikeway, bicycle
path or trail, equestrian trail, or shared-use path. Motorized play vehicles
may be operated on any private property open to the public, including but not
limited to schools, churches, apartment complexes, or businesses, with the
written permission of the owner, the person entitled to immediate possession
of the property, or the authorized agent of either.



   (B)   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of a minor shall not
authorize or knowingly permit the minor to violate this section. If a
sanction is imposed upon a minor who is found to be in violation of this
section, the parents or legal guardian having custody or control of the minor
shall be jointly an severally liable with the minor for payment of the
sanction whether or not the parents or guardian knew of, or anticipated, a
violation of this section.



   (C)   It is unlawful for a merchant to sell motorized skateboards or
motorized play vehicles without making the disclosures required by this
section. Any merchant who sells motorized skateboards or motorized play
vehicles within the city shall:



      (1)   Post, in a prominent place at each location where
motorized skateboards or motorized play vehicles are on display, a notice to
the effect that operation of motorized skateboards or motorized play vehicles
is prohibited:



         (a)   On any public sidewalk, roadway, or any other part
of a highway or on any bikeway, bicycle path or trail, equestrian trail, or
shared-use path in the City of El Mirage; and/or



         (b)   On any private property open to the public,
including but not limited to schools, churches, apartment complexes, or
businesses without the written permission of the owner, the person entitled
to immediate possession of the property, or the authorized agent of either.



      (2)   Provide a copy of the notice to each purchaser of a
motorized skateboard or motorized play vehicle, either before or in
connection with the purchase.



   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized play
vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, any drug, a vapor
releasing substance containing a toxic substance, or any combination of
liquor, drugs, or vapor releasing substances if the person is impaired to the
slightest degree. A person by operating a motorized play vehicle within the
city is deemed to have impliedly consented to the administration of a
chemical test of the person’s blood or breath for the purpose of
determining the alcoholic or drug content of that person’s blood, and upon
request of the arresting officer shall have the test performed.



(Prior Code, § 13-2-15)  (Ord. O16-11-10, passed 11-1-2016)  Penalty, see
§ 71.99



§ 71.16  PARKING VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Definitions.PERSON, as used in this section, means, as
applicable, a human being, an enterprise, a public or private corporation, an
unincorporated association, a partnership, a firm, a society, a government, a
governmental authority, or an individual or entity capable of holding a legal
or beneficial interest, or delegated authority in property.



   (B)   Applicability.



      (1)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all
parking violations where a notice of violation is issued.



      (2)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the driver
of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States
government, state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such
driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise
permitted in this chapter or by state statute.



   (C)   Presumption.



      (1)   In any prosecution charging a violation of any of the
provisions of Title 28 of the Arizona Revised Statutes or the El Mirage City
Code governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, the person in whose name
such vehicle is registered shall be prima facie responsible for such
violation and subject to the penalty for the violation.



      (2)   The provisions of division (C)(1) of this section shall
apply to those persons in whose names such vehicle is jointly registered. The
person shall be jointly and severally prima facie responsible for such a
violation and subject to penalty for the violation.



   (D)   Payment of penalty fee upon receipt of notice of violation.



      (1)   Any person who becomes aware that a notice of violation
has been issued with respect to an alleged violation of any provision of this
section may, in lieu of court proceedings, pay the base penalty fee set by
the City of El Mirage within 30 days of the date of violation indicated on
the notice of violation.



      (2)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle for which a notice
of violation has been issued fails to pay the base penalty fee indicated
above, or request a hearing as provided in division (D)(3) of this section
within 30 days from the date the notice of violation was issued, an
additional penalty fee shall be added to the base penalty fee.



      (3)   The owner or operator of a vehicle for which a notice of
violation has been issued may contest the violation by requesting a hearing.
The request for hearing must be in writing and shall be submitted to the
Clerk of the Court within 30 days of the date of the notice of violation. The
City Court may require that the request for hearing be made as ordered by the
City Court.



      (4)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle for which a notice
of violation has been issued fails to pay the amount of the base penalty fee,
or request a hearing within 30 days of the issuance of the notice of
violation, then a summons and complaint shall be issued to the registered
owner or the vehicle. The summons and complaint for a parking violation shall
be issued within 60 days from the date of the notice of violation. The
summons shall command the registered owner to appear in the City Court on a
date and time provided.



      (5)   When a person is found responsible for a violation by a
Judge or a Hearing Officer, whether by default or after a hearing, the Judge
or Hearing Officer shall impose a civil sanction for the violation, which
shall be not less than the amount of the base penalty fee, as indicated in
division (D)(1) of this section, any additional penalty fee for the violation
as provided in division (D)(2) of this section, if applicable, and any
additional fees, surcharges and penalties required by state, federal, or
local laws.



      (6)   A civil sanction imposed pursuant to division (D)(5) of
this section shall be a civil judgment. Such judgment may be recovered by the
city as any other civil judgment including any applicable fees and charges as
provided in Title I, Chapter 10 of the El Mirage City Code.



   (E)   Procedure.



      (1)   The rules of procedure in civil traffic violation cases
shall apply to determinations of whether or not a person is responsible for
an offense under this section, unless otherwise expressly provided.



      (2)   An action or proceeding brought before the City Court
alleging a civil traffic violation may be commenced by the filing of a
summons and complaint; which may be served in person, or by regular mail to
the address provided to the Arizona Department of Transportation by the
person made responsible for the alleged violation of the applicable statute
or ordinance; or by the use of an Arizona traffic ticket and complaint. If
the proceeding is commenced by summons and complaint, the complaint may be
signed by any Police Officer or any other duly authorized agent of the Police
Department. Service of the summons and complaint is complete on mailing.



      (3)   Any person receiving a notice of violation may request
and receive a hearing prior to the filing of a summons and complaint, as
provided in Title I, Chapter 10 of the El Mirage City Code.



   (F)   Enforcement generally.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of each individual who is
authorized to issue notice of violations to keep account of all violations of
this section and to take the following actions:



         (a)   Identify the violation and the employee who issued
the violation;



         (b)   Report the date, time and location of the
violation;



         (c)   Report the State license plate number of any
vehicle that is in violation of this section;



         (d)   Report any other facts, or knowledge which is
necessary to a thorough understanding of the violation and its attending
circumstances;



         (e)   Additional information may be included with the
citation but is not required. Citations which contain the information in
division (F)(1) (a) through (d) of this section shall be considered valid,
notwithstanding information otherwise not provided on the citation; and



         (f)   Attach to a vehicle that is unlawfully parked a
notice of violation that includes the date, time and location of the
violation; the state license plate number of the vehicle; and the violation.
Attachment may be accomplished by placing the citation under the windshield
wiper or other place that is reasonably visible to a driver.



      (2)   The notice of violation will be in writing and will
inform the person owning or operating the vehicle of the violation of the
base penalty fee and of the additional penalty fee that may be incurred by
failing to pay the base penalty fee with 30 days of the date of the notice of
violation. The notice will also state that failure to pay the base penalty
fee within the required time period will result in the filing of a summons
and complaint in City Court.



      (3)   A copy of the notice of violation need not be personally
served upon the owner or operator of the vehicle that is the subject of the
violation, but may be served by attaching a copy of the notice of violation
to the vehicle.



      (4)   The following individuals are authorized to issue
notices of violation in accordance with the provisions of this section:



         (a)   City employees who are employed as Police Officers
and Code Enforcement Officers;



         (b)   Other city employees who are authorized by the
Chief of Police, in writing, and identified either as a group, by job title,
or designated individually to issue notices of violation. Written
authorizations pursuant to this subsection shall be filed in the office of
the City Clerk; and



         (c)   The Chief of the Fire Department or authorized
designee.



(O17-02-02, passed 2-7-2017; R17-02-04, passed 2-7-2017)



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   A violation of § 71.15(D) shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor.



   (C)   Violations of § 71.14 and § 71.15 shall be designated a
civil traffic violation unless otherwise designated and shall be prosecuted
in the same manner as provided by law for other civil traffic violations.



(Prior Code, § 13-2-15)



Statutory reference:



   Civil traffic violations, see A.R.S. § 28-1591



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING



Section



   72.01   Method of parking



   72.02   Blocking traffic



   72.03   Parking adjacent to schools



   72.04   Authority to erect signs restricting parking



   72.05   Parking vehicles on sidewalks



   72.06   Abandoned vehicles



   72.07   Parking for persons with physical disabilities



   72.08   Volunteer parking enforcement specialists



   72.09   Parking requirements



   72.10   Trucks and trailers on residential streets



   72.11   Parking in residential areas; driveways or private property



   72.99   Penalty



§ 72.01  METHOD OF PARKING.



   Except as otherwise provided by resolution of the Council, every
vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway shall do so with the flow of traffic.



(Prior Code, § 13-3-1)



§ 72.02  BLOCKING TRAFFIC.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle, or
other vehicle, upon a street in the city in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than 20 feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a person may
stop temporarily, in the actual loading or unloading of passengers, or when
necessary, in the observance of traffic signs or signals of a police officer.



   (B)   No person shall park a motor vehicle, or other vehicle, within
an alley or entrance to a private driveway except for the loading or
unloading of materials, and not then unless the loading or unloading can be
accomplished without blocking the alley to the free movement of vehicular
traffic.



(Prior Code, § 13-3-2)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.03  PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.



   When signs are erected indicating no parking on that side of the street
adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such
designated place for one hour before school opens until one hour after school
closes on any school day.



(Prior Code, § 13-3-3)  Penalty, § 72.99



§ 72.04  AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS RESTRICTING PARKING.



   The City Manager or his or her designee, upon approval by the Council,
may erect signs requiring parking at an angle to the curb, allowing parking
on the left-hand curb on one-way streets, notifying drivers that parking is
prohibited and restricting parking in any way that may be necessary. When
these signs have been erected, no person shall stop or stand a vehicle in
disobedience to the parking restrictions.



(Prior Code, § 13-3-4)  Penalty, § 72.99



§ 72.05  PARKING VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall park any vehicle, whether in usable condition or not,
nor shall an owner permit his or her vehicle to be parked upon any sidewalk
in the city.



(Prior Code, § 13-3-5)  Penalty, § 72.99



§ 72.06  ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   Any vehicle left unattended for more than 48 hours within the
right-of-way of a highway, road, street, or other public thoroughfare or on
any sidewalk, is declared to be an abandoned vehicle, and the police may
forthwith remove the same from the sidewalks or streets of the city at the
expense of the owner of the vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 13-3-6)



§ 72.07  PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH PHYSICAL DISABILITIES.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) hereof, no person shall
stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle within any such specially-designated and
marked parking space provided in accordance with division (F) hereof and
A.R.S. §§ 28-881 et seq., unless the motor vehicle is transporting a person
who has been issued a valid placard or special number plates bearing the
international wheelchair symbol, and either:



      (1)   The motor vehicle displays the distinguishing insignia
placard; or



      (2)   The motor vehicle displays number plates bearing the
international wheelchair symbol.



   (B)   A person who is chauffeuring a physically disabled person
shall be allowed, without a distinguishing insignia placard or number plates
bearing the international wheelchair symbol, to park momentarily in any such
parking space for the purpose of loading or unloading the disabled person. No
complaint or citation shall be issued to the driver for the momentary parking.



   (C)   If a law enforcement officer, or a parking enforcement
specialist appointed pursuant to § 72.08 herein, finds a motor vehicle in
violation of this section, the officer or parking enforcement specialist
shall issue a citation or complaint for a civil traffic violation to the
operator or other person in charge of the motor vehicle or, if an operator or
person in charge is not present, to the registered owner of the vehicle by
leaving the complaint or citation on the vehicle windshield in a prominent
location. The registered owner of the vehicle shall be strictly liable and
responsible for violations of this section regardless of whether or not the
owner was the person who parked or left the vehicle in violation of this
section.



   (D)   This section does not apply:



      (1)   To zones where stopping, standing, or parking is
prohibited to all vehicles; or



      (2)   If there is an ordinance of the city prohibiting parking
during heavy traffic periods such as rush hours or where parking clearly
would present a traffic hazard for the general public.



   (E)   Each such parking space for persons with physical disabilities
shall be prominently outlined with paint and posted with a permanent sign
located not less than three feet nor more than six feet above the grade and
of a color and design approved by the Arizona Department of Transportation
bearing the internationally accepted wheelchair symbol and the caption
“reserved parking”.



   (F)   In this section, the term “persons with physical
disabilities” shall have the meaning assigned to it in A.R.S. §§ 28-881
et seq.



(Ord. O08-04-05, passed 4-10-2008)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.08  VOLUNTEER PARKING ENFORCEMENT SPECIALISTS.



   The City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to establish a
volunteer parking enforcement specialist program for parking for persons with
physical disabilities, in accordance with A.R.S. § 28-886, to issue
citations for violations of § 72.07 of the city code.



(Ord. O08-04-05, passed 4-10-2008)



§ 72.09  PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Off-street parking spaces shall be provided according to the following
provisions and standards.



   (A)   Off-street parking facilities for residential uses shall be
utilized solely for the parking of licensed and operable passenger
automobiles, recreational vehicles, or boats owned by the occupants of the
residence or the parking of passenger automobiles by guests of the occupants.
Under no circumstances shall required parking facilities for a residential
structure be used for storage of commercial vehicles or equipment or for the
parking of vehicles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants, or customers
of business or manufacturing establishments except as provided in § 72.11.



   (B)   Excess vehicle and visitor parking may be located in no more
than 35% of the front yard containing the driveway, except on lots less than
7,000 square feet in which case the excess vehicle and visitor parking may be
located up to 50% of the front yard.



(Prior Code, § 13-3-8)



§ 72.10  TRUCKS AND TRAILERS ON RESIDENTIAL STREETS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way,
including the improved and unimproved shoulder or berm thereto.



   (B)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle with a gross vehicle
weight rating in excess of 25,000 pounds, or a tractor, semi-trailer,
trailer, or bus on a street in a residential zone, or adjoining a residential
zone, except during the process of loading or unloading the vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 13-3-9)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.11  PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS; DRIVEWAYS OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle with a gross vehicle
weight rating in excess of 25,000 pounds, or a tractor, semi-trailer,
trailer, or bus on any real property within a residential zoning district
within the city, except during the process of loading or unloading the
vehicle, or unless parked or placed in a rear yard or screened area not
visible from the public street or roadway.



   (B)   No person shall park, or permit to be parked, any motor
vehicle, trailer, boat, or camper (hereafter “vehicle”) for the purpose
of sale upon any lot or area within the city. This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   The display of one vehicle for sale when the vehicle is
owned by the resident of the property and is not being sold in connection
with a vehicle sales business; or



      (2)   Property which has a zoning classification which permits
the sale of vehicles and the sale of vehicles is by the property owner, his
or her lessee, or tenants.



(Prior Code, § 13-3-10)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   The City Court, upon a finding that a vehicle has been in
violation of § 72.07, shall impose on the operator, person in charge, or
owner of the vehicle a fine of not less than $250 for a first offense, not
less than $500 for a second offense, and not less than $1,000 for a third and
all subsequent offenses. All fines shall have added the penalty assessments
prescribed by the Arizona Revised Statutes.



   (C)   (1)   Unless otherwise provided, a violation of § 72.11
shall be a civil traffic violation and shall be subject to a civil sanction
of not more than $100, plus any applicable surcharges.



      (2)   Violation of § 72.11(B) shall constitute a civil
traffic violation and the violator shall be subject to a civil sanction of
not more than $250, plus any applicable surcharges. No person shall be
charged with a violation of § 72.11(B) unless either:



         (a)   A sign(s) visible from all entrances to the lot or
from the parking space prohibits unauthorized parking; or



         (b)   The person parking on the private parking area has
been warned orally or in writing to refrain from parking there.



(Prior Code, § 13-3-10)  (Ord. O08-04-05, passed 4-10-2008)



CHAPTER 73:  OPERATION OF VEHICLES



Section



   73.01   Excessive noise



   73.02   City parks and public properties



   73.03   Use of mobile communication devices



§ 73.01  EXCESSIVE NOISE.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle, whether
stationary or moving, in such a manner as to create excessive loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise. No person shall
intentionally operate any vehicle at such a speed on a curve or turn or
accelerate or decelerate the vehicle in such a manner as to create loud and
unnecessary noise through the squealing of tires upon the pavement or to
cause damage to the roadway.



(Prior Code, § 13-4-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Mufflers and vehicle noise, A.R.S. §§ 28-955 et seq.



§ 73.02  CITY PARKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTIES.



   No person shall drive, ride, stop, stand, or park any vehicle within a
city park or other publicly-owned property except upon established park roads
and drives specifically designated as such or in established parking areas.
This section specifically prohibits the stopping, standing, or parking of any
vehicles on the grassy areas of the parks.



(Prior Code, § 13-4-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.03  USE OF MOBILE COMMUNICATION DEVICES.



   A certain document titled “Exhibit A” which was made public record
by Resolution R18-11-18 amending Chapter 73 by adding this section, § 73.03,
is hereby referred to, adopted and made part of this city code as if fully
set out herein.



(Ord. O18-11-14, passed 11-20-2018)



CHAPTER 74:  OUTDOOR STORAGE OF DISMANTLED, ABANDONED, OR INOPERABLE MOTOR
VEHICLES



Section



   74.01   Definitions



   74.02   Outdoor storage of dismantled, abandoned, or inoperable
motor vehicles



   74.03   Exemptions



   74.04   Permits



   74.05   Clearing of dismantled, abandoned, or inoperable motor
vehicles or parts from private property



   74.06   Nuisance



   74.99   Penalty



§ 74.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED. Abandoned, worn out, inoperable, unused, stripped,
unclaimed, junked, or discarded. It shall also mean an automobile being
repaired when such repairs take over 30 days.



   DISMANTLED and PARTIALLY DISMANTLED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle from
which some part, ordinarily a component of the motor vehicle, has been
removed or is missing.



   DWELLING. Any house, building, structure, tent, shelter, trailer, or
vehicle or portion thereof which is occupied in full or in part as the home,
residence, living, or sleeping place, or which is intended to be occupied by
one or more human beings, either permanently or transiently.



   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle which by reason of
dismantling, disrepair, or other causes is incapable of being propelled under
its own power.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any wheeled vehicle which is self-propelled.



   STORE or STORAGE. The presence or locating of any dismantled, partially
dismantled, inoperable, or abandoned motor vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 13-5-1)



§ 74.02  OUTDOOR STORAGE OF DISMANTLED, ABANDONED, OR INOPERABLE MOTOR
VEHICLES.



   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful for any owner,
tenant, lessee, or other occupant to store on, place on, or permit to be
stored on or placed on, or allowed to remain on, any private property in the
city a dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperable, or abandoned motor
vehicle or any parts of a motor vehicle.



   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful for any owner,
tenant, lessee, or other occupant, to store on, place on, or permit to be
stored or placed on, or allowed to remain on, any private property upon which
there is a structure used in whole or in part as a dwelling in the city, a
dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperable or abandoned vehicle, or any
parts of a motor vehicle, unless the vehicle, or parts of the vehicle, shall
be kept in a wholly enclosed garage or other wholly enclosed structure. A
fenced or walled area shall not be considered a wholly-enclosed structure
hereunder if any vehicle or any part of a vehicle may be seen from a street,
alley, or other private or public property.



(Prior Code, § 13-5-2)



§ 74.03  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Any bona fide owner, co-owner, tenant, or co-tenant may store,
permit to be stored, or allow to remain on the premises of which he or she is
the owner, co-owner, tenant, or co-tenant, any such dismantled, partially
dismantled, or inoperable motor vehicle for a period of not to exceed 48 
hours. Any such owner, co-owner, tenant, or co-tenant may, in the event of
hardship, upon payment of the fee hereinafter provided, secure a permit from
the Community Development Director of the city to extend the period of 48
hours for an additional period of not to exceed one week for any such
dismantled, partially dismantled, or inoperable motor vehicle. This section
shall not be construed as to permit parking or placing of dismantled,
partially dismantled, or inoperable motor vehicles on any street area in the
city as now or hereafter defined by the zoning ordinance of the city.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person
duly licensed to store dismantled, partially dismantled, or inoperable motor
vehicles or parts where such activity is within the contemplated purpose
under the terms and conditions of Chapter 154 of this code, as now or
hereafter amended.



   (C)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to motor
vehicles manufactured prior to 1930 and considered of historical value or to
a “classic car” as defined by the Classic Car Club of America.



(Prior Code, § 13-5-3)



§ 74.04  PERMITS.



   Upon application duly made and upon showing of hardship, the Community
Development Director of the city is hereby authorized to issue a permit
provided for in § 74.03. A fee of $5 for each such permit issued shall be
collected and shall be paid into the General Fund.



(Prior Code, § 13-5-4)



§ 74.05  CLEARING OF DISMANTLED, ABANDONED, OR INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES OR
PARTS FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   The City Manager is hereby authorized and empowered to notify
the owner or the agent of the owner of any property within the city to
properly dispose of dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperable, or
abandoned motor vehicles or parts located upon the owner’s property which
are dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare. The notice shall be
by registered mail with return receipt requested and addressed to the owner
at his or her last known address.



   (B)   Upon the failure of any owner to properly dispose of
dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperable, or abandoned motor vehicles or
parts within 30 days after receipt of written notice provided for in division
(A) of this section, or within 30 days after the date of the notice in the
event the same is returned to the City Post Office Department because of its
inability to make delivery thereof, provided that the same was properly
addressed to the last known address of the owner or agent, the Manager is
authorized and empowered to pay for the disposing of the dismantled,
partially dismantled, inoperable, or abandoned motor vehicles or parts or to
order its disposal by the city.



(Prior Code, § 13-5-5)



§ 74.06  NUISANCE.



   The presence of a dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperable, or
abandoned motor vehicle or part of a motor vehicle on any parcel of land in
violation of the terms of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 13-5-6)



§ 74.99  PENALTY.



   Every owner, tenant, lessee, or other occupant who shall store a
dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperable, or abandoned motor vehicle in
violation of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in § 10.99. The
imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 13-5-7)



CHAPTER 75:  MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY REGULATIONS



Section



   75.01   Adoption of Federal Motor Carrier safety regulations



   75.02   Scope and jurisdiction; definition



   75.03   Major streets, local streets; definitions



   75.04   Permissible routes, unlawful acts



   75.05   Exceptions to route restrictions



   75.06   Liability for damages



   75.07   Definition; gross weight of trucks and load



   75.08   Permits for the movement of over dimensional loads



   75.09   Weighing of vehicles



   75.10   Exemptions



   75.11   Trucks; noise, truck routes; designations; restrictions on
operation during designated hours; violations



   75.99   Penalty



§ 75.01  ADOPTION OF FEDERAL MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY REGULATIONS.



   The certain code entitled Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations,
2003 edition, published by the U.S. Department of Transportation’s Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration, is hereby adopted as the Motor Carrier
Safety Regulation Code of the City of El Mirage. At least three copies of the
motor carrier safety regulation code shall be filed in the office of the
Clerk and kept available for public use and inspection in accordance with
A.R.S. § 9-802.



(Prior Code, § 13-6-1)



§ 75.02  SCOPE AND JURISDICTION; DEFINITION.



   (A)   This section shall apply to solely users of streets within the
city boundaries and under the jurisdiction of the City of El Mirage.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      TRUCK. Those vehicles with motive power, other than buses and
recreational vehicles, having three or more axles and measuring 36 feet or
longer in overall length including truck and load, which are designed and
used primarily for carrying property other than the effects of the driver.



(Prior Code, § 13-6-2)



Statutory reference:



   Weighing of vehicles, A.R.S. § 28-1102



§ 75.03  MAJOR STREETS, LOCAL STREETS; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      COLLECTOR STREETS. All those streets designated as COLLECTOR
STREETS on the street classification map, on file in the office of the City
Clerk. COLLECTOR STREETS provide for both land access, service, and traffic
circulation within residential neighborhoods and commercial and industrial
areas, and collect traffic from residential neighborhoods and channel it into
the arterial street system. Such streets are not designated on the
transportation element of the city’s general plan.



      LOCAL STREETS. All those streets designated as LOCAL STREETS on
the street classification map, on file in the office of the City Clerk. LOCAL
STREETS provide for access to those properties that are adjacent to the
collector street network and serve travel needs over relatively short
distances and connections to higher classification streets. Such streets are
not designated on the transportation element of the city’s General Plan.



      MAJOR ARTERIAL STREETS. All those streets designated as MAJOR
ARTERIAL STREETS on the street classification map, on file in the office of
the City Clerk. MAJOR ARTERIAL STREETS provide for traffic movement from one
area of the city to another, and are primarily designed to accommodate
through traffic; provision of access to abutting property is a secondary
consideration. MAJOR ARTERIAL STREETS are designated on the transportation
element of the city’s General Plan.



      MINOR ARTERIAL STREETS. All those streets designated as MINOR
ARTERIAL STREETS on the classification street map, on file in the office of
the City Clerk. MINOR ARTERIAL STREETS accommodate through traffic, while
balancing the need to develop adjacent land uses in accordance with arterial
access guidelines contained in the city’s Comprehensive Plan.



      PARKWAY. Those streets designated on the city’s street
classification map as a PARKWAY and proposed to have a right-of-way not less
than that for a major arterial street and that shall have controlled points
of access. These streets are designated on the transportation element of the
city’s General Plan. Such streets shall be treated as major arterial
streets for the purpose of regulating truck traffic under this code.



   (B)   Truck routes and through truck routes are established for
major arterial streets.



(Prior Code, § 13-6-3)



§ 75.04  PERMISSIBLE ROUTES, UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   Trucks must operate only on truck routes, through truck routes, and
major arterial streets, except as provided by this code. It shall be unlawful
to operate any truck on any street in the City of El Mirage in violation of
the provisions of this code.



(Prior Code, § 13-6-4)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.05  EXCEPTIONS TO ROUTE RESTRICTIONS.



   Trucks may operate off of major arterial streets only for delivery and
pickup of merchandise, materials, or equipment going to or from a specific
location in minor arterial, local, or collector streets. Trucks must use the
shortest route on minor arterial, local, or collector streets to and from the
major arterial streets.



(Prior Code, § 13-6-5)



§ 75.06  LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.



   (A)   Any person driving, operating, or parking any truck upon any
street under the jurisdiction of the City of El Mirage shall be liable for
any damage to any street, light, or sign of the City of El Mirage as a result
of any unlawful operation, driving, moving, or parking of the truck, or as a
result of operating, driving, moving, or parking any truck weighing or
measuring in excess of the maximum weight.



   (B)   When the driver is not the owner of the truck, but is
operating, driving, moving, or parking the truck with the express or implied
permission of the owner, then the owner and the driver shall be jointly and
severally liable for any damage.



   (C)   Damages, under this section, shall be ordered as restitution
to the City of El Mirage by the Magistrate Court upon any conviction for
violation of this code. The City Magistrate shall not waive or reduce the
amount of restitution provided for by this section.



   (D)   The City Attorney may bring a civil action on behalf of the
city to recover the damages.



(Prior Code, § 13-6-6)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, A.R.S.§ 28-1107



§ 75.07  DEFINITION; GROSS WEIGHT OF TRUCKS AND LOAD.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      TRUCK. Any motor vehicle designed or used primarily for the
carrying of property other than the effects of the driver or passengers, and
includes a motor vehicle to which has been added a box, platform, or other
equipment for the carrying.



   (B)   The axle loads and the gross weight and loads of any truck or
truck and load driven upon city streets shall not exceed the loads and
weights set forth in A.R.S. §§ 28-1008, 28-1009, and 28-1009.01, the
provisions of which are adopted by reference as though fully contained in
this code.



Statutory reference:



   The statutes cited in this division have been repealed and replaced.
Current maximum loads and weights, see A.R.S. §§ 28-1099, 28-1100



   (C)   The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to trucks
operating pursuant to a permit for the movement of over-dimensional vehicles
as provided in this code.



(Prior Code, § 13-6-7)



§ 75.08  PERMITS FOR THE MOVEMENT OF OVER DIMENSIONAL LOADS.



   (A)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee, upon written
application and with good cause being shown, may issue an oversized or
overweight permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles of a size, weight, or load exceeding the maximum
specified in this chapter, or otherwise not in conformity with the provisions
of A.R.S. 28-6-18, relating to size, weight, and load regulation upon any
street under the jurisdiction of the city.



Statutory reference:



   The statute cited in this division does not exist. Authority to issue
permits, see A.R.S. § 28-1103



   (B)   The permit provided for in this section shall be one adopted
by the Chief of Police or his or her  designee, and shall be issued pursuant
to and in conformity with the provisions of A.R.S. 28-6-18.



Statutory reference:



   The statute cited in this division does not exist.



   Authority to issue permits, see A.R.S. § 28-1103



   Requirements and conditions, see A.R.S. §§ 28-1091 et seq.



   (C)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee may establish
seasonal or other time limitations on such permits within which the vehicles
described may be operated on the highways indicated, or otherwise limit and
prescribe conditions of operation of the vehicles when necessary, to ensure
against undue damage on the road infrastructure and/or surfaces, and may
require other security as he or she deems necessary to compensate for any
damage to a roadway or road structure. The person for whom a permit is issued
is liable for any damage caused by his or her actions, and for the actions of
parties carrying out the work covered under the permit.



   (D)   A permit issued pursuant to this section shall be carried in
the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers, and shall be open
for inspection by any peace officer or agent of the city.



   (E)   A fee shall be assessed for each permit issued.



   (F)   A 30-day permit may be issued for the movement of over
dimensional and/or overweight loads as long as any load to be carried within
the 30-day period does not exceed the specifications listed on the permit. A
fee shall be assessed for each 30-day period. A single trip permit may be
issued under the same premise as is a 30-day permit, but is valid for only
three days from the date of issue. A fee for this permit shall also be
assessed.



   (G)   Applications for permits described in this section must be
submitted to the Police Department not less than five working days prior to
the time that work, described on the permit, is to commence.



   (H)   At the discretion of the Chief of Police or his or her
designee, a permit holder may be required to have escorts and/or certified
peace officers to accompany loads. Non-police escorts shall be trained in
traffic direction and control by the permit holder and shall utilize vehicle
markings that are visible from a minimum of 200 feet in daylight.



   (I)   Loads with widths wider than 25 feet and/or with heights
greater than 15 feet will require the review of the Public Works Director, or
his or her designee, before a permit can be issued.



   (J)   The Chief of Police, Public Works Director, or their designee
may suspend permits for reasons of public safety concerns and/or negligence.



(Prior Code, § 13-6-8)



§ 75.09  WEIGHING OF VEHICLES.



   Any peace officer having reason to believe that a vehicle is being
operated in violation of this code is authorized to require the operator to
stop and submit to an inspection and/or weighing of the vehicle and load by
means of either portable or stationary scales and may require the vehicle to
be driven to the nearest public scales in the event the scales are within two
miles in the same manner as provided by the Arizona Revised Statutes.



(Prior Code, § 13-6-10)



§ 75.10  EXEMPTIONS.



   Users of highways within the city limits of the City of El Mirage which
are within the state highway system and under the jurisdiction of the State
of Arizona shall comply with the requirements of state law and upon such
compliance are exempt from this chapter. This chapter shall not apply to fire
apparatus, urban mass transportation vehicles, or to instruments of
husbandry, including farm tractors temporarily moved upon a street.



(Prior Code, § 13-6-11)



§ 75.11  TRUCKS; NOISE, TRUCK ROUTES; DESIGNATIONS; RESTRICTIONS ON
OPERATION DURING DESIGNATED HOURS; VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Findings.  The City Council finds that:



      (1)   There are arterial and collector roadways in the City of
El Mirage, as defined in the El Mirage General Plan and Transportation Plan
and that have been designated under this code as truck routes that traverse
through residential areas to intense industrial and commercial zones
(hereafter, designated roadways);



      (2)   Traffic on these designated roadways late at night and
early morning results in excessive noise, excessive vibration, and dust that
degrades the environment of the city to a degree that:



         (a)   Is harmful and detrimental to the health, welfare,
and safety of the city’s inhabitants;



         (b)   Interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life,
property, and recreation and with the conduct of business and industry;



         (c)   Creates nuisances; and



         (d)   Creates incompatibility between residential uses
and commercial uses.



      (3)   No one has the right to create excessive noise or
excessive vibration; and



      (4)   Effective control and elimination of excessive noise and
excessive vibration is essential to the furtherance of the health and welfare
of the city’s inhabitants and to the conduct of the normal pursuits of
life, recreation, commerce, and industrial activity.



   (B)   Intent and purpose.  It is the intent and purpose of this
section to prevent excessive noise and excessive vibration and to limit,
control, and eliminate excessive noise and excessive vibration in general
from whatever source, while minimizing any burdens on interstate or
intrastate commerce in accordance with the United States Constitution and the
Constitution of Arizona. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to
restrict the movement of interstate commerce under the United States
Constitution and in the event any court of competent jurisdiction finds that
a provision of this section constitutes a restriction upon interstate
commerce under the United States Constitution, the provisions shall be
severed from the remainder of the section.



   (C)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY. The City of El Mirage, Arizona.



      DESIGNATED ROADWAY. A public street of the city that has been
designated in accordance with this section for restrictions on the operations
of trucks during certain specified hours.



      EXCESSIVE NOISE. Any noise prohibited by division (D) of this
section.



      EXCESSIVE VIBRATIONS. The presence of a vibration or vibrations
of such intensity, duration, frequency, or character which annoy, disturb, or
cause or tend to cause adverse psychological or physiological effects on
persons, or damage or tend to damage personal or real property.



      PERSON. Any individual, natural person, syndicate, association,
partnership, firm, corporation, institution, or other entity recognized by
law as a subject of rights and duties.



      TRUCK. Shall have the definition set forth in § 75.02.



      VIBRATION. An oscillatory motion of solid bodies of deterministic
or random nature described by displacement, velocity, or acceleration with
respect to a given reference point.



   (D)   Excessive noise.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud,
unnecessary, and unusual noise by operating a truck on a roadway designated
in accordance with this section for restricted truck hours operation, that
disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or
annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the
area.



   (E)   Excessive vibration.  No person shall discharge or allow the
escape of sounds or vibrations of a nature which are prohibited by or are in
excess of that permitted by this section, or which result in or cause noise
or excessive vibration on a roadway designated in accordance with this
section for restricted truck hours operation.



   (F)   Strict liability.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
cause to operate or operate any truck on a roadway designated in accordance
with this section for restricted truck hours operation during the hours of
9:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m.



   (G)   Other remedies.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
as limiting the rights of any person to redress in a court of law for any
injury to person or damage to property caused by noise or excessive vibration.



   (H)   Powers and duties of the Department of Public Works.  The
Department of Public Works shall have the following powers and duties.



      (1)   The Department shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter in cooperation with the Police
Department.



      (2)   The Department shall post notices every 300 feet along
the roadway at least 11" x 17" in size providing not less than 15-days’
notice of the intent to designate any designated truck route for restrictive
truck hours regardless of its designation as an arterial or collector
roadway. Truck operation shall be prohibited from 9:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m.



         (a)   No roadway designated as a state route or state
highway shall be subject to the designation process.



         (b)   No roadway shall be designated if the designation
would preclude truck access in all four directions.



   (I)   Standard.



      (1)   The standard that shall be used by the Director of
Public Works in designating a roadway for restrictive truck hours that may be
considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this
section exists may include, but not limited to, the following:



         (a)   The level of noise in accordance with recognized
engineering standards adopted by the Director of Public Works and whether
such standards are exceeded;



         (b)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or
unusual;



         (c)   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or
unnatural;



         (d)   The level and intensity of the background noise,
if any;



         (e)   The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping
facilities;



         (f)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the
noise emanates and whether the area is predominantly residential in character;



         (g)   The density of the inhabitation of the area within
which the noise emanates;



         (h)   The time of the day and night the noise occurs;
and/or



         (i)   The duration of the noise; and whether the noise
is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.



      (2)   If the Director of Public Works determines that four or
more of these factors are impacted, he or she shall have the jurisdiction to
designate the roadway in accordance with this section.



   (J)   Appeal.  Any owner of real property fronting a roadway
proposed to be designated for restrictive truck hours may file an appeal of
the proposed designation within 15 days of the date of the posted notice. The
appeal shall be filed with the Director of Public Works and shall be heard by
the a hearing officer appointed by the City Council for such purposes. The
hearing officer shall decide the matter within 20 days of the appeal. The
standard of the review shall be whether Public Works Director had a
reasonable basis to determine that four or more of the factors in division
(I)(1) were impacted.



(Prior Code, § 13-6-12)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of § 75.04 shall be
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.



   (C)   In addition to any other penalties provided for the violation
of this chapter, any person convicted of violating the provisions of this
chapter shall be punished by a fine as set forth in A.R.S. § 28-1101 and any
amendments thereto.



(Prior Code, § 13-6-9)



   (D)   Violations of § 75.11 by operation of a truck on a designated
roadway in violation of restrictive truck hours shall be a civil traffic
violation. The Court or hearing officer shall impose a mandatory fine of $250
for each cited violation of § 75.11, or any other section of this code or
any provision of A.R.S. Title 28, that is determined responsible, together
with applicable surcharges. The Court shall not reduce the amount of the
mandatory fine, but may provide for time payment.



(Prior Code, § 13-6-12)



CHAPTER 76:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Local streets



   II.   Collector streets



   III.   Arterial streets



   IV.   Speed limit map



SCHEDULE I. LOCAL STREETS.



   All roadways classified as local streets on the latest version of the
city’s “Street Classification Map” have speed limits of 25 mph.



SCHEDULE II.  COLLECTOR STREETS.



   All roadways classified as collector streets on the latest version of
the city’s “Street Classification Map” have speed limits of 25 mph
except the following:



 


Street Name

 

From

 

To

 

Speed Limit




119th Ave.

 

Myer Ln.

 

Cactus Rd.

 

30




Thunderbird Rd. East

 

Thunderbird Rd.

 

Main St.

 

30




 



SCHEDULE III.  ARTERIAL STREETS.



   All roadways classified as arterial streets, minor or major, on the
latest version of the city’s “Street Classification Map” have speed
limits as follows:



 

Street Name
 
From
 
To
 
Speed Limit




Cactus Rd.
 
Dysart Rd.
 
A point 550 feet west of 127th Ave.
 
45


Cactus Rd.
 
A point 550 feet west of 127th Ave.
 
El Mirage Rd.
 
35


Cactus Rd.
 
El Mirage Rd.
 
Main St.
 
40


Dysart Rd.
 
Greenway Rd.
 
Peoria Ave.
 
45


Dysart Rd.
 
Peoria Ave.
 
Northern Ave.
 
50


El Mirage Rd.
 
Paradise Ln.
 
Greenway Rd.
 
35


El Mirage Rd.
 
Santa Fe Ln.
 
Thunderbird Rd.
 
25


El Mirage Rd.
 
Thunderbird Rd.
 
Cactus Rd.
 
35


El Mirage Rd.
 
Cactus Rd.
 
Ramirez Rd.
 
40


El Mirage Rd.
 
Ramirez Rd.
 
Olive Ave.
 
45


El Mirage Rd.
 
Olive Rd.
 
Northern Ave.
 
50


Greenway Rd. (south half)
 
Market St.
 
Grand Ave.
 
25


Greenway Rd. (south half)
 
A point 150 feet west of Greasewood St.
 
Thompson Ranch Rd.
 
35


Northern Ave.
 
West City Limit
 
East City Limit
 
45


Olive Ave.
 
West City Limit
 
121st Ave.
 
45


Peoria Ave.
 
Dysart Rd.
 
El Mirage Rd.
 
40


Peoria Ave.
 
El Mirage Rd.
 
121st Ave.
 
25


Thompson Ranch Rd.
 
Greenway Rd.
 
Grand Ave.
 
35


Thunderbird Rd.
 
Dysart Rd.
 
A point 550 feet west of 124th Ave.
 
40


Thunderbird Rd.
 
A point 550 feet west of 124th Ave.
 
El Mirage Ave.
 
35


Thunderbird Rd.
 
El Mirage Rd.
 
Grand Ave.
 
30




 



SCHEDULE IV.  SPEED LIMIT MAP







 



 

PLEASE NOTE THAT:

   1   THE SPEED LIMIT APPROACHING SCHOOL ZONES WITH YELLOW SCHOOL
CROSSWALKS WHEN PORTABLE SIGNS ARE IN PLACE IS 15 MPH.

   2   THE SPEED LIMIT APPROACHING SCHOOL ZONES WITH FLASHING SIGNAL
LIGHTS IS 25 MPH. SCHOOL ZONES WITH FLASHING SIGNALS ARE NUMBERED ABOVE AND
LISTED BELOW:

   3.   EL MIRAGE ELEMENTARY - 7:30AM TO 3:30PM

   4.   THOMPSON RANCH ELEMENTARY - 8:30AM TO 4:30PM

THE SPEED LIMIT ON ALL LOCAL AND COLLECTOR STREETS IS 25 MPH, EXCEPT 119TH
AVENUE FROM MYER LANE TO CACTUS ROAD AND THUNDERBIRD ROAD EAST FROM
THUNDERBIRD ROAD TO MAIN STREET.

SCHOOL ZONES ARE NUMBERED ON THE MAP ABOVE AND LISTED BELOW:

   1.   DYSART ELEMENTARY

   2.   RIVERVIEW ELEMENTARY

   3.   EL MIRAGE ELEMENTARY

   4.   THOMPSON RANCH ELEMENTARY

   5.   SURPRISE ELEMENTARY

COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT CREATED MARCH 2019



 



(Ord. O00-05-09, passed 7-27-2000; Ord. O01-12-08, passed 12-20-2001; Ord.
O06-07-13, passed 8-31-2006; Ord. O08-06-10, passed 7-10-2008; Ord.
O10-05-06, passed 5-13-2010; Ord. O10-10-15, passed 11-4-2010; Ord.
O11-08-12, passed 8-25-2011; Ord. O17-02-01, passed 2-7-2017; Ord. O18-08-08,
passed 8-14-2018; Ord. O19-03-02, passed 3-19-2019; Res. R19-03-05, passed
3-19-2019)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   NUISANCE AND NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION





         91.   ANIMAL CODE





         92.   PARKS





         93.   ABANDONED PROPERTY





         94.   AIR POLLUTION REGULATIONS; DUST CONTROL





         95.   PUBLIC SAFETY





         96.   ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS




CHAPTER 90: NUISANCE AND NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION



Section



   90.01   Purpose and scope



   90.02   Definitions



   90.03   Enforcement



   90.04   Owner of record



   90.05   Inspections



   90.06   Notices and orders of abatement



   90.07   Service of notice



   90.08   Removal by city



   90.09   Lien for removal



   90.10   Means of appeal



   90.11   Subsequent assessments



   90.12   Emergency abatement



   90.13   Land maintenance



   90.14   Vehicles



   90.15   General nuisance



§ 90.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to preserve established communities and
promote the health and safety of all residents and to protect neighborhoods
against hazardous, blighting, and deteriorating influences or conditions that
contribute to the downgrading of neighborhood property values by establishing
minimum standards for the condition of vacant and improved land.



(Prior Code, § 20-1-1)  (Ord. O06-11-21, passed 12-14-2006; Res. R06-11-33,
passed - -)



§ 90.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED/INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is partially or wholly
dismantled, discarded, or wrecked; or on blocks, stands, or similar devices;
or stripped or scrapped; or inoperable due to mechanical disassembly; or with
a deflated tire or tires, or physically incapable of operation; or other
reasons that may include an expired license plate or the absence of a license
affixed or assigned thereto.



   ANIMAL WASTE. Waste from stables, kennels, pet pens, chicken coops,
veterinary establishments, and others of similar nature and household pet
waste.



   BOARD OF APPEAL. The BOARD OF APPEAL established pursuant to § 111 of
the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), 2006 edition, as adopted
by the City of El Mirage Council.



   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTES. All waste building materials,
rubble, and spoils resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and
demolition operations on any building or structure.



   CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL. Includes but is not limited to asphalt,
concrete, plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, sand, dirt, lumber, blocks, or any
other materials commonly used in construction or landscaping material.



   COUNCIL. The Mayor and City Council of El Mirage, Arizona.



   DEBRIS. Substance or material of little or no apparent value, including
but not limited to deteriorated lumber, old newspapers, cardboard material,
scrap metal, vehicle parts, discarded furniture parts, stoves, sinks,
cabinets, household fixtures, refrigerators, abandoned, broken, or neglected
equipment, or the scattered remains of items.



   LITTER. All solid waste including, but not limited to, ashes, street
cleanings, severed plant growth, garbage, dead animals, abandoned or junked
vehicles or parts thereof, solid commercial and industrial waste, paper,
rugs, empty barrels, crates, packing cases, boxes, cartons, wood shavings,
packing materials, wrapping, cigarettes, cardboard, landscape clippings,
leaves, metal, mattresses, bedding, crockery, bottles, cans, glass, plaster,
plastic, asphalt, tile, rock, bricks, clean fill, fill dirt, excavation
material, or other materials tending to create an unsightly condition and
having an adverse effect upon the health, safety, aesthetic, or general
welfare of citizens.



   PERSON. A PERSON as defined in § 10.03 of the City of El Mirage City
Code and shall for purposes of this chapter include an occupant of the
property.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Land owned by any person other than the United
States, the State of Arizona, a county, city, or town.



   TRASH. All nonputrescible wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible solid waste material, excluding ashes.



   UNSHELTERED. Items, rubbish, debris, or any other items located outside
a garage or other building or structure in such a manner as to be visible to
a person standing upon any public street or sidewalk or at ground level upon
any adjoining piece of property.



   VEHICLE. Every device by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn; including but not limited to automobiles, motor homes,
travel trailers, utility trailers, or watercraft. Devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks are exempt.



   VEHICLE PARTS. Any part(s), component(s), or accessory of a vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 20-1-2)  (Ord. O06-11-21, passed 12-14-2006; Res. R06-11-33,
passed - -)



§ 90.03  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall only apply to conditions
that are visible to a person standing upon a public street or sidewalk except
where the city determines that the conditions are, or are likely to become, a
threat to the public health or safety or where the conditions are so severe
they are, or are likely to become, a nuisance to a neighborhood.



   (B)   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered to be a public nuisance. The city may elect to proceed either
civilly or criminally against any person who is found to be responsible for
causing, permitting, facilitating, or aiding or abetting a violation of any
provision of this chapter.



   (C)   Any code enforcement officer or police officer who observes a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is empowered to issue a
citation to the alleged violator. Prior to issuing a citation, the code
enforcement officer or police officer may, except as otherwise specifically
provided here, issue a written notice of violation. If the violation is not
remedied within the time frame specified in the notice of violation, a
citation may be issued.



(Prior Code, § 20-1-3)  (Ord. O06-11-21, passed 12-14-2006; Res. R06-11-33,
passed - -)



§ 90.04  OWNER OF RECORD.



   The owner of record, as recorded in the Maricopa County Recorder’s
Office, shall be presumed to be a person having lawful control over any
building or parcel of land. If more than one person is recorded as the owner
of the property, those persons shall be jointly and severally presumed to be
persons having lawful control over the building or parcel.



(Prior Code, § 20-1-4)  (Ord. O06-11-21, passed 12-14-2006; Res. R06-11-33,
passed - -)



§ 90.05  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Any code enforcement officer or police officer may inspect
buildings or land to determine compliance with this chapter.



   (B)   Building exteriors and unscreened land may be inspected at any
time with or without the presence of the owner or occupant in conformance
with legal requirements governing administrative inspections of buildings and
land.



   (C)   Except in a situation presenting an imminent hazard to life,
health, or public safety, building interiors and screened land shall be
inspected during the normal business hours of the city, unless otherwise
arranged, upon:



      (1)   The owner’s or occupant’s consent; or



      (2)   Any administrative or court order.



(Prior Code, § 20-1-5)  (Ord. O06-11-21, passed 12-14-2006; Res. R06-11-33,
passed - -)



§ 90.06  NOTICES AND ORDERS OF ABATEMENT.



   (A)   If a person owning or controlling any property fails,
neglects, or refuses to remove or properly dispose of rubbish, trash, weeds,
or other accumulation of litter, junk, garbage, debris, or dilapidated
structures located on property owned or controlled by the person, or
otherwise fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the person
shall be given written notice from the city to remove all such matter from
the property or to take such other actions as may be necessary to comply
within 30 days from the date the notice was received by him or her, and prior
to the date of compliance on the notice.



   (B)   The notice shall contain an estimate of the cost of removal by
the city; a statement that unless the person owning or controlling the
property complies with the notice within 30 days from the date the notice is
received, that the city will, at the expense of the person owning or
controlling the property, perform the necessary work at a cost not to exceed
the estimate given in the notice; and that the cost of the removal by the
city shall be billed separately and shall constitute a lien on the property
owned or controlled by the person. The notice shall further advise that the
person receiving the notice may appeal in writing to the Board of Appeal
within 30 days from the date the notice is received by the person and prior
to the date of compliance.



(Prior Code, § 20-1-6)  (Ord. O06-11-21, passed 12-14-2006; Res. R06-11-33,
passed - -)



§ 90.07  SERVICE OF NOTICE.



   Notice shall be personally served on the owner, person, controlling the
property, and on the occupant or lessee by a code enforcement officer or
police officer, or mailed certified mail to the owner or person controlling
the property at his or her last known address, or the address to which the
tax bill for the property was last mailed. If the owner does not reside on
the property, a duplicate notice shall be sent to him or her by certified or
registered mail at his or her last known address. In the event that the post
office address of the owner or person controlling the property is unknown or
if the owner or person controlling the property cannot be reached by mail,
the City Clerk may cause the notice to be published in the newspaper used by
the city for one publication, and that service shall be complete and shall
have the same effect and force as if personally served upon the owner or user
of the property.



(Prior Code, § 20-1-7)  (Ord. O06-11-21, passed 12-14-2006; Res. R06-11-33,
passed - -)



§ 90.08  REMOVAL BY CITY.



   When any such person to whom notice, as aforesaid, has been given and
on or before the date of compliance on the notice, or within such further
time as may have been granted by the Board of Appeal on appeal, fails,
neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice, the code enforcement officer
is authorized and directed to cause same to be removed and disposed of at the
expense of the owner or person controlling the property. Upon completion of
the work, the code enforcement officer shall prepare a verified statement of
account of the actual cost of the removal or abatement plus 50% of the cost
for the city’s additional inspection and other incidental costs in
connection therewith, which shall constitute an assessment against the
property, the date the work was completed, and the street address and the
legal description of the property on which the work was done, and shall serve
a duplicate copy of the verified statement upon the person owning or
controlling the property in the manner prescribed in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 20-1-8)  (Ord. O06-11-21, passed 12-14-2006; Res. R06-11-33,
passed - -)



§ 90.09  LIEN FOR REMOVAL.



   If no appeal is taken from the amount of the assessment, or if an
appeal is taken and the Board of Appeal has affirmed or modified the amount
of the assessment, the original assessment or the assessment as so modified
shall be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder and, from the date of
its recording, shall be a lien on the lot or tract of land until paid. The
liens shall be subject and inferior to the lien for general taxes. All costs
associated with filing the lien, such as but not limited to filing fees,
postage, and any other miscellaneous fees, will be added to the lien amount.
A sale of the property to satisfy a lien obtained under the provisions of
this section shall be made upon judgment of foreclosure or order of sale. The
city shall have the right to bring an action to enforce the lien in the
superior court at any time after the recording of the assessment, but failure
to enforce the lien by such action shall not affect its validity. The
recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters
recited therein and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the
recording thereof.



(Prior Code, § 20-1-9)  (Ord. O06-11-21, passed 12-14-2006; Res. R06-11-33,
passed - -)



§ 90.10  MEANS OF APPEAL.



   The owner of record or person controlling the property may appeal a
notice served pursuant to § 90.07, or an assessment served pursuant to §
90.08, within 30 days of receipt of the notice or assessment, in writing to
the Board of Appeal by filing the appeal with the City Clerk’s office.
The  Board of Appeal shall, at its next regular meeting held not less than
ten days after receiving the appeal, hear and determine the same and the
decision of the Board of Appeal shall be final. The Board of Appeal may
affirm, reverse, or modify the actions required in the notice or the amount
of the assessment.



(Prior Code, § 20-1-10)  (Ord. O06-11-21, passed 12-14-2006; Res.
R06-11-33, passed - -)



§ 90.11  SUBSEQUENT ASSESSMENTS.



   A prior assessment against the building or property shall not be a bar
to subsequent assessment or assessments for such purposes, and any number of
liens on the same property may be enforced in the same action.



(Prior Code, § 20-1-11)  (Ord. O06-11-21, passed 12-14-2006; Res.
R06-11-33, passed - -)



§ 90.12  EMERGENCY ABATEMENT.



   (A)   If a violation of this chapter presents an imminent hazard to
life, health, or public safety, the city may notify the owner, the owner’s
authorized agent, the owner’s statutory agent, occupant, or person
responsible for the violation to correct the violation immediately or the
city may abate the violation.



   (B)   A notice for emergency abatement may be written, oral, or
electronic. A written notice shall be served by any of the following methods:



      (1)   By hand delivering a copy of the notice to the owner,
the owner’s authorized agent, the owner’s statutory agent, occupant,
lessee, and/or person responsible for the violation;



      (2)   By mailing a copy of the notice to the owner, the
owner’s authorized agent, the owner’s statutory agent, occupant, lessee,
and/or person responsible for the violation at the last known address; and/or



      (3)   By prominently posting a copy of the notice on the
building, accessory improvement, land, or vehicle in violation.



   (C)   Written notice is deemed served on the date it is hand
delivered, or if mailed, on the date it is deposited in the United States
mail, or the date it is posted.



   (D)   Whether or not notice is received, the city may abate the
violation.



   (E)   Upon request, the owner, the owner’s authorized agent, the
owner’s statutory agent, occupant, lessee, or person responsible for a
violation that presents an imminent hazard to life, health, or public safety
shall be granted a hearing before the Board of Appeal but the appeal shall
not stay the city’s abatement of the violation.



   (F)   The city may assess the owner, occupant, or person responsible
for a violation as set forth in § 90.08 above.



   (G)   The city may enforce the assessment lien as set forth in §
90.09 above.



(Prior Code, § 20-1-12)  (Ord. O06-11-21, passed 12-14-2006; Res.
R06-11-33, passed - -)



§ 90.13  LAND MAINTENANCE.



   The following acts, omissions, conditions, and things in or upon any
land, building, or structure in the city constitute public nuisances, the
existence which are hereby prohibited and declared to be unlawful.



   (A)   No person, shall place any personal property, materials, good,
wares, merchandise, or similar items of any kind in or upon any public
street, sidewalk, alleyway, or right-of-way. Items placed by or approved by
the city are exempt from this division.



   (B)   No person, shall place, deposit, or leave in or upon any
public street, alleyway, sidewalk, right-of-way, park, or other city building
or property any bottles, glass, cans, graffiti, handbills, posters, pieces of
scrap metal, metal articles, paper, or other material or items, except in
proper containers for collection.



   (C)   No owner or an occupant of any property shall allow or permit
any trees, shrubs, or other plant growth on the property to impede, obstruct,
or interfere with the free passage upon any public street, sidewalk, or
alleyway; or obstruct the visibility of drivers; or interfere with any
traffic control device; or signs or street lighting. Tree limbs must be
maintained to hang no lower than 12 feet above any public street or alleyway
and seven feet above any public sidewalk. Trees below seven feet, shrubs, or
other plant growth must be maintained one foot from any public sidewalk. Dead
trees, dead plants, and dead shrubs must be removed.



   (D)   No person shall allow the accumulation of items such as but
not limited to bottles, glass, cans, pieces of scrap wood, metal, metal
articles, paper, plastic, boxes, tires, vehicle parts, or other such
materials or items in unsheltered areas of private property.



   (E)   No person shall place and/or store furniture, except furniture
designed and placed for outdoor use, household equipment, appliances,
construction or landscape material, cardboard material, plastic material,
debris, or any similar materials in a location that is visible to a person
standing upon any public street or sidewalk.



   (F)   No person owning or occupying any property fronting on any
street, alleyway, or public place in the city including the area between the
property line of the property and the street shall allow thereon grass or
weeds to exceed a height over six inches when such conditions create a
blighting condition or may harbor infestations or are likely to become a
hazard to the public health and safety. Dead trees, dead plants, and dead
shrubs must be removed.



   (G)   No person owning any vacant building or vacant property within
the city shall allow thereon grass or weeds to exceed a height over six
inches, dead trees and bushes, or allow the accumulations of discarded
construction materials, construction waste, trash, or any other debris when
such conditions create a blighting condition, or may harbor infestations or
are likely to become a hazard to public health or safety.



   (H)   No person shall place any waste materials, trash, weeds, or
other accumulation of debris upon any public or private property not owned or
under the control of that person, other than the placement of refuse for
collection in accordance with policy.



   (I)   The storage of construction materials in unsheltered areas of
the yard in which insects may breed or multiply or which provides harborage
for rodents or which constitutes a hazard to the public health or safety is
prohibited. This division shall not apply to any construction materials when
a valid building permit exists for the property on which the construction
material is located and the construction materials is intended to be
incorporated in the project for which the permit is issued.



   (J)   Any person owning any vacant property that has been subject to
illegal dumping on more than three occasions within a 12-month period must
effectively secure the area where the illegal dumping has occurred and place
“no dumping” sign.



   (K)   The person in control of any private property shall at all
times maintain adjacent unutilized street right-of-way and the portion of the
alley contiguous with the property up the centerline of the alley free of
litter.



(Prior Code, § 20-1-13)  (Ord. O06-11-21, passed 12-14-2006; Res.
R06-11-33, passed - -)



§ 90.14  VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall park or permit to be parked any vehicle for
the purpose of sale upon any property or vacant property except where the
sale of a vehicle is customary and incidental to the principal use of the
property and in accordance with Chapter 154 of this code.



      (1)   The display of one vehicle for sale is permitted at a
residence when the vehicle is titled to the owner or occupant of the
property, is parked on an improved surface, and is not being sold in
connection with an automobile sales business.



      (2)   No more than three vehicles may be displayed for sale at
the same residence within a  12-month period and only one vehicle shall be
displayed for sale at one time.



   (B)   No person shall park or permit to be parked any vehicle,
including but not limited to semi-tractors, semi-tractor trailers, or
limousines on any property or vacant property except where the parking of
such vehicles is customary and incidental to the principal use of the
property and in accordance with Chapter 154 of this code.



   (C)   No person shall park or permit to be parked any vehicle,
including but not limited to semi-tractors, semi-tractor trailers, or any
other vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of 20,000 pounds or more in any
residentially-zoned district.



   (D)   The unsheltered storage of any abandoned or inoperable
vehicle, including any vehicle being repaired or restored, that is visible
from any public street or sidewalk is prohibited except where the storage,
repair, or restoration is customary and incidental to the principal use of
the property and in accordance with Chapter 154 of this code.



   (E)   An abandoned or inoperable vehicle, including any vehicle
being repaired or restored, may be stored in a carport if the vehicle is
covered with a properly maintained vehicle cover made exclusively for
covering vehicles.



   (F)   Within any residential zoned district any vehicle undergoing
repair must be titled to the owner or occupant of the property and not exceed
15 days and no more than three such repairs shall be permitted within a
12-month period.



   (G)   Within any residential zoned district, no person shall park or
store any vehicle such as but not limited to watercraft, camper shell, truck
camper, trailer, boat, or utility trailer in any portion of the side yard
unless the side yard is screened from the street and the surface area is
improved to gravel, concrete, asphalt, or paving bricks.



   (H)   Within any residentially-zoned district no person shall park
or store any vehicle, such as but not limited to watercraft, camper shell,
truck camper, boat, or utility trailer in any portion of the front yard.



(Prior Code, § 20-1-14)  (Ord. O06-11-21, passed 12-14-2006; Res.
R06-11-33, passed - -)



§ 90.15  GENERAL NUISANCE.



   (A)   No person shall erect, maintain, use, place, deposit, cause,
allow, leave, or permit to be or remain in or upon any private lot, building,
structure, or property or in or upon any public street, alleyway, sidewalk,
right-of-way, or other public or private place, any condition, thing, or act,
to the prejudice, danger, or annoyance of a neighborhood or others.



   (B)   No person shall abandon, discard, store, or keep in any place
accessible to children, a refrigerator or any other self-latching container
of a capacity greater than one and one-half cubic feet which is outside of
any dwelling unit or within any unoccupied or abandoned building or structure
without removing the doors, lids, hinges, latches, or securing to prevent
access.



   (C)   All property shall be maintained to prevent the accumulation
of stagnant water that may cause a hazardous or unhealthy condition or breed
insects.



   (D)   No person shall allow any swimming pool, architectural pool,
pond, or spa to remain or be maintained in a condition that may breed insects
or result in insect or other infestations, is polluted or stagnant, or
creates a blighting condition.



   (E)   No person shall permit or cause the discharge of water from
any swimming pool, architectural pool, or spa into any public street,
alleyway, or right-of-way.



(Prior Code, § 20-1-15)  (Ord. O06-11-21, passed 12-14-2006; Res.
R06-11-33, passed - -)



CHAPTER 91: ANIMAL CODE



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Animals at large prohibited



   91.03   Dangerous and aggressive animals



   91.04   Animals disturbing the peace



   91.05   Restrictions on the keeping of animals



   91.06   Enforcement agents; powers and duties



   91.07   Animals kept by owners; violations; responsibility for
damages



   91.08   Vicious animals; determination



   91.09   Handling of biting animals; responsibility for reporting
animal bites; authority to destroy animals; killing animals in lieu of
impoundment



Impoundment, Permits, and Public Buildings



   91.20   Impoundment of livestock, fowl, and rodents



   91.21   Animals in public buildings, prohibited; exceptions,
violations



   91.22   Dogs; kennel permit required



   91.23   Dog license



   91.24   License fees



   91.25   Establishment of pounds; impounding and disposing of dogs
and cats; reclaiming impounded dogs and cats; impound fees



   91.26   Proper destruction of impounded animals



   91.27   Animal waste



Treatment of Animals



   91.40   Confinement of animals in vehicles



   91.41   Cruelty to animals



   91.42   “Sidewalk sales”; unlicensed sales of animals



   91.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGENT. A person legally authorized to act in the place and stead of an
animal owner, an enforcement agent, or law enforcement officer.



   ANIMAL. Any creature belonging to the following taxonomic classes
(except humans): mamalia, marsupial, ares, reptilia, and/or amphibia.



   AT LARGE.



      (1)   Being neither confined in an enclosure nor physically
restrained by a leash while on  public property, or on private property that
is not enclosed by a fence or other structure.



      (2)   Dogs in dog parks, and livestock and equine pleasure
practices are specifically exempted.



   CAT. Any animal of the feline genus.



   CITY. The City of El Mirage.



   COLLAR. A band, harness, or suitable device worn around the neck of an
animal to which a license may be affixed.



   COUNTY. The County of Maricopa, State of Arizona.



   DANGEROUS AND AGGRESSIVE ANIMALS. Any animal that has a propensity to
attack, to cause injury, or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings
or other animals without provocation, or that without provocation menaces,
threatens, or causes injury to a human or other animal.



   DEPARTMENT. The State Department of Health Services.



   DOG. Any member of the canine genus.



   ENFORCEMENT AGENT. A person designated by the city who is responsible
for the enforcement of this chapter and regulations promulgated thereunder.



   IMPOUND. The act of taking or receiving into custody by the city or its
designee or authorized agent any animal for the purpose of confinement in an
authorized pound in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   KENNEL. An enclosed, controlled area, inaccessible to other animals in
which a person keeps, harbors, or maintains four or more dogs under
controlled conditions.



   LIVESTOCK. Asses, cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, swine, poultry,
and fowl.



   OWNER. Any person keeping an animal other than livestock for more than
six consecutive days.



   PET SHOP. Any establishment at which are kept for sale any animals
generally considered to be household pets.



   POULTRY. Chickens, turkeys, domesticated birds, game birds, fowl, water
fowl, and exotic birds, including ostriches, rheas, and emus.



   POUND. Any establishment authorized by the enforcement agent for the
confinement, maintenance, safekeeping, or control of animals that come into
the custody of the enforcement agent in the performance of his or her
official duties.



   RABIES QUARANTINE AREA. Any area in which a state of emergency has been
declared to exist due to the occurrence of rabies in animals in or adjacent
to the area.



   RABIES VACCINATION CERTIFICATE. A method of recording and duplicating
rabies information that is in compliance with the enforcement agent’s
licensing system or the enforcement agent’s prescribed forms.



   RODENT. A mammal of the order Rodentia, such as a mouse, squirrel, rat,
or beaver characterized by large incisors adapted for gnawing or nibbling.



   STRAY DOG. Any dog four months of age or older running at large that is
not wearing a valid license tag.



   VACCINATION. The administration of an anti-rabies vaccine to animals by
a veterinarian, or in authorized pounds by employees trained by a
veterinarian.



   VETERINARIAN. Any doctor licensed to practice animal medicine in the
State of Arizona.



   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Any establishment operated by a veterinarian
licensed to practice in Arizona that provides clinical facilities and houses
animals or birds for dental, medical, or surgical treatment. A VETERINARY
HOSPITAL may have adjacent to it or in conjunction with it or as an integral
part of it, pens, stalls, cages, or kennels for quarantine, observation, or
boarding.



   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal that has a propensity to attack, to cause
injury, or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings without
provocation, after having been so declared after a hearing before a Justice
of the Peace or the Municipal Court Judge.



   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal of the ferae naturae or ferae bestiae or
species that have not yet been domesticated or are still subject to further
domestication.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007; Ord. O17-04-03, passed 4-4-2017)



§ 91.02  ANIMALS AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, suffer,
or permit any animal, fowl, or rodent to be at large at any place in the city
at any time.



   (B)   In a rabies quarantine area, no animals shall be permitted at
large. Each dog shall be confined within an enclosure on the owner’s
property.



   (C)   Any dog over four months in age shall wear a collar or harness
to which is attached a valid license tag. Dogs used for the control of
livestock or while being used or trained for hunting or dogs while being
exhibited or trained at a kennel club event or dogs while engaged in races
approved by the Arizona Racing Commission, and such dogs while being
transported to and from such events need not wear a collar or harness with a
valid license tag attached, provided they are properly vaccinated, licensed,
and controlled.



   (D)   No person in charge of any animal shall permit the animal in a
public park or upon any city or public school property or upon the property
of a third party unless the animal is physically restrained by a leash,
enclosed in a car, cage, or similar enclosure, or being exhibited or trained
at a recognized kennel club event, public school, or city-sponsored event.



   (E)   Whenever any animal is found at large, the enforcement agent
may take one or more of the following actions:



      (1)   The dog may be apprehended and impounded.



      (2)   The enforcement agent may issue a citation to the dog
owner or person acting for the owner when the dog is at large. The procedure
for issuance of notice to appear shall be in conformity with A.R.S. §
13-3903, except that the enforcement agent shall not make an arrest before
issuing the notice to appear. The issuance of citations pursuant to this
section shall be subject to the provisions of A.R.S. § 13-3899.



   (F)   Upon request of the city or county and issuance of an order by
a hearing officer, the Justice of the Peace, or the Municipal Court, any
animal impounded under this section may be kept or impounded until there is a
final disposition of any associated criminal proceeding.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-2)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.03  DANGEROUS AND AGGRESSIVE ANIMALS.



   (A)   It is unlawful to permit any dangerous, vicious, aggressive,
or wild animal of any kind to run at large within the city, and such animals
shall be immediately impounded by the enforcement agent.



   (B)   Any owner of a dangerous and aggressive animal, as defined in
this code, shall carry a minimum of $50,000 of general liability insurance
against such unforeseen and/or catastrophic occurrence.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-3)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  ANIMALS DISTURBING THE PEACE.



   It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animals that disturb the
peace at any time of the day or night which results in an unreasonable
interference with a citizen’s right to quiet enjoyment of his or her own
premises.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-4)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05  RESTRICTIONS ON THE KEEPING OF ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall keep within the corporate limits of the city
any animal in such a manner as to disturb the peace, health, safety, or
welfare of any person residing in the city.



   (B)   No person shall keep within the corporate limits of the city
any animal if the animal shall cause, create, contribute to, or become a
health nuisance or health hazard. The presence of flies, mosquitoes, insects,
vermin, rodent harborage, odors, dust, ponded water, accumulation of manure,
garbage, refuse, or other obnoxious or putrescible material shall constitute
prima facie evidence of a health nuisance.



   (C)   The keeping of all animals within the city shall be subject
additionally to the regulations of the State of Arizona and the Maricopa
County Board of Health.



   (D)   The premises upon which animals, livestock, and poultry are
kept shall always be sanitary and subject to inspection and regulation by the
city’s enforcement agent or his or her designee.



      (1)   All pens, yards, runs, or other structures wherein any
animal is kept shall be of such construction and/or erection so as to be
easily cleaned and maintained and shall be kept in good repair.



      (2)   Fences which are intended to be used as an enclosure for
any animal shall be securely constructed and shall not be allowed to
deteriorate or become unsightly.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-5)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007; Ord. O11-09-17, passed 9-22-2011)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.06  ENFORCEMENT AGENTS; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   General. The enforcement agent shall:



      (1)   Enforce the provisions of this chapter;



      (2)   May issue citations for the violations of the provisions
of this chapter and the regulations promulgated thereunder. The procedure for
the issuance of notices to appear shall be in accordance with A.R.S. §§
13-3899, 13-3903, and this code, except that the enforcement agent shall not
make an arrest before issuing the notice; and



      (3)   Shall be responsible for declaring a rabies quarantine
area with the city’s jurisdiction. When a quarantine area has been declared
by the enforcement agent, the agent shall meet with the State Department of
Health, the Game and Fish Department, and/or the State Livestock Board as
applicable, to implement an emergency program for the control of rabies
within the area. Any regulations restricting or involving movements of
livestock within the area shall be subject to approval by the State
Veterinarian.



   (B)   Interference. It shall be unlawful to interfere with the
enforcement agent in the course of his or her official duties pursuant to
this code and A.R.S. § 11-1015.



   (C)   Lawful presence. An enforcement agent, police officer, or
their designee is lawfully in or on the private property of the owner of an
animal within the meaning of this chapter when acting as an invitee or
licensee, or when in the course of performance of a duty imposed upon him or
her by the law of the state, the United States, or of the city.



   (D)   Wrongful removal. No person may remove or attempt to remove an
animal which has been lawfully impounded or which is lawfully in the
possession of the enforcement agent except in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and the regulations promulgated thereunder.



   (E)   Deputization. The enforcement agent may appoint deputies to
his or her discretion and in the manner as he or she sees fit.



   (F)   Animal Control Fund. The enforcement agent or his or her
authorized representative shall place fees collected by him or her under the
provisions of this chapter in a special fund to be known as the “Animal
Control Fund” and these funds shall be used for the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter and the regulations promulgated thereunder.



   (G)   Accounting and oversight. There shall be an annual review of
the account balances, appropriations, expenditures, and revenue sources of
all monies relative to the Animal Control Fund. This review shall be prepared
by the enforcement agent and shall be presented to the City Manager upon
request.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-6)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)



§ 91.07  ANIMALS KEPT BY OWNERS; VIOLATIONS; RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES.



   (A)   Injury or damage to any property by an animal kept by the
owner while at large shall be the full responsibility of the owner or person
responsible for the animal when the damages occurred.



   (B)   Injury or damage to any person or animal as defined by this
code shall create in the aggrieved party a cause of action for the full
amount of damages associated therewith.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-7)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)



§ 91.08  VICIOUS ANIMALS; DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Any person having reasonable belief that an animal is vicious
may petition the Justice of the Peace or the Municipal Court for a
determination that the animal is vicious. The Court may assign the matter to
a civil hearing officer within the Court for all proceedings under this
section.



      (1)   After notice to the owner of the animal in any manner
calculated to provide reasonable notice, including but not limited to the
Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, the Justice of the Peace or the Municipal
Court shall conduct a hearing on the merits of the instant matter. The
hearing shall be open to the public. Any relevant oral and documentary
evidence from any interested party may be considered by the Court, whether or
not the evidence is admissible under the Arizona Rules of Evidence.



      (2)   Any owner who fails to appear after notice pursuant to
this section may be deemed to have waived any right to introduce evidence and
eventual right of appeal of the final judgment of the court. Further, the
Justice of the Peace or Municipal Court shall thereby determine that all of
the allegations contained in the petition are deemed admitted as true.



      (3)   The decision under this  section shall be based upon
the standard of a preponderance of the evidence.



      (4)   The Justice of the Peace or the Municipal Court may
consolidate a viciousness petition with a criminal proceeding arising out of
the same violation, provided that viciousness is alleged as an element of the
associated criminal complaint.



   (B)   Upon determining an animal to be vicious, the Justice of the
Peace or Municipal Court shall enter such orders as it deems necessary to
protect the public. The Justice of the Peace or Municipal Court shall retain
continuing jurisdiction over the matter for a period not to exceed three
years to ensure that orders are enforced. The Justice of the Peace or
Municipal Court may order but is not limited to the following:



      (1)   The owner of the vicious animal post one or more signs
on the premises where the animal is kept containing letters not less than
three inches high and easily readable by the public using the words:
“Danger: Vicious Animal”;



      (2)   The owner obtain public liability insurance in a single
incident amount of not less than $50,000 or other such amount as determined
by the Court for bodily injury or death of any person for damage to property
caused by the vicious animal;



      (3)   The animal be destroyed or removed from the premises;



      (4)   The animal at all times be securely confined indoors or
in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed or
muzzled;



      (5)   The animal be spayed, neutered, or tattooed for
identification purposes;



      (6)   The animal be defanged, declawed, or debarked; and



      (7)   The cost of any successful proceedings to declare an
animal vicious be assessed against the owner.



   (C)   Proof of provocation of the attack by the person injured shall
be a rebuttable defense to an action to declare an animal dangerous or
vicious.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-8)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)



§ 91.09  HANDLING OF BITING ANIMALS; RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPORTING ANIMAL
BITES; AUTHORITY TO DESTROY ANIMALS; KILLING ANIMALS IN LIEU OF IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   Any animal that bites a person shall be confined and
quarantined in an authorized pound or, upon request of and at the expense of
the owner, at a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than seven days.
A dog properly licensed and vaccinated pursuant to this chapter that bites
any person may be confined and quarantined at the home of the owner or
wherever the dog is harbored and maintained with the consent of and in a
manner prescribed by the enforcement agent.



   (B)   Any animal other than a dog or cat that bites any person shall
be confined and quarantined in an authorized pound or, upon the request of
and at the expense of the owner, at a veterinary hospital for a period of not
less than 14 days provided that livestock shall be confined and quarantined
for the 14-day period in a manner regulated by the Livestock Board. If the
animal is a caged rodent, it may be confined and quarantined at the home of
the owner or where it is harbored or maintained, for the required period of
time with the consent of and in a manner prescribed by the enforcement agent.



   (C)   Any wild animal which bites any person may be killed as a
matter of public privilege and submitted to the enforcement agent or his or
her deputies for transmission to an appropriate diagnostic laboratory.



   (D)   Whenever an animal bites any person, the incident shall be
reported to the enforcement agent immediately by any person having direct
knowledge of such a bite incident.



   (E)   The enforcement agent may destroy any animal confined and
quarantined pursuant to this section prior to the termination of the minimum
confinement period for laboratory examination of rabies if:



      (1)   The animal shows any clear indicator of rabies; or



      (2)   The owner of the animal consents to the animal’s
destruction.



   (F)   Any animal subject to licensing under this chapter found
without a tag identifying its owner shall be deemed unowned.



   (G)   The enforcement agent shall destroy a vicious animal upon
order of a Justice of the Peace or Municipal Court. A Justice of the Peace or
Municipal Court may issue such an order in the manner provided for by this
chapter or pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. § 11-7-6.



Statutory reference:



   The statute cited in this division does not exist. Issuance of orders,
see A.R.S. § 11-1014



   (H)   Killing certain animals in lieu of impoundment. In the
reasonable judgment of an enforcement agent or police officer, if any animal
at large is dangerous or fierce and constitutes an immediate threat to human
safety that cannot be immediately rectified by impoundment, that animal may
be immediately slain by such agent or officer.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-9)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)



IMPOUNDMENT, PERMITS, AND PUBLIC BUILDINGS



§ 91.20  IMPOUNDMENT OF LIVESTOCK, FOWL, AND RODENTS.



   (A)   The city or its agent or designee may apprehend and impound
any livestock, fowl, or rodent that is at large within the city. The city
shall have the limited authority to enter upon private property for the
purpose of apprehending or impounding the livestock, fowl, or rodent. The
entry upon private property shall be reasonable and shall not include entry
into a residence or enclosure upon the property unless it is with the consent
of the owner or the resident or occupant of the structure. After entry, the
city shall take reasonable steps to apprehend and impound the livestock,
fowl, or rodent. If any livestock, fowl, or rodent that is at large within
the city leaves the city limits during an attempt by the city to impound or
apprehend the livestock, fowl, or rodent, the city may take reasonable steps
to pursue the livestock, fowl, or rodent for the purpose of impoundment or
apprehension of same.



   (B)   After impoundment at a public facility or a private authorized
facility, the city shall make a reasonable effort to contact the owner of the
impounded livestock, fowl, or rodent and give the owner a reasonable
opportunity to reclaim the impounded animal. The city may request assistance
from the Arizona Livestock Department in contacting the owner. It shall be
presumed to be a reasonable effort to contact the owner of the brand on the
livestock impounded. Prior to releasing any impounded livestock, fowl, or
rodent to the owner, the city shall collect from the owner the actual costs
and expenses incurred in apprehending and impounding the livestock, fowl, or
rodent. The city may release any impounded livestock, fowl, or rodent to the
Arizona Livestock Department or Arizona Game and Fish Commission if the
appropriate agency agrees to collect the city’s actual costs and expenses
from the owner prior to releasing the livestock, fowl, or rodent.



   (C)   If the owner fails within ten days after notice to reclaim any
impounded livestock, fowl, or rodent by paying the city’s actual costs and
expenses of apprehension and impoundment, the city shall post notices in
three public places and publish a notice once in a newspaper of general
solicitation in the city that the impounded livestock, fowl, or rodent will
be sold. The sale shall be conducted in a commercially reasonable manner and
with reasonable notice. The proceeds of the sale shall be applied first to
paying the city’s actual costs and expenses of impoundment, apprehension
and sale. The city shall pay the remaining sale proceeds, if any, to the
owner of the animal(s) that were sold. Alternatively, the city may release
any impounded livestock, fowl, or rodent to the custody of the Arizona
Livestock Department, if the Department agrees to pay the city’s actual
costs and expenses or impoundment and apprehension out of the proceeds of any
such sale of livestock, fowl, or rodent.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-1)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)



§ 91.21  ANIMALS IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS, PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS, VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, it shall
be unlawful for any person to bring into any public building under the
control and jurisdiction of the city any animal, fowl, or rodent.



   (B)   Any legally blind person, deaf person, handicapped person, dog
guide trainer, or service dog trainer may make use of a dog guide or service
dog while in a public building under the control and jurisdiction of the
city. These uses shall be subject to the provisions of A.R.S. § 11-1024.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-2)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.22  DOGS; KENNEL PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   A person operating a kennel shall obtain a permit issued by
the county’s Board of Supervisors unless each individual dog is licensed. A
dog remaining within the kennel is not required to be licensed individually.
A dog leaving the controlled kennel conditions shall be individually licensed
unless it is only being transported to another kennel for which a permit has
been issued under this section.



   (B)   A person operating a kennel must obtain a business license
from the city, have a zoning clearance from the Community Development
Department, and may only operate a kennel subject to applicable zoning
restrictions. For purposes of this section, kennel operations shall include
any animal which is domesticated by the full blood or in part.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-3)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.23  DOG LICENSE.



   It is unlawful to keep a dog that is over the age of four months that
is not currently licensed by the county.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-4)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007, Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.24  LICENSE FEES.



   The annual license fee for all animals shall be set by the county’s
Board of Supervisors for unincorporated Maricopa County and maintained in
accordance with all applicable county and state laws.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-5)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)



§ 91.25  ESTABLISHMENT OF POUNDS; IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSING OF DOGS AND
CATS; RECLAIMING IMPOUNDED DOGS AND CATS; IMPOUND FEES.



   (A)   All animals impounded under this code shall be given proper
care and maintenance.



   (B)   Each stray animal impounded shall be kept for no less than 72
hours unless claimed by its owner.



   (C)   Prior to the release of a stray dog or cat from the pound for
purchase by any person, the dog or cat shall be surgically spayed or neutered.



   (D)   The pound may use any unrefunded deposits for any of the
purposes provided for in A.R.S. § 11-1022(D).



   (E)   Any person may purchase an impounded dog or cat upon
expiration of the impoundment period, provided that person pays the actual
costs and pound fees associated with the animal, and complies with all
licensing, vaccinating, and sterilization provisions of this chapter. If a
dog or cat is not claimed within the impoundment period, the enforcement
agent shall take possession of the unclaimed animal and may place the animal
for sale or may dispose of the cat or dog in a humane manner. The enforcement
agent may destroy impounded, sick, or injured dogs or cats whenever necessary
to prevent the dog or cat from suffering or to prevent the spread of disease.



   (F)   Any impounded licensed dog or cat may be reclaimed by its
owner or the owner’s agent provided that the person reclaiming the dog or
cat furnishes proof of right to do so and pays all pound fees. If the dog or
cat is not reclaimed within the impoundment period, the enforcement agent
shall take possession and may place the dog or cat for sale or may dispose of
same in a humane manner. Any person purchasing such an animal shall pay all
pound fees associated with the animal.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-6) (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)



§ 91.26  PROPER DESTRUCTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   (A)   Any dog or cat, except those showing signs of rabies destroyed
while impounded in an authorized county, city, or town pound shall be
destroyed only by the use of one of the following:



      (1)   Sodium pentobarbital or a derivative of sodium
pentobarbital;



      (2)   Nitrogen gas; or



      (3)   T-61 euthanasia solution or it’s generic equivalent.



   (B)   If an animal is destroyed by means specified above, it shall
be done by a licensed veterinarian or in accordance with procedures
established by the state veterinarian pursuant to A.R.S. § 24-153.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-7)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)



Statutory reference:



   The statute cited in division (B) has been repealed and renumbered.
State procedures, see A.R.S. § 3-1213



§ 91.27  ANIMAL WASTE.



   It shall be unlawful for an owner of an animal or any person
responsible for the animal to allow that animal to defecate in public or on
public property without removing the animal waste.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-8)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 91.99



TREATMENT OF ANIMALS



§ 91.40  CONFINEMENT OF ANIMALS IN VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person having charge, custody, or ownership of an animal
and a motor vehicle shall place or confine the animal or allow the animal to
be placed, confined, or remain in a motor vehicle under such conditions or
for such period of time as may endanger the health or well being of the
animal due to heat, lack of food or drink, or other such circumstances as may
reasonably be expected to cause suffering, disability, or death of the animal.



   (B)   When in the judgement of a peace officer, enforcement officer,
or firefighter an animal has been placed in danger as described herein, they
may take such steps as are reasonable and necessary to enter the vehicle and
impound the animal in the manner provided by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-3-1)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.41  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.



   A person commits the offense of cruelty to animals if the person:



   (A)   Intentionally kills or attempts to kill any animal without
first obtaining legal authority, or without necessary public privilege;



   (B)   Overworks, overloads, tortures, torments, abandons,
administers poison to, cruelly beats, or mutilates an animal or exposes a
poison with an intent that it be ingested by an animal;



   (C)   Ties, tethers, chains, or restrains an animal, either a pet or
livestock, in a manner that is inhumane or detrimental to its welfare.
Livestock and animal husbandry practices are specifically exempted;



   (D)   Deprives an animal which a person owns, possesses, or acts as
an agent for, of adequate food, water, shelter, ventilation, rest,
sanitation, grooming, necessary medical attention, and protection from
extremes of temperature, all in sufficient quantity and quality so as to meet
the needs of the animal;



   (E)   Abandoning any animal over whom the person has ownership,
charged care, custody, or possession. Abandonment shall mean a person’s
intent not to supply all of the elements listed in division (D) above;



   (F)   Owns, possesses, keeps, or trains an animal engaged in an
exhibition of fighting, or permits any such act to be done on premises under
his or her charge or control;



   (G)   Acts as judge or participates as a spectator at events of
animal fighting or bets or wagers on the outcome of the fight;



   (H)   Intentionally torments or harasses an animal owned by or
engaged by a police department or public agency of the state or its political
subdivisions, or interferes with the lawful performance of a police animal;



   (I)   Uses a live animal as bait or a lure in a race, game, or
contest, or in training animals in a manner inconsistent with state law;



   (J)   Keeping, using, owning, or possessing any property,
paraphernalia, or animals for the purpose of animal fighting or baiting,
giving, or receiving money or wagering money in relation to any animal
fighting or baiting or causing an animal to fight, or training an animal to
fight other animals;



   (K)   Commits theft, conversion, taking, leading away, or secreting
of any animal;



   (L)   Concealing the identity of any animal for the purpose of
making the return of the animal to their owner more difficult, including but
not limited to the obscuring, altering, or removing of any collar, tag,
license, tattoo, or other identifying device or mark;



   (M)   Tripping, felling, or dragging an animal by the legs or tail;



   (N)   Causes a risk to the health, peace, or life of an animal for
the purposes of entertainment, amusement, sport, or monetary gain; and/or



   (O)   Uses any animal as a lure or bait, except for the purposes of
fishing or trapping, pursuant to state license.



(Prior Code, § 6-3-2)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.42  “SIDEWALK SALES”; UNLICENSED SALES OF ANIMALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any brood or
litter of animals within the confines of the city if the person does not
possess a valid business license, the purpose of which declares the
licensee’s primary occupation to be that of selling animals in the ordinary
course of business.



   (B)   Nothing in this code shall prevent the lawful owner of a brood
or litter of animals from transferring ownership of the litter or brood by
gift, or by a transaction where there exists no consideration.



(Prior Code, § 6-3-3)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17,
passed 7-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
chapter is subject to non-waivable penalties of up to $2,500 and may be
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, and shall be prosecuted for the violation in
the manner as provided by law.



   (B)   Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided by this code, the City
Attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to
prohibit the continuation of any violation of this chapter. The application
for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary
injunction, and permanent injunction.



   (C)   (1)   A violation of § 91.03(A) is a Class 1 misdemeanor,
and shall be accompanied by a non-waivable fine of $2,500.



      (2)   A violation of § 91.03(B) is a Class 1 misdemeanor and
shall carry a non-waivable fine of $2,500.



   (D)   Violation of § 91.04 is a petty offense and shall result in a
non-waivable fine of $100.



   (E)   Violation of § 91.05 shall be a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall
carry a non-waivable fine of $500.



   (F)    Violation of § 91.06(B) shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor and
shall carry a non-waivable fine of $2,500.



   (G)   Violation of § 91.21 shall be a petty offense and carry a
non-waivable fine of $100.



   (H)   A person who knowingly fails within 30 days after written
notification from the enforcement agent to obtain a kennel permit is guilty
of a Class 2 misdemeanor which shall carry a non-waivable fine of $750. The
Court shall order the person to obtain the kennel permit, zoning clearance,
and business license and pay all applicable fees as a condition of sentencing.



   (I)   Violation of § 91.27 shall be a petty offense and shall carry
a non-waivable fine of $50.



   (J)   Violation of § 91.40(A) shall be a Class 2 misdemeanor and
shall carry a non-waivable fine in the amount of $750.



   (K)   A violation of § 91.41 shall be charged either as a
misdemeanor or a felony under the provisions of A.R.S. § 13-2910 within the
discretion of the City Prosecutor.



      (1)   Misdemeanor provision. Any violation of § 91.41(A),
(B), (D), (F), (G), (H), (J), (M) and/or (N) shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor
that carries a non-waivable fine in the amount of $2,500 and/or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed six months. Violations of § 91.41 (C), (E), (I),
(K), (L) and/or (O) shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor that carries a
non-waivable fine in the amount of $1,000 and/or a term of imprisonment not
to exceed six months.



      (2)   Recidivist provision. Any offender who is charged with a
second and independent occurrence of offense within the meaning of § 91.41
shall at the election of the prosecutor have the charges prosecuted against
them as a felony within the meaning of A.R.S. § 13-2910.



   (L)   Violation of § 91.42(A) shall be a Class 3 misdemeanor and
shall carry a non-waivable fine in the amount of $500.



(Prior Code, §§ 6-1-3(B), 6-1-4, 6-1-5(F), 6-2-2(C), 6-2-3(C), 6-2-8,
6-3-2(P), 6-3-4)  (Ord. O07-07-06, passed 7-12-2007; Res. R07-07-17, passed
7-12-2007)



CHAPTER 92: PARKS



Section



General Provisions



   92.01   Administration



Rules and Regulations



   92.15   Use and preference for park facilities



   92.16   Permit required



   92.17   Responsibility and restrictions of permit holders



   92.18   Term agreements



   92.19   Revocation of permits



   92.20   Presence in parks after closing



   92.21   Glass containers prohibited



   92.22   Drug and tobacco free zone



   92.23   Property damage



   92.24   Litter



   92.25   Boats, model aircraft or rockets, archery, golf



   92.26   Fires



   92.27   Weapons



   92.28   Person under the influence of drugs or alcohol



   92.29   Camping, lodging out-of-doors in parks, on public property
prohibited



   92.30   Passive park recreation area



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   The Community Services Director, through the City Manager,
shall have general administrative authority for the management and
regulations of the park facilities in the city. The Council has the
responsibility for establishing policy for the park facilities.



   (B)   The Community Services Director is hereby authorized to close
or limit access to parks to any and all persons not properly authorized to
use the facilities. This emergency authority shall not exceed three days
without Council approval.



(Prior Code, Art. 12-1)



RULES AND REGULATIONS



§ 92.15  USE AND PREFERENCE FOR PARK FACILITIES.



   (A)   All individuals and groups may use any park facility for
recreational purposes not prohibited by this code or contrary to public
policy.



   (B)   Preference for use of any park facility shall be as follows:



      (1)   City-sponsored and regularly scheduled activities;



      (2)   Permit holders; and



      (3)   Other.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-1)



§ 92.16  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   A permit, in written form, must be obtained from the Community
Services Department whenever any person or group not sponsored by the city
desires to reserve a recreation area or facility.



   (B)   All organized groups and/or leagues must obtain a permit.



   (C)   The permit shall be kept in possession of permittee during the
use of the facility.



   (D)   Applications shall be filed with the Community Services
Department at least two weeks prior to the date use is requested.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-2)



§ 92.17  RESPONSIBILITY AND RESTRICTIONS OF PERMIT HOLDERS.



   (A)   All group use of park facilities must be under competent adult
supervision with the persons or groups using the facility or equipment.



   (B)   Any permittee using park facilities shall be required to
indemnify and save the city harmless from any and all liabilities for
damages, personal or property, which may arise out of or in connection with
the use of the park facilities by the permittee. Responsibility for loss,
breakage, or need for repair of any piece of furniture, equipment, or portion
of the facility rests solely with the person in charge, the one signing the
agreement who shall report same to the Community Services Department.



   (C)   All permittees shall be responsible for returning the
facilities and grounds used to the same condition in which they existed upon
issuance of the permit.



   (D)   Any permit issued which will cost the city additional funds
shall be subject to a rental fee established by the Community Services
Department.



   (E)   When a permit has been approved for the use of the facilities
by the Community Services Department, notification shall be made immediately
to the Police Department. The notification shall contain the date, hours of
use, age group, type of activity, and the number of participants.



   (F)   Concession rights shall be reserved to the city unless
specifically stated otherwise.



   (G)   The permit holder shall be responsible for all expenses
incurred by the city relating to the request, if notice of cancellation of a
request is not received by the city at least 48 hours prior to the date of
the event.



   (H)   No apparatus, furniture, or equipment shall be moved into a
park or facility unless special permission is granted in advance. Such
apparatus, furniture, or equipment, provided by the permittee, shall be
removed from the park area promptly after use and before 7:00 a.m. the
following morning so there is no interference with normal park and recreation
programs. Failure to comply shall prohibit the person or group from using
facilities in the future.



   (I)   When security, personnel, or special services are necessary,
such personnel shall be supplied by the permittee or shall be procured by the
Community Services Department and charged to the permittee. The Community
Services Department and Police Department shall specify when security
personnel are necessary.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-3)



§ 92.18  TERM AGREEMENTS.



   Term agreements for use of facilities by clubs or enterprises shall be
permitted through signed contracts, which may be reissued as necessary at the
direction of the issuing authority.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-4)



§ 92.19  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   All permits shall be revocable at any time by the Community Services
Department upon finding of a violation of any rule, code section, or state
statute.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-5)



§ 92.20  PRESENCE IN PARKS AFTER CLOSING.



   It is unlawful for any person to trespass upon or be upon the grounds
of any municipal park or playground between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
am. without first obtaining authorization from the Community Services
Department.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.21  GLASS CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.



   No person while in any municipal park shall have a glass beverage
container in his or her possession.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.22  DRUG AND TOBACCO FREE ZONE.



   All areas on or within 300 feet of a city park, recreation area, or
accompanying grounds are declared drug and tobacco free zones.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-8)



§ 92.23  PROPERTY DAMAGE.



   No person shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, displace, or
remove, any buildings, tables, benches, fireplaces, plants or landscaping,
paving, public utilities, or parts thereof, or other structures or equipment
facilities or property.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.24  LITTER.



   No person shall bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any trash, ashes,
rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse. All waste shall be place in proper
receptacles. If receptacles are not provided, the waste shall be carried away
by the persons responsible for its presence.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.25  BOATS, MODEL AIRCRAFT OR ROCKETS, ARCHERY, GOLF.



   No person shall do any of the following without the written consent of
the Community Services Department:



   (A)   Operate a boat, raft, model watercraft, or model aircraft;



   (B)   Launch a rocket;



   (C)   Engage in archery; and/or



   (D)   Drive golf balls.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.26  FIRES.



   No person shall start or sustain a fire in any city park, except for
the use of charcoal in grills designed for such use. No person shall build
any fire in violation of any fire restrictions imposed by the city.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.27  WEAPONS.



   No person shall bring into any city park any weapon or firearm,
including any handguns, rifles, shotguns, BB guns, CO2 pellet guns,
explosives, fireworks, slingshots, bows and arrows, or knives with blades
longer that three and one-half inches. A knife longer than three and one-half
inches may be possessed in a park provided the knife is used solely in
connection with serving or preparing food.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.28  PERSON UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF DRUGS OR ALCOHOL.



   No person shall be in any city park while under the influence of drugs
and/or alcohol if the person is impaired to the slightest degree.



(Prior Code, § 12-2-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.29  CAMPING, LODGING OUT-OF-DOORS IN PARKS, ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CAMPING. To use real property of the city for living
accommodation purposes such as sleeping activities, or making preparations to
sleep, including the laying down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping, or
storing personal belongings, or making a fire, or using any tents or shelter
or other structure or vehicle for sleeping or doing any digging or earth
breaking or carrying on cooking activities.



      LIVING ACCOMMODATION PURPOSES.  To use publicly owned property
as a temporary or permanent place of lodging or residence.



      LODGING OUT-OF-DOORS.  Using publicly owned property for living
accommodation purposes by the erection, use, or occupation of any tent, hut,
lean-to, shack, temporary shelter, or the like, for sleeping purposes or the
laying down of bedding, such as a blanket, sleeping bag, bed roll,
newspapers, cardboard, or similar material for the purpose of sleeping.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use publicly owned
property in the city, including parks, for living accommodation purposes,
camping, and/or lodging out-of-doors, except as may be specifically
authorized by the appropriate governmental authority.



   (C)   No person shall be charged under this section unless the
person continues to engage in conduct prohibited by this section after having
been:



      (1)   Notified by a law enforcement officer that the conduct
is prohibited; and



      (2)   Provided an opportunity to relocate.



   (D)   First violation of division (B).



      (1)   Any person who after being notified by a law enforcement
officer and provided the opportunity to relocate, fails to do so shall be
subject to arrest for violation of division (B).



      (2)   The first violation of division (B) shall be designated
a Class 3 misdemeanor.



   (E)   Second and subsequent violations of division (B).



      (1)   Any person who having previously violated division (B),
and having received notification from a law enforcement officer and provided
the opportunity to relocate, shall be subject to arrest and increased
penalties.



      (2)   The second violation of division (B) within a 12
consecutive month period shall be designated a Class 2 misdemeanor.



      (3)   The third and subsequent violations of division (B)
within a 12 consecutive month period shall be designated a Class 1
misdemeanor.



(Ord. O12-11-12, passed 11-8-2012)



§ 92.30  PASSIVE PARK RECREATION AREA.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, a PASSIVE PARK
is an outdoor city-owned recreational facility intended for passive
recreational activities, such as walking, hiking, jogging, and
roller-skating. A PASSIVE PARK does not include organized or competitive
activities and no permits for non-city related activities will be considered.
Generally, a PASSIVE PARK is maintained in its existing state, with exception
of public improvements made by the city or other government agency for the
purpose of protecting the public's health, safety, and welfare.



   (B)   Apassive park will be so designated by the City Council and
park rules and regulations will be in keeping with this chapter of the City
Code.



(Ord. O14-01-01, passed 1-7-2014) Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 93: ABANDONED PROPERTY



Section



   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Notice of official possession



   93.03   Claim and proof of ownership



   93.04   Disposal



   93.05   Disposition of proceeds



   93.06   Exemptions from provisions



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED. Personal property shall be deemed ABANDONED if the owner
thereof fails to make satisfactory claim and proof of ownership within 30
days after the giving of notice as provided in § 93.02.



   EXEMPTED ITEMS. Any vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer of a type subject
to registration under A.R.S. Title 28; livestock; intangible personal
property.



   OFFICER. Any officer, agent, or employee of the city acting within the
scope of his or her employment.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY. All personal property of whatever nature where the
owner thereof or his or her whereabouts is unknown, or which is unclaimed for
more than seven days, but the term shall be interpreted to mean and shall
specifically exclude exempted items.



(Ord. O07-12-11, passed 12-13-2007; Res. R07-12-32, passed 12-13-2007)



§ 93.02  NOTICE OF OFFICIAL POSSESSION.



   (A)   Any officer having in his or her possession personal property
shall publish at least once a notice in a newspaper distributed within the
city containing the following information:



      (1)   The name, designation, and address of the officer giving
the notice;



      (2)   The description of the personal property that has come
into the possession of the officer since the giving of the last periodic
notice;



      (3)   A demand that all owners of the property described in
the notice make claim and proof of ownership satisfactory to the officer
named in the notice within 30 days from the date of the notice;



      (4)   A statement that any of the described personal property
not so claimed within the 30-day period shall be deemed to be abandoned, and
that the same may be disposed of by the city; and



      (5)   The date of the notice.



   (B)   A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the owner, if known,
at his or her last known place of residence.



(Ord. O07-12-11, passed 12-13-2007; Res. R07-12-32, passed 12-13-2007)



§ 93.03  CLAIM AND PROOF OF OWNERSHIP.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, if the
personal property described in the notice required by § 93.02 remains in the
possession of the officer without any person making satisfactory claim and
proof of ownership therefore for a period of 30 days from the date of the
notice describing it, the personal property shall be deemed to be abandoned,
and title thereof shall be deemed to be in the city and become “city
personal property” by reason of abandonment by the owner and possession by
the city.



   (B)   The conversion of unclaimed personal property for personal use
is prohibited.



   (C)    When dealing with property which is lost, found by a person
not the owner (hereinafter referred to as the “finder”), and then turned
over to an officer, the finder shall be deemed to have made satisfactory
claim and proof of ownership to be entitled to possession of the personal
property at the end of 30 days from the date of the notice. However, the
finder’s claim and proof of ownership under this section shall be inferior
to and subject to a satisfactory claim and proof of ownership by any owner of
the personal property. Upon delivery of the property to the finder as
provided in this section, the city shall have no further interest in or
obligations with respect to the property. The city shall, however, provide
the name and address of the finder and the location of the property, if
known, to any person making a satisfactory claim and proof of ownership
subsequent to the delivery of the property to the finder.



(Ord. O07-12-11, passed 12-13-2007; Res. R07-12-32, passed 12-13-2007)



§ 93.04  DISPOSAL.



   (A)   The city shall have the right to sell, lease, exchange, trade,
or otherwise dispose of abandoned personal property for the best interest of
the city. No disposal of property shall be made until 30 days after the
public notice required by § 93.02 has been given.



   (B)   The officer conducting the sale shall maintain a complete and
accurate record of the sale, which shall include the description of the
personal property sold, the name and address of the purchasers, the sale
price of each item sold and the cost of the sale.



   (C)   Fair market value of materials to be disposed of by exchange
or trade shall be determined by an appraisal. The appraisal shall be
contained in the records in the materials management office and shall be
solicited from an expert in the commodity field who is not a city employee or
agent of a responding enterprise.



(Ord. O07-12-11, passed 12-13-2007; Res. R07-12-32, passed 12-13-2007)



§ 93.05  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.



   (A)   All monies received from disposal of abandoned personal
property, or an amount equal to the fair market value of the property if
disposed by exchange or trade, as provided for in this chapter, less the cost
of advertising and selling, shall be immediately paid over to the City
Treasurer and retained in a separate fund for at least six months.



   (B)   Should any person within six months from the date of disposal
of any item of abandoned personal property make claim thereto and establish
ownership, the sum of money paid over to the City Treasurer as provided
herein shall be paid over to that person. In no event shall any claim be
considered unless it shall be presented to the City Treasurer in writing
under oath and before the expiration of six months from the date of the
disposal of the item claim.



(Ord. O07-12-11, passed 12-13-2007; Res. R07-12-32, passed 12-13-2007)



§ 93.06  EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS.



   The provisions contained in this chapter shall not apply to the
following categories of abandoned personal property:



   (A)   Firearms, weapons, and other devices or instruments designed
for inflicting bodily injury. The city may elect to dispose of or retain the
same;



   (B)   Items for which no bids are received or bids received are less
than the cost of advertising or selling. Such items may be deemed to be of no
intrinsic or monetary value and may be disposed of in any manner deemed
appropriate by the city;



   (C)   Items useful or necessary to the city. Such items may be
retained by the city for its use; and



   (D)   At the discretion of the City Manager or his or her designee,
the city may elect to donate any abandoned personal property or exempted item
in its custody for at least 90 days to a governmental or nonprofit or
charitable organization.



(Ord. O07-12-11, passed 12-13-2007; Res. R07-12-32, passed 12-13-2007)



CHAPTER 94: AIR POLLUTION REGULATIONS; DUST CONTROL



Section



   94.01   Purpose



   94.02   Definitions



   94.03   Unpaved roads, shoulders, and alleys



   94.04   Parking areas



   94.05   Open areas and vacant lots



   94.06   Leaf blowers



   94.07   Off-highway vehicles



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to comply with the Arizona House Bill
1552 which stipulates that each jurisdiction provides in the city code
measures to control dust pollution which may be enforceable by the
jurisdiction. The intent is to limit particulate matter emissions into the
ambient air from any property, operation, or activity that may serve as a
fugitive dust source.



(Prior Code, § 23-1-1)  (Ord. O08-03-03, passed 3-13-2008)



§ 94.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISTURBED SURFACE AREA. A portion of the earth’s surface (or material
placed thereupon) which has been physically moved, uncovered, destabilized,
or otherwise modified from its undisturbed native condition.



   DUST CONTROL IMPLEMENT. A tool, machine, equipment, accessory,
structure, enclosure, cover, material, or supply, including an adequate
readily available supply of water and its associated distribution/delivery
system, used to control fugitive dust emissions.



   DUST CONTROL PLAN. A written plan describing all control measures.



   DUST GENERATING OPERATION. Any activity capable of generating fugitive
dust, including but not limited to, land clearing, earthmoving, weed
abatement by discing or blading, excavating, construction, demolition,
material handling, storage and/or transporting operations, vehicle use and
movement, the operation of any outdoor equipment, or unpaved parking lots.
For the purpose of this code, basic (not including trenching, grading, or any
other mechanized activity) landscaping maintenance and/or playing on a ball
field shall not be considered a DUST GENERATING OPERATION.



   DUST SUPPRESSANT. Water, hygroscopic material, solution of water and
chemical surfactant, foam. Non-toxic chemical stabilizer or any other dust
palliative, which is not prohibited for ground surface application by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or the Arizona Department of
Environmental Quality (ADEQ) or any applicable law, rule, or regulation as a
treatment material for reducing fugitive dust emissions.



   FUGITIVE DUST. The particulate matter, which is not collected by a
capture system, which is entrained in the ambient air, and which is caused
from human and/or natural activities, such as but not limited to, movement of
soil, vehicles, equipment, blasting, and wind.



   INTERMITTENT SOURCE. A fugitive dust generating operation and/or
activity that lasts for a duration of less than six consecutive minutes.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. A self-propelled vehicle for use on the public roads and
highways of the City of El Mirage and required to be registered under the
Arizona State Uniform Motor Vehicle Act, including any non-motorized
attachments, such as but not limited to, trailers or other conveyances which
are connected to or propelled by the actual motorized portion of the vehicle.



   OFF-ROAD VEHICLE. Any self propelled conveyance specifically designed
for off-road use, including but not limited to, off-road or all-terrain
equipment, trucks, cars, motorcycles, motorbikes, or motor buggies.



   OPEN AREAS AND VACANT LOTS. Any of the following:



      (1)   An unsubdivided or undeveloped tract of land adjoining a
developed or a partially developed residential, industrial, institutional,
governmental, or a commercial area;



      (2)   A subdivided residential, industrial, institutional,
governmental, or commercial lot, which contains no approved or permitted
buildings or structures of a temporary or permanent nature;



      (3)   A partially developed residential, industrial,
institutional, governmental, or commercial lot;



      (4)   A tract of land, in the non-attainment area, adjoining
agricultural property;



      (5)   Vacant portions of residential or commercial lots that
are immediately adjacent and owned and/or operated by the same individual or
entity are considered one vacant open area or vacant lot; and/or



      (6)   Does not include any site that has been issued a county
dust control permit.



   OWNER AND/OR OPERATOR. Any person who owns, leases, operates, controls,
or supervises a dust generating operation subject to the requirements of this
chapter.



   PAVE. To apply and maintain asphalt, concrete, or other similar
material to a roadway surface (i.e. asphaltic concrete, concrete pavement,
chip seal, or rubberized asphalt).



   PUBLIC ROADWAYS. Any roadways that are open to public travel.



   SILT. Any aggregate material with a particle size of less than 75
micrometers in diameter which passes through a No. 200 sieve.



   UNPAVED HAUL/ACCESS ROAD. Any on-site unpaved road used by commercial,
industrial, institutional, or governmental travel.



   UNPAVED PARKING LOT. Any area (other than residential with four or
fewer units) larger than 5,000 square feet that is not paved and that is used
for parking, maneuvering, or the storing of motor vehicles and residential
areas of 3,000 square feet or more with four or fewer units.



   UNPAVED ROAD. Any road or equipment path that is not paved and used
exclusively for the purpose of travel by motor vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 23-1-2)  (Ord. O08-03-03, passed 3-13-2008)



§ 94.03  UNPAVED ROADS, SHOULDERS, AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   The City’s Public Works Department shall implement and
maintain a plan for the stabilization of city-owned unpaved roads, alleys,
and the unpaved shoulders on all arterial roads with the use of approved dust
suppressants. An inventory shall be taken and routinely updated to identify
unpaved rights-of-way, haul/access roads, roadways (designated or otherwise),
shoulders, and alleys for treatment.



   (B)   The following criteria shall be considered for prioritizing
the dust control measures:



      (1)   Traffic volume. Roads with greater traffic volume have a
higher potential for dust emissions from the road surface and shoulders based
upon direct tire action as well as vehicular wake effects. Consistent with
A.R.S. § 9-500.04, priority shall be given to unpaved roads with 100 average
daily trips. Traffic volumes shall also be considered in prioritizing
shoulders. Alley traffic volumes are generally low, but should be considered
for treatment.



      (2)   Shoulders on arterial roads or other road segments with
vehicular use. Shoulders shall be prioritized for stabilization based upon
the location of the shoulder segments along arterial streets and evidence of
vehicular use. Shoulders which appear to be used for unauthorized turn lanes,
parking, or traffic bypass shall have a higher priority. In addition,
shoulders in areas where vehicular use is anticipated due to projected
traffic volume have a higher potential for generating dust emissions.



      (3)   Traffic speed. Roadways with a higher vehicular speed
also have a higher potential for generating dust from direct vehicular tire
action and the vehicular wake effect.



      (4)   Heavy-duty truck traffic. Roadways with higher
heavy-duty truck traffic have a higher potential for dust from the larger
tires, greater weight, and larger vehicle profile, which cause a greater wake
effect.



      (5)   Silt content in underlying soil. Natural soils with clay
and silty clay have a severe erosion potential rating. This rating indicates
a high potential for generating fine particle of dust, which stay suspended
as PM-10 pollution. Areas of high silt content within the City of El Mirage
limits shall be identified and targeted for routine observation and treatment.



      (6)   Target areas. Priority shall be given to the Agua Fria
river basin and the areas adjacent to the river. In addition, the areas
contained within the Dysart Ranchette community shall be given priority as
these areas reflect the highest opportunity to reduce PM-10 through the
treatment of unpaved roads.



      (7)   Safety, drainage, and other issues. Safety and drainage
issues are an important factor in prioritizing treatment areas. Roads and
paving shoulders in areas without a storm drain system are susceptible to
discharge onto the roadway. Selection of roads for treatment must also
include consideration of connectivity to other roads, as well as the
location, relative to other paving and stabilization projects.



   (C)   The City of El Mirage will maintain records of implementation
of city-owned road, shoulder, and alley treatments and will submit annual or
periodic reports as requested by Maricopa County or other responsible
agencies.



   (D)   (1)   Private roadways used for haul/access or any on-site
unpaved road used by commercial, industrial, institutional, or governmental
travel shall be targeted by Code Enforcement for compliance with the dust
control measures included within this chapter unless all of the following
measures are continuously observed:



         (a)   Speed limits are posted at 15 mph;



         (b)   Trips on the roadway are limited to not more than
20 trips per day; and



         (c)   Water is applied so the surface is visibly moist
or the surface is treated with other dust suppressant materials or methods.



      (2)   In the even a violation this division (D) is discovered,
the following fines and procedures shall apply:



         (a)   First offense.  A notice of compliance (NOC)
shall be issued requiring compliance with this section no later than 30 days
from the issuance date of the NOC. The purpose of the NOC is to provide the
public information on PM-10 issues and educational material regarding
compliance with dust control regulations.



         (b)   Second offense or failure to comply with a NOC. 
A civil fine of $250 shall be imposed and the violator shall be given a
notice of violation (NOV) requiring compliance within two weeks.  Failure to
comply with the NOV within two weeks shall also constitute a third offense.



         (c)   Third and subsequent offenses.  A civil fine of
$500 shall be imposed. Each day the violation is permitted to exist may be
treated as a new offense for which a new NOV may be issued.



         (d)   Additional fines.  Additional fines may be issued
by Maricopa County Air Quality for repeat offenders.



(Prior Code, § 23-1-3)  (Ord. O08-03-03, passed 3-13-2008; Ord. O08-10-17,
passed 10-9-2008)



§ 94.04  PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   Parking, maneuvering, ingress and egress areas at any
development (industrial, institutional, commercial, multi-family residential,
etc.) other than residential buildings with four or fewer units shall be
maintained with a dustproof paving method approved by the city.



   (B)   Parking, maneuvering, ingress and egress areas that are 3,000
square feet or more in size at residential buildings with four or fewer units
shall be maintained with a dustproof paving method approved by the city.



   (C)   In the event a violation of this section is discovered, the
following fines and procedures shall apply:



      (1)   First offense.  A notice of compliance shall be issued
requiring compliance with this section no later than 30 days from the
issuance date of the NOC. The purpose of the NOC is to provide the public
information on PM-10 issues and educational material regarding compliance
with dust control regulations.



      (2)   Second offense or failure to comply with a NOC.  A
civil fine of $500 shall be imposed and the violator shall be given a notice
of violation (NOV) requiring compliance within two weeks.  Failure to comply
with the NOV within two weeks shall also constitute a third offense.



      (3)   Third and subsequent offenses.  A civil fine of $1,000
shall be imposed. Each day the violation is permitted to exist may be treated
as a new offense for which a new NOV may be issued.



      (4)   Additional fines.  Additional fines may be issued by
Maricopa County Air Quality for repeat offenders.



   (D)   Reasonable written notice shall be given to the property owner
that the unpaved disturbed surface is required to be stabilized. The City of
El Mirage has the authority to enter onto the lot to stabilize the disturbed
surface at the expense of the owner if stabilization has not been met by the
day set for compliance. The city shall have the right to lien the property
for the expenses if not paid by the owner within 14 days of request for
payment.



(Prior Code, § 23-1-4)  (Ord. O08-03-03, passed 3-13-2008; Ord. O08-10-17,
passed 10-9-2008)



§ 94.05  OPEN AREAS AND VACANT LOTS.



   (A)   Open areas and vacant lots as described in § 94.02 shall
comply with all dust control regulations requiring stabilization of the
disturbed surface as specified in Rule 310 of the Maricopa County Air
Pollution Control Regulations.



   (B)   The parking or access of any vehicle on the site is restricted
to stabilized surfaces only. The owner of any vacant property is responsible
for restricting access to the property by either:



      (1)   The posting of and maintenance of signage stating “NO
TRESPASSING BY MOTOR VEHICLES AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLES”. Signs must be posted
on all sides of the property accessible to/by the public and spaced at an
interval minimum of 150 feet; or



      (2)   Installing physical barriers such as curbs, fences,
gates, posts, shrubs, and/or trees to prevent access.



   (C)   Any surface area which exceeds one-tenth of an acre or 4,356
square feet of area where a dust generating operation, as described in §
94.02, is taking place the owner/operator is required to have in their
possession a dust permit from the Maricopa Air Quality Department (MCAQD)
which contains an approved dust control plan. Owner/operators blading and
discing properties less than one-tenth of an acre are responsible for
utilizing a Rule 310 dust control implement/method for controlling fugitive
dust emissions.



   (D)   In the event a violation of this section is discovered, the
following fines and procedures shall apply:



      (1)   First offense.  A notice of compliance (NOC) shall be
issued requiring compliance with this section no later than 30 days from the
issuance date of the NOC. The purpose of the NOC is to provide the public
information on PM-10 issues and educational material regarding compliance
with dust control regulations.



      (2)   Second offense or failure to comply with a NOC.  A
civil fine of $500 shall be imposed and the violator shall be given a notice
of violation (NOV) requiring compliance within two weeks.  Failure to comply
with the NOV within two weeks shall also constitute a third offense.



      (3)   Third and subsequent offenses.  A civil fine of $1,000
shall be imposed. Each day the violation is permitted to exist may be treated
as a new offense for which a new NOV may be issued.



      (4)   Additional fines.  Additional fines may be issued by
Maricopa County Air Quality for repeat offenders.



   (E)   Reasonable written notice to the property owner that the
unpaved disturbed surface is required to be stabilized shall be given. The
City of El Mirage has the authority to enter onto any vacant lot or open area
to stabilize the disturbed surface, fence, or otherwise restrict access to
the site at the expense of the owner if compliance has not been met by the
time specified. The city shall have the right to lien the  property for the
expenses if not paid by the owner within 14 days of request for payment.



(Prior Code, § 23-1-5)  (Ord. O08-03-03, passed 3-13-2008; Ord. O08-10-17,
passed 10-9-2008)



§ 94.06  LEAF BLOWERS.



   Any contractor, employee, or landowner operating a leaf blower within
the city limits is prohibited under the following conditions:



   (A)   The use on high pollution advisory days other than in vacuum
mode.



   (B)   The blowing of debris onto public/public access roadways is
prohibited at all times.



   (C)   Use on any non-stabilized surface.



(Prior Code, § 23-1-6)  (Ord. O08-03-03, passed 3-13-2008)



§ 94.07  OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, all-terrain vehicle,
or off-road recreational vehicle, including motorcycles, go carts, and
scooters, on an unpaved surface that is not a public or private road, street
or lawful easement and that is closed or posted as no trespassing by the
landowner.



   (B)   Exceptions.



      (1)   The operation of vehicles in the normal course of
business or government operations. Vehicle identification must be visible and
readable by the public by way of a marked company vehicle, signage on the
vehicle, or a posted sign in the window of the vehicle.



      (2)   An event that is intended for off highway operation of
motor vehicles and that is endorsed, authorized, permitted, or sponsored by a
public agency, occurs on a designated route or area and includes dust
abatement measures at all staging areas, parking areas, and entrances.



      (3)   An event that occurs at a facility where admission or
use fee is charged and includes dust control measures.



      (4)   A closed course that is maintained with dust abatement
measures.



      (5)   Golf carts used as a part of a private or public golf
course.



   (C)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a Class 3
misdemeanor. A judge may order, in addition to or in lieu of a fine, the
person to perform 8-24 hours of community restitution or complete an approved
safety course related to the off-highway operation of motor vehicles.



(Prior Code, § 23-1-7)  (Ord. O08-03-03, passed 3-13-2008; Ord. O08-10-17,
passed 10-9-2008)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Enforcement, effective October 1, 2008, shall encourage the
application and maintenance of paving material, gravel, recycled asphalt, or
other suitable dust suppressant, as per § 94.04.



      (1)   A notice of violation will be issued at the first
offense which includes a fine of $500 and/or compliance within 30 days.



      (2)   Second offenses within any six-month period will result
in a fine of $1,000 and/or compliance within two weeks.



      (3)   Third offense (no time limitation) will result in a
civil citation.



      (4)   Additional fines may be issued by Maricopa County Air
Quality for repeat offenders.



      (5)   Prior to the effective date, code enforcement officers
may issue notices of compliance with no associated fines for the purpose of
educating the public on dust control regulations. This NOC will specify
immediate compliance and information on PM-10 or other (updated) regulatory
measures.



   (C)   Enforcement, effective October 1, 2008, shall encourage the
owner’s responsibility to comply with the dust prevention measures, as per
§ 94.05.



      (1)   A notice of violation will be issued at the first
offense which includes a fine of $250 and/or compliance within 30 days.



      (2)   Second offenses within any six-month period will result
in a fine of $500 and/or compliance within two weeks.



      (3)   Third offense (no time limitation) will result in a
civil citation.



      (4)   Additional fines may be issued by Maricopa County Air
Quality for repeat offenders.



      (5)   Prior to the effective date, code enforcement officers
may issue notices of compliance with no associated fines, for the purpose of
educating the public on dust control regulations. This NOC will specify
immediate compliance and information on PM-10 or other (updated) regulatory
measures.



      (6)   Citations, with a penalty of $250, may also be issued to
the person(s) responsible for committing the trespass by Code Enforcement
and/or Police.



   (D)   Enforcement, effective March 31, 2008, shall encourage
responsibility to comply with the dust prevention measures, as per § 94.06.



      (1)   A notice of violation will be issued at the first
citation which includes a fine of $250.



      (2)   Second citations within any six-month period will result
in a fine of $500.



      (3)   Third offense (no time limitation) will result in a
civil citation.



      (4)   Additional fines may be issued by Maricopa County Air
Quality for repeat offenders.



   (E)   A person who violates § 94.07 is guilty of a Class 3
misdemeanor. A judge may order the person to perform eight to 24 hours of
community restitution, or complete an OHV safety course, or both in lieu of a
fine. Fines are set per Arizona Bill 1522 as follows:



      (1)   A warning for the first violation;



      (2)   A civil penalty of $50 for the second violation;



      (3)   A civil penalty of $100 for the third violation; and



      (4)   A civil penalty of $250 for the fourth and subsequent
violations.



(Ord. O08-03-03, passed 3-13-2008)



CHAPTER 95: PUBLIC SAFETY



Section



Fire



   95.01   Adoption of International Fire Code



   95.02   Fireworks



Police



   95.15   Applicability



   95.16   Warning notice



   95.17   Police review of false alarms



   95.18   Appeal procedures



FIRE



§ 95.01  ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.



   The certain code entitled “International Fire Code”, 2006 edition,
published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Fire
Code of the City of El Mirage. The fire code and its adopted addendums are
made a part of this chapter the same as though the code was specifically set
forth in full herein. From time to time, as deemed necessary, new editions of
the fire code may be adopted by the City Council. At least three copies of
the fire code shall be filed in the office of the Clerk and kept available
for public use and inspection in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-802.



(Prior Code, Art. 4-3)  (Ord. O05-04-05, passed 5-12-2005; Ord. O09-04-04,
passed 4-23-2009; Ord. O10-10-17, passed 10-28-2010)



§ 95.02  FIREWORKS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CONSUMER FIREWORK. Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.



      DISPLAY FIREWORK. Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.



      FIREWORKS. Any combustible or explosive composition, substance or
combination of substances, or any article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration
or detonation, that is a consumer firework, display firework or permissible
consumer firework as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.



      NOVELTY ITEMS. Federally deregulated novelty items that are known
as snappers, snap caps, party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices,
sparklers, and certain toys as defined in A.R.S. § 36-1601.



      PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Those fireworks as defined by
A.R.S. § 36-1601 that may be sold within the City of El Mirage even where
the use of those items has been prohibited.



      SUPERVISED PUBLIC DISPLAY. A monitored performance of display
fireworks open to the public and authorized by permit issued by the Fire
Chief or his or her designee.



   (B)   Use of fireworks prohibited; exceptions.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the use, discharge
or ignition of fireworks within the City of El Mirage is prohibited.



      (2)   Nothing in this section or subchapter shall be construed
to prohibit the use, discharge or ignition of novelty items or the occurrence
of a supervised public display of fireworks.



      (3)   Permits may be granted by the Fire Chief or designee for
conducting a supervised public display of fireworks. Every supervised public
display of fireworks shall be of such character and so located, discharged or
fired, only after proper inspection and in a manner that does not endanger
persons, animals, or property. The Fire Chief has authority to impose
conditions on any permits granted. When a high fire danger is declared, the
Fire Chief shall not issue a permit, or shall revoke a permit previously
issued, for supervised public display of fireworks.



   (C)   Sale of fireworks.



      (1)   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of
permissible consumer fireworks to a person who is under 16 years of age.



      (2)   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of
permissible consumer fireworks in conflict with state law.



   (D)   Posting of signs by persons engaged in the sale of fireworks;
civil penalty.



      (1)   Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks,
every person engaged in such sales shall prominently display signs indicating
the following:



         (a)   The use of fireworks within the City of El Mirage,
including permissible consumer fireworks, as defined by City of El Mirage
Code, is prohibited.



         (b)   Consumer fireworks authorized for sale under state
law may not be sold to persons under the age of 16.



      (2)   Signs required under this section shall be placed at
each cash register and in each area where fireworks are displayed for sale.



      (3)   The Fire Chief or designee shall develop regulations
concerning the size and color of the required signs and shall develop a model
sign. The required sign regulations and model sign shall be posted on the
City of El Mirage's website and filed with the Clerk's office.



      (4)   Failure to comply with divisions (D)(1) or (D)(2) above
is a civil offense punishable by a minimum fine of not less than $500 or more
than $1,000.



   (E)   Authority to enforce violations of this article; means of
enforcement.



      (1)   The Fire Chief or designee, a City of El Mirage police
officer, a City of El Mirage Code Enforcement Officer, or the City Attorney
may issue civil complaints to enforce violations of this section.



      (2)   Any person authorized pursuant to this section to issue
a civil complaint may also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to
be taken and the time in which they are to be taken to avoid issuance of a
civil or criminal complaint.



      (3)   A City of El Mirage police officer or the Fire Chief or
his or her designee may issue criminal complaints to enforce this section.



   (F)   Liability for emergency responses related to use of fireworks;
definitions.



      (1)   A person who uses, discharges or ignites permissible
consumer fireworks, prohibited novelty items, or anything that is designed or
intended to rise into the air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly
above the ground, is liable for the expenses of any emergency response that
is required by such use, discharge or ignition. The fact that a person is
convicted or found responsible for a violation(s) of this section is prima
facie evidence of liability under this section.



      (2)   The expenses of an emergency response are a charge
against the person, parent or legal guardian if a minor, liable for those
expenses pursuant to division (F)(1) of this section. The charge constitutes
a debt of that person and may be collected proportionately by the public
agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit entities that incurred the
expenses. The liability imposed under this section is in addition to and not
in limitation of any other liability that may be imposed.



      (3)   For the purposes of this division, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:



         EXPENSES OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE. Reasonable costs
directly incurred by public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit
entities that make an appropriate emergency response to an incident.



         REASONABLE COSTS. The costs of providing police, fire
fighting, rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of an incident
and the salaries of the persons who respond to the incident.



   (G)   Penalty. A violation of any provision of § 95.02(B) or (C)
may be cited as either a civil infraction or class one misdemeanor offense.
Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served, with
reasonable opportunity to abate the violation, shall be deemed a separate
offense.



(Ord. O10-10-17, passed 10-28-2010)



POLICE



§ 95.15  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter is intended to regulate the activities and
responsibilities of persons who purchase, rent, or use alarm systems,
devices, or services.



(Prior Code, § 4-4-1)



§ 95.16  WARNING NOTICE.



   When an alarm system generates two false alarms within a consecutive
365-day period, the Police Department shall send a warning notice to both the
alarm subscriber and the alarm business or the proprietor alarm owner that
one subsequent false alarm within the period will subject the notified
parties to the sanctions as provided herein.



(Prior Code, § 4-4-2)



§ 95.17  POLICE REVIEW OF FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   Any alarm system which has three or more false alarms within a
consecutive 365-day period shall be subject to assessment as provided herein.



   (B)   If the Police Department records three or more false alarms
within a consecutive 365-day period:



      (1)   The Police Department shall notify both the subscriber
and alarm business or the proprietor alarm owner by mail of the Police
Department’s initial notice of assessment of false alarm service fees and
the amount of the assessed service fees. The alarm subscriber and alarm
business or the proprietor alarm owner may, within 20 days of the date of the
mailing of the notice, appeal to the Police Chief by filing a petition with
the Police Chief or his or her designee. The petition shall contain specific
defenses to the assessment. Affirmative defenses to a false alarm service fee
assessment alarm may include evidence that a false alarm was caused by an act
of God, common cause, action of the telephone company, telephone line outage,
power outage lasting longer than the life of a fully charged battery, and
other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the
alarm business, alarm subscriber, or proprietor alarm owner;



      (2)   Any petition submitted pursuant to division (B)(1) above
shall be received by the Police Chief or his or her designee within the time
specified. If the petition is not timely submitted, any notified party shall
be deemed to have waived his or her right to any further review or hearing as
provided herein and the initial assessment shall be final;



      (3)   If a petition is timely submitted pursuant to division
(B)(1) above, the Police Chief or his or her designee shall review the
defenses, if any, set forth in the petition. If it is determined that a valid
defense to the initial determination of false alarm assessment has been set
forth, a notice shall specifically set forth the findings and conclusions of
the Police Chief or his or her designee with respect to the review of the
initial assessment;



      (4)   If the Police Chief or his or her designee determines
that a defense to the initial notice of assessment has not been set forth, a
notice of decision shall be sent by mail to both the alarm subscriber and the
alarm business or the proprietor alarm owner that they will be assessed
pursuant to division (B)(5) below. The notice of decision shall contain the
specific findings and conclusions of the Police Chief with respect to the
review of the initial assessment; and



      (5)   Service fees assessed pursuant to divisions (B)(2) and
(4) shall be in an amount of $74 per false alarm upon the third and any
subsequent false alarm to recover the cost of the response by the Police to
the false alarm. The alarm subscriber, alarm business or the owner of a
proprietor alarm system shall, except as provided in § 95.15, be jointly and
severally responsible for the payment of the service fees imposed upon the
alarm system. No service fee shall be imposed under this section for any
false alarm for which a service fee has been imposed against the alarm
subscriber or proprietor alarm owner pursuant to § 95.15.



(Prior Code, § 4-4-3.5)



(Prior Code, § 4-4-3)



§ 95.18  APPEAL PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Police Chief or his
or her designee made pursuant to § 95.16 or § 95.17 may, within ten days of
receipt of the notice of decision, appeal by filing a notice of appeal with
the Hearing Officer so designated by the City Manager.



   (B)   The notice of appeal shall set forth the specific objections
to the decision of the Police Chief which forms the bases of the appeal.



   (C)   The Hearing Officer shall set a time and place for the hearing
as soon as practicable.



   (D)   The hearing proceeding shall be conducted in an informal
process to determine whether there is a sufficient factual and legal basis to
support the assessment of the conduct of such hearings, provided that the
decision of the Hearing Officer shall in all cases be based upon substantial
and reliable evidence. All parties to the hearing shall have the right to
present evidence. In a hearing on an appeal filed pursuant to § 95.16, the
evidence may relate to the specific defenses listed under § 95.17 and a
claim that another party is solely responsible for the false alarms.



   (E)   The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be based upon the
evidence presented and it shall:



      (1)   Affirm the assessment, in which case any service fees
imposed pursuant to § 95.16 or § 95.17 shall be sustained; or



      (2)   Reverse the assessment, in whole or in part, in which
case no service fee or a lesser service fee shall be imposed.



   (F)   When any part of the assessment is affirmed in appeals which
are filed pursuant to § 95.16 and which involve an alarm subscriber and an
alarm business permittee, the Hearing Officer may designate the alarm
subscriber or the alarm business permittee as solely responsible for the
payment of the service fees. When any part of the assessment is affirmed in
appeals which are filed pursuant to § 95.17 and which involve a proprietor
alarm owner, the Hearing Officer shall designate the proprietor alarm owner
as solely responsible for payment of the service fees.



   (G)   The decision of the Hearing Officer is final.



(Prior Code, § 4-4-4)



CHAPTER 96: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS



Section



   96.01   Administrative appeal to hearing officer



§ 96.01  ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL TO HEARING OFFICER.



   (A)   Notwithstanding other remedies allowed within this code, in
order to allow the most efficient and cost-effective service to city
residents, businesses and land owners, there is hereinafter established a
process of administrative appeal from the provisions of any portion of this
code to a hearing officer.



   (B)   The City Manager, by the authority granted by the City
Council, is hereby authorized to act as a hearing officer or to delegate such
authority to other city staff members as deemed appropriate to hear and act
on any administrative appeal of the decision of any city officials in the
enactment of their duties to interpret, administer, or enforce the provisions
of the City Code upon any person or entity.



   (C)   Any party aggrieved by a decision of any city official acting
in his or her authority to interpret, administer, or enforce the provisions
of the City Code may, within ten days of receipt of the notice of decision,
appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the City Manager.



   (D)   The notice of appeal shall set forth the specific objections
to the decision of the code official which form the bases of the appeal.



   (E)   The hearing officer shall set a time and place for the hearing
as soon as practicable.



   (F)   The hearing proceeding shall be conducted in an informal
manner to determine whether there is a sufficient factual and legal basis to
support the appeal. The decision of the hearing officer shall in all cases be
based upon substantial and reliable evidence. All parties to the hearing
shall have the right to present evidence. In a hearing on an appeal, the
evidence may relate to specific codes and the physical hardship of meeting
such standards on the property in question.



   (G)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be based upon the
evidence presented and shall either:



      (1)   Affirm the assessment of the city official, in which
case the pertinent provisions of this code shall be enforced; or



      (2)   Reverse the assessment, in whole or in part, of the city
official, and provide appropriate direction to the city official regarding
the enforcement of the code.



   (H)   When any part of the assessment is affirmed in appeals which
are filed, the hearing officer may designate the aggrieved party as
responsible for the penalties assessed by the appropriate sections of this
code.



   (I)   An aggrieved party may still pursue an appeal to the City
Council, if provided for by the City Code, acting as the Board of Appeals or
the Board of Adjustment as provided for under the provisions found in other
sections of this code or pursue any other legal action afforded under state
law.



(Ord. O10-10-14, passed 10-28-2010)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   LICENSES





         111.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS





         112.   CABLE TELEVISION LICENSING CODE




CHAPTER 110: LICENSES



Section



Business Licenses Generally



   110.01   License required



   110.02   Issuance of license



   110.03   Proration of licenses



   110.04   Separate licenses



   110.05   Exhibition of license required



   110.06   Business license fees



   110.07   Exemptions



   110.08   Delinquent fees



   110.09   Business licenses; background investigation



Liquor Licenses



   110.20   Liquor license background investigation



   110.99   Penalty



BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY



§ 110.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Any person, partnership, syndicate, firm, association, or corporation,
before engaging in any of the businesses, callings, or professions,
hereinafter collectively called “business” or “businesses”, within
the corporate limits of the city or who conducts a business outside the
corporate limits of the city and who solicits, canvasses, advertises, or
delivers products or performs services within the city limits for a fee shall
procure from the Finance Department a license for the carrying on of the
business, upon payment of the license tax, as hereinafter provided.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-1) (Ord. O12-05-03, passed 5-22-2012)



§ 110.02  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The Finance Department or an authorized agent for the city
shall issue a license for each prospective licensee required to pay a license
fee hereunder.



   (B)   The license shall state the amount of the license fee, the
period of time covered, the name of the licensee, and location or place of
business, if any.



   (C)   The issuance of a business license shall, in no way, be
construed as permission to operate a business activity in violation of any
other law or regulation to which the activity may be subject.



   (D)   All applications for a business license for a mobile vendor or
a business located within the city shall be reviewed by city staff to ensure
that it complies with all applicable city, county, state, or federal
regulations.



   (E)   If the proposed business is found to violate any regulations,
the city or its agent may deny the business license unless and until the use
of the property comes into compliance with all applicable regulations.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-2) (Ord. O12-05-03, passed 5-22-2012)



§ 110.03  PRORATION OF LICENSES.



   There shall be proration only the first year of business with the city.
After the first year, there shall be no proration of any business license
fee. A business license cannot be transferred from one owner to another.
Proration is based on calendar year.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-3) (Ord. O12-05-03, passed 5-22-2012)



§ 110.04  SEPARATE LICENSES.



   A person engaged in more than one activity subject to city privilege
and use taxes at any one business location is not required to obtain a
separate license for each activity; provided that, at the time the person
makes application for a license, he or she list on the application each
category of activity in which the business is engaged. The licensee shall
inform the Finance Department of any changes in the business activities,
location, or mailing address within 30 days. A person who is conducting one
or more businesses at two or more locations or under two or more business
names shall procure a license for each location, or business name. A
"location" is a place of a separate business establishment. Each license
issued shall authorize the licensee to practice, transact, and carry on only
that business set forth on the license and only at the location or place of
business described thereon.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-4) (Ord. O12-05-03, passed 5-22-2012)



§ 110.05  EXHIBITION OF LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Every licensee shall display the license or licenses conspicuously at
the applicable place of business and shall, upon demand, display the same to
the City Police, City Manager, or designee. In the event that the licensee
does not have a place of business within the city limits, the license shall
be kept on the person conducting the licensee’s business.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-5) (Ord. O12-05-03, passed 5-22-2012)



§ 110.06  BUSINESS LICENSE FEES.



   License fees shall be established from time to time by resolution.



 


Regular business

 
$100 per year


Mining
 
$2,000 per year


Special event license (seven or less consecutive days)
 
$65 per event


Sexually oriented businesses
 
$2,000 per year


Massage therapist
 
$2,000 per year


Peddlers and solicitors
 
$25 per quarter; $100 per year


Liquor licenses
 
As per Arizona Department of Liquor License



 



(Prior Code, § 8-3-6)  (Ord. O11-04-08, passed 4-14-2011; Ord. O12-05-03,
passed 5-22-2012)



§ 110.07  EXEMPTIONS.



   There shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter the following
businesses:



   (A)   Businesses conducted as an agency or department of the United
States of America, the State of Arizona, County of Maricopa, or City of El
Mirage; and



   (B)   Churches, veterans, and civic service organizations
occasionally engaging in a business and which such business is for a bona
fide non-profit purpose.



   (C)   Residential rental properties or property owners. Per A.R.S.
§ 9-1304 this does not prohibit the City of El Mirage, which imposes a sales
tax on rent, from requiring a transaction privilege tax license for
residential rental property owners.



   (D)   Businesses providing occasional participation in city
sponsored special events upon prior approval by City Manager.



   (E)   De minimis business activity. Individuals who annually
transact less than $2,000 in business activity as defined in § 110.01 above
are exempt from these license requirements. No incorporated business,
partnership, syndicate, firm, association, or corporation is considered to be
de minimis.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-7)  (Ord. O11-04-08, passed 4-14-2011; Ord. O12-02-04,
passed 2-21-2012; Ord. O12-05-03, passed 5-22-2012)



§ 110.08  DELINQUENT FEES.



   (A)   When any license fee provided for herein shall be due and
unpaid for 15 days, the same shall become delinquent.



   (B)   The Finance Department shall, on the day the same becomes
delinquent, add thereto an amount equal to 10% of the total amount of any fee
unpaid and delinquent as a penalty.



   (C)   No further license shall be issued by the Finance Department
until the license fees that are delinquent and the penalties added thereto
have been paid in full.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-8) (Ord. O12-05-03, passed 5-22-2012)



§ 110.09  BUSINESS LICENSES; BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION.



   The City of El Mirage may request, receive, and review the criminal
history record information, including conviction and non-conviction data, for
the purpose of evaluating the fitness of licensees, controlling persons, and
designated agents in connection with the issuance, renewal, suspension, or
revocation of a license or the addition or change of a controlling person or
designated agent. Each applicant for a license identified in this section
that is issued by the city shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the El
Mirage Police Department for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal
criminal records background check. The El Mirage Police Department shall
forward the fingerprints, appropriate information and fees to the Arizona
Department of Public Safety, who is authorized to exchange fingerprint
information with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The city shall collect
pertinent fees for the processing of fingerprints, obtaining criminal history
information, and license registration. All background checks will be
conducted in accordance with A.R.S. § 41-1750, and Pub. Law No. 92-544.
Background investigations may be conducted for applicants applying for the
following types of licenses from the city:



   (A)   After-hours establishments;



   (B)   Auctioneers;



   (C)   Auction houses;



   (D)   Businesses that are regulated by state and/or federal entities;



   (E)   Carnivals/circuses;



   (F)   Escorts and escort services;



   (G)   Exhibitors;



   (H)   Liquor;



   (I)   Massage facilities;



   (J)   Massage therapist;



   (K)   Medical marijuana distribution;



   (L)   Pawnbrokers;



   (M)   Peddlers;



   (N)   Second hand/junk dealers;



   (O)   Sexually oriented businesses;



   (P)   Street sales and vendors;



   (Q)   Solicitors; and



   (R)   Teletracking.



(Ord. O12-05-03, passed 5-22-2012)



LIQUOR LICENSES



§ 110.20  LIQUOR LICENSE BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION.



   Each applicant for a liquor license (owner, partner, or investor
regardless of percentage) shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the City
of El Mirage Police Department for the purpose of obtaining a state and
national criminal records check. These checks shall be done in accordance
with A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Pub. Law No. 92-544. The Arizona Department of
Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the
Federal Bureau of Investigation.



(Ord. O07-04-03, passed 4-12-2007; Ord. O12-05-03, passed 5-22-2012)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
operate a business without first having obtained a business license as
provided herein. Each person, firm, or corporation found to be in violation
of §§ 110.01 through 110.09 shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor shall
be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with A.R.S. Title 13.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-9) (Ord. O12-05-03, passed 5-22-2012)



CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Application for license



   111.03   Issuance of license; refusal; hearing



   111.04   Regulations



   111.05   License fees



   111.06   Revocation of license



   111.07   Exemptions



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLER. Any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling
by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance,
from house to house or from street to street, carrying, conveying, or
transporting goods, wares, merchandise, farm products, or provisions,
offering them for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers.
The word PEDDLER shall include the word HAWKER and HUCKSTER.



   SOLICITOR. A person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling
either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of
conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to
street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares, and
merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery
or for services, whether or not the individual has, carries, or exposes for
sale a sample of the subject of the sale or whether he or she is collecting
advance payment on the sales or not.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-1)



§ 111.02  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Applications for licenses by solicitors and peddlers shall be
made to the Finance Department; then, forwarded to the Police Department for
review. Applications shall be sworn and in writing and shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   Name and physical description of applicant;



      (2)   Address;



      (3)   A brief description of the nature of the business to be
conducted and the goods to be sold and, if the goods are farm products or
provisions, a statement whether they are produced or grown by the applicant;



      (4)   If the applicant is employed, the name and address of
the employer together with credentials establishing the exact relationship;



      (5)   The length of time for which the right to do business is
desired;



      (6)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted of any crime, including misdemeanors and violations of city or town
ordinances; the nature of the offense; and the penalty assessed therefore; and



      (7)   Such other information as the city may deem necessary
for the proper protection of the city.



   (B)   Applications shall be accompanied by not less than two
photographs of the applicant, taken not more than six months prior to the
date of the application. One photograph shall be attached to the application;
in the event a license is issued, a photograph shall be attached to the
license and made a part thereof. Photographs shall be of the head and
shoulders of applicant and no less than two inches by two inches in dimension.



   (C)   The Police Department shall maintain a record of all
applications for licenses remaining in force. In the event a license is not
issued, the application shall be retained for a period of six months.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-2)



§ 111.03  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; REFUSAL; HEARING.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, the Police Department shall
examine the application and make appropriate investigation. If the Police
Department determines that issuance of a license is not detrimental to the
proper protection of the city, a license shall be issued for a period not
exceeding two years. The license shall contain:



      (1)   Name of applicant;



      (2)   Picture of applicant;



      (3)   Nature of business and goods to be sold; and



      (4)   Date of issuance of license.



   (B)   In the event a license is refused, the applicant may petition
the Council for a hearing regarding the action taken by the Police
Department. At the hearing, the applicant shall be advised of the basis of
the determination not to issue a license and may present testimony
controverting the action. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Council, by a
majority vote, shall determine whether or not a license shall be issued for a
period not to exceed two years.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-3)



§ 111.04  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of solicitor or peddler
without a license issued by the city displayed on his or her person.



   (B)   No solicitor or peddler shall refuse, upon demand from an
authorized police officer, to exhibit a license.



   (C)   No person shall solicit or peddle from 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
or at any time when a sign has been posted on a building stating “No
Solicitors or Peddlers” or words of like effect, except that a licensed
solicitor or peddler may call upon the occupant of a residence at other times
when he or she has received express prior permission from the occupant to do
so.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.05  LICENSE FEES.



   License fees shall be established from time to time by resolution. See
§ 110.06 of the code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-5)



§ 111.06  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Grounds for suspension or revocation of permit. A peddler’s
or solicitor’s permit may be denied, suspended, or revoked for any of the
following reasons:



      (1)   The peddling or solicitation carried on pursuant to the
permit violates the requirements of this chapter;



      (2)   An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified or
misrepresented information on the application;



      (3)   The applicant/permittee is found to have been convicted
of a felony, misdemeanor, or ordinance violation involving a sex offense,
trafficking in controlled substances, or any violent acts against persons or
property, the conviction being entered within the five years preceding the
date of application or investigation;



      (4)   The applicant/permittee is person against whom a civil
judgment based upon, or criminal conviction for, fraud, deceit, or
misrepresentation has been entered within five years immediately preceding
the date of application or investigation;



      (5)   The applicant/permittee has committed fraud,
misrepresentation, or made false statements in the course of carrying on the
business;



      (6)   There is no proof as to the authority of the applicant
to serve as an agent to the principal;



      (7)   The applicant has been denied a permit under this
chapter within the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does
show to the satisfaction of the City Manager or designee that the reasons for
the earlier denial no longer exist;



      (8)   The applicant/permittee has violated code or the El
Mirage Tax Code within the five years preceding the date of the application
or investigation; and/or



      (9)   The applicant/permittee has conducted business in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or
to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
public.



   (B)   Revocation procedure. When grounds for a license suspension or
revocation exist, the City Manager shall give the permittee written notice of
a license revocation or suspension hearing. The notice of hearing shall be
given pursuant to this chapter and shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The grounds relied upon for the suspension or
revocation, including citations to applicable city code provisions;



      (2)   The date, time, and place of the hearing, which shall be
not less than ten days nor more than 15 days from the giving of notice;



      (3)   The permittee shall have the right to present evidence
at the hearing and to be represented by legal counsel if the licensee so
chooses; and



      (4)   The license will be suspended or revoked at the date and
time of the hearing unless the permittee appears to contest the revocation or
suspension.



   (C)   Revocation hearing.



      (1)   At the time of the revocation hearing, the City Manager
will state the grounds for suspension or revocation and shall disclose any
supporting evidence to the permittee. The permittee may then present evidence
in rebuttal. The evidence adduced at the hearing may either be through live
testimony, documentary evidence, or other materials.



      (2)   The City Manager may rule on the revocation at the close
of the evidence and argument, but shall enter a ruling within ten days of the
completion of the hearing.



      (3)   The ruling of the City Manager shall be in writing and
signed by the City Manager and shall contain the City Manager’s findings in
respect to the allegations and the evidence supporting the findings. No
license shall be revoked unless the City Manager finds by a preponderance of
the evidence that one or more of the grounds alleged for revocation are true.
The City Manager shall give notice of the ruling as provided in this chapter
and any revocation of a license shall be effective when notice is given to
the licensee, as applicable, and:



         (a)   The time permitted for filing a notice of appeal,
pursuant to division (D) below has expired without a notice of appeal having
been filed;



         (b)   The revocation has been affirmed by the City
Manager following the hearing of a timely filed notice of appeal; and/or



         (c)   The applicant/permittee party has filed a timely
notice of appeal, but has abandoned the appeal prior to any hearing and
ruling by the City Manager.



      (4)   When a revocation becomes effective, the affected
permittee shall surrender the permit to the City Manager immediately and
shall no longer conduct any business pursuant to the permit.



      (5)   Provisions to the contrary notwithstanding, following a
ruling by the City Manager as provided in division (C)(3)(b) above, the City
Manager may declare that the subject permit be revoked immediately, if in the
reasonable judgment of the City Manager, the continuation of activities or
conduct licensed or permitted constitutes an unreasonable danger to the
health or safety of any individual or the community in general. A revocation
made effective under the provisions of this division shall be reactivated
immediately upon the successful determination of an appeal brought by the
applicant/permittee.



   (D)   Appeal.



      (1)   An applicant/permittee may appeal the suspension or the
revocation of a permit to the City Council by filing a written notice of
appeal with the City Clerk not later than ten days after the City Manager has
taken the action to be appealed from. The right to appeal is waived if the
notice of appeal is not timely filed.



      (2)   This chapter contains all the appellate relief to which
an applicant/permittee is entitled through city procedures. The exhaustion of
appellate remedies at the city level does not preclude an applicant/permittee
from seeking any other remedies provided by law.



   (E)   Appeal procedure.



      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of appeal, the City
Clerk shall set an appeal hearing within 21 days and shall give notice of the
hearing as provided in this chapter.



      (2)   When required in the interest of fairness, the City
Manager may grant continuances of the hearing, but all hearings on license
revocations and suspensions shall be heard not later than 45 days from the
date on which the notice of appeal was filed.



      (3)   An appellant may be represented by counsel at the
hearing and the city may be represented by the City Attorney’s or City
Prosecutor’s Office. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. Both the
appellant and the city shall have the right to present evidence through
testimony or exhibits and to cross-examine witnesses. The Mayor and City
Council shall preside over the proceedings and shall determine the order and
manner of proof.



      (4)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall
rule on the appeal within ten  working days, unless all parties stipulate
that additional time is required to render a fair decision. The City Council
shall sustain the action appealed if it is supported by a preponderance of
evidence. The city appellant shall be notified of the ruling in writing, by
mail, whether or not the ruling is made at the conclusion of the evidence at
the time of the hearing.



      (5)   When a permit revocation is the subject of an appeal
under this section, the revocation shall not be effective unless it is
sustained by the City Council. The revocation shall be effective immediately
when the ruling is made by the City Council at the time of the hearing, or
upon mailing of the written notice of ruling as provided in this section,
when the ruling is made at a time after the hearing is concluded. The
permittee shall surrender all revoked permits to the City Manager, or to such
city representative as the City Manager may direct, whenever the revocation
becomes effective.



   (F)   Record of proceeding. Proceedings made pursuant to division
(E) above shall be recorded stenographically, on magnetic voice tape or on
videotape. The resulting record shall be maintained as a public record of the
city for such period of time as may be required by law, but in no event for
less than one year.



   (G)   Use of criminal history information.



      (1)   Any use or disclosure of criminal history information in
the implementation of this chapter shall be only under the terms and
conditions of A.R.S. §  41-1750. All other use of the information is
prohibited.



      (2)   Criminal history information obtained pursuant to A.R.S.
§ 41-1750 shall not be disclosed to the public. Should the disclosure and
discussion of the information become necessary during any hearing or
proceeding that is otherwise open to the public, the disclosure and
discussion shall be in camera. “In camera”, as used herein, means
disclosure or discussion of criminal history information only to those who
are authorized by law to know the disclosed information.



   (H)   Reapplication.



      (1)   Any person who, pursuant to this chapter, has previously
been denied a permit or renewal, or who has had a license revoked, may
reapply for a permit of the same character at any time after the decision
affecting the applicant’s permit has become final and is no longer subject
to appeal pursuant to this chapter. No new permit may be issued to the
applicant except upon full compliance with this chapter.



      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to this chapter, has previously
been denied a permit or renewal, or who has had a permit revoked because
false or misleading information was given in any permit application, or was
submitted in support of the application, or the applicant or permittee failed
or refused to make full disclosure of all information required for the
completion of the application, shall not be permitted to apply for any permit
to which this chapter applies until two years after the decision affecting
the applicant’s license has become final and is no longer subject to appeal
pursuant to this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-6)



§ 111.07  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following persons are exempt from the registration provisions of
this chapter, but remain subject to the remaining provisions of this chapter:



   (A)   Persons engaging in the sale of newspaper subscriptions;



   (B)   Members of non-profit youth organizations, including, but not
limited to, the Boy Scouts of America, the Girl Scouts of America, and the
Boys and Girls Clubs of America, engaging in organization sponsored
fund-raising activities;



   (C)   School children engaging in authorized or school sponsored
fund-raising activities; and



   (D)   Religious organizations engaging in the act of disseminating
information regarding the beliefs of their faiths.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-7)



CHAPTER 112: CABLE TELEVISION LICENSING CODE



Section



   112.01   Adoption



§ 112.01  ADOPTION.



   A copy of the current contract is available in the City Clerk’s
office. The city’s Cable Licensing Code is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated as if set out in full herein.



(Prior Code, Art. 8-2)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   OFFENSES GENERALLY





         131.   GRAFFITI




CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES GENERALLY



Section



   130.01   Alcoholic beverages in parks or city-owned buildings



   130.02   Dangerous constructions



   130.03   Excavations to be covered



   130.04   Explosives



   130.05   Fences, electric



   130.06   Flammable, explosive, or other dangerous substances



   130.07   Curfew



   130.08   Noise



   130.09   Obstruction of view



   130.10   Offensive business



   130.11   Offensive premises



   130.12   Prostitution



   130.13   Public urinating and defecating



   130.14   Searchlights



   130.15   Signs and banners



   130.16   Spitting



   130.17   Water; flow upon streets prohibited



   130.18   Clothesline usage



   130.19   Payment of costs of confinement



   130.20   Emergency telephone service; misuse of



   130.21   Improper disposal of flaming or glowing substances and
cigarettes



   130.22   Parental responsibility



 



   130.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Animal Code, see Chapter 91



   Nuisance and Neighborhood Preservation, see Chapter 90



§ 130.01  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PARKS OR CITY-OWNED BUILDINGS.



   The possession of any alcoholic beverage is not permitted in any park
or city-owned building.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-1)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  DANGEROUS CONSTRUCTIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any signs,
billboards, awnings, and other similar structures over or near streets,
sidewalks, public grounds, or places frequented by the public, so situated or
constructed as to endanger the public safety.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-2)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  EXCAVATIONS TO BE COVERED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation or dig
any hole, drain, or ditch in any highway or thoroughfare in the city without
providing a sufficient light at night and a temporary fence or suitable
obstruction around the excavation to protect the public during the day.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to maintain a well, cellar, pit,
or other excavation of more than two feet in depth on any unenclosed lot,
without substantial curbing, covering, or protection.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-3)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  EXPLOSIVES.



   It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to blast or
use powder, fireworks, or other explosives without a permit from the Chief of
Police in writing.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-4)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  FENCES, ELECTRIC.



   It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain within the city any
electric fence. Any such fence is hereby declared a public nuisance and
subject to abatement by order of the City Court.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-5)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  FLAMMABLE, EXPLOSIVE, OR OTHER DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.



   The parking or standing of railroad tank cars, trucks, truck-trailers,
or other vehicles or portable containers containing substances which are
flammable, explosive or noxious, or otherwise dangerous, or which have
previously contained such substances and for which all traces thereof have
not been removed, within the city limits is hereby prohibited; provided, that
the necessary loading and unloading of the containers is not prohibited
hereby; further provided, that the storage of fuel for recreational vehicles
and domestic use by the users is not prohibited hereby.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-6)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.07  CURFEW.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years old to
be upon the streets or public places of the city between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless that minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, or
other person of lawful age having legal custody of that minor.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other adult person
having the care and custody of the minor to encourage or allow the minor to
be upon the streets or public places between the hours specified in this
section unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.



   (C)   It is unlawful for a parent, guardian or other person of
lawful age having legal custody of that minor to fail or refuse to take
custody of the minor after such reasonable directive or request is made by a
law enforcement officer who arrests the minor for a violation of this chapter.



   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not apply under the
following circumstances:



      (1)   When the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate
business directed by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person
having the care and custody of the minor.



      (2)   When the minor is going to or from an employment
activity without any detour or stop.



      (3)   When the minor is going to or from, or attending an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by
adults who take responsibility for the minor.



      (4)   When the minor is on property abutting their residence.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-7)  (Ord. O09-06-04, passed - -; Ord. O06-08-17, passed
9-14-2006; Ord. O17-04-04, passed 4-4-2107)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.08  NOISE.



   (A)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and it is
unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation owning or operating or in
control of any restaurant, hotel, dance hall, show, store, or any place of
public amusement, entertainment, or accommodation, to play or permit to be
played any music or musical instrument whether played by individuals,
orchestra, radio, phonograph, music box, or other mechanical device or means
in such a loud or unusual manner as to be offensive to the senses, or so as
to disturb the slumber, peace and quiet, or otherwise interfere with or annoy
the comfortable enjoyment of life or property of any person and is no less a
nuisance because the extent of the annoyance inflicted is unequal.



   (B)   It is unlawful to play, operate, or use any device known as a
sound truck, loud speaker, or sound amplifier, radio, or phonograph with loud
speaker or sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or character which
emits loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle unless
the person in charge of the vehicle shall have first applied to and received
permission from the Chief of Police to operate any such vehicle so equipped.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-8)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.09  OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW.



   It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any tree, hedge,
billboard, or other obstruction which prevents persons driving vehicles on
public streets, alleys, or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic
when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-9)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.10  OFFENSIVE BUSINESS.



   It is unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any
slaughterhouse or make a practice of slaughtering cattle, hogs, sheep, or any
other kind of animal, or establish or maintain any soap factory, render
tallow, or pursue, maintain, or carry on any other business or occupation
offensive to the senses or prejudicial to the public health within the limits
of the city.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-10)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.11  OFFENSIVE PREMISES.



   It is unlawful for any person to suffer, or permit any premises
belonging to or occupied by him or her, or any cellar, privy, vault, pool,
sewer, or private drain therein to become nauseous, foul, or offensive to the
senses or prejudicial to the public health or comfort.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-11)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.12  PROSTITUTION.



   It is unlawful for any person to practice prostitution, to patronize a
prostitute, or to solicit any person to visit or patronize a prostitute or
place of prostitution.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-12)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.13  PUBLIC URINATING AND DEFECATING.



   It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate upon any of the
public sidewalks or crosswalks in the city or upon any public path, by-way,
or highway, or upon the floor or interior of any bus or other public
conveyance, or in or on any public place or park, except where suitable
facilities are provided therefore.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-13)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.14  SEARCHLIGHTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate within the city any
incandescent or arc-type searchlight, beacon light, or similar lighting
device designed to and capable of projecting a beam of light into the sky for
a distance in excess of one-half mile unless permission is obtained from the
Council.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency
searchlights or beacons operated pursuant to public authority.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-14)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.15  SIGNS AND BANNERS.



   It is unlawful for any person to place any banner or sign upon any
streetlight pole, traffic signal pole, or utility pole within the city
without first obtaining a permit from the city.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-15)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.16  SPITTING.



   It is unlawful for any person to spit upon any of the public sidewalks
or crosswalks in the city or upon any public path, by-way, or highway, or in
or on any public ground or park in the city or upon the floor or interior of
any public building in the city.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-16)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.17  WATER; FLOW UPON STREETS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently
permit or cause the escape or flow of water in such quantity as to cause
flooding, or to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous
condition to such traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets of the
city.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently
permit or cause the escape or flow of irrigation water in such quantity as to
cause flooding, to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a
hazardous condition to traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets of
the city through the failure or neglect to properly operate or maintain any
irrigation structure, delivery ditch, or waste ditch in which the person has
a vested right or interest, or through the willful or negligent failure of
the person to accept irrigation water after it has been ordered by him or her.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-17)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.18  CLOTHESLINE USAGE.



   It is unlawful to erect, display, or use any clothesline or other
structure on which articles of clothing are placed to dry, in the front or
side yard of any residence, unless the clothesline or other structure is
within a fence, wall, or other enclosure around the perimeter of the
residence which completely conceals the clothesline or other structure from
the view from any street adjacent to the residence.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-18)  (Ord. O00-11-17, passed - -)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 130.19  PAYMENT OF COSTS OF CONFINEMENT.



   Any person who is convicted of a misdemeanor criminal offense in the
City Court and who, as a consequence, is incarcerated in the Maricopa County
Jail shall, as part of any sentence imposed by the City Court, be required to
reimburse the city for its actual expenses incurred to the county by reason
of the confinement. A judge may waive all or any part of the incarceration
expense if the person is found to be indigent.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-19)  (Ord. O01-01-01, passed - -; Ord. O02-03-02,
passed - -)



§ 130.20  EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE; MISUSE OF.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to misuse the emergency
telephone service.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      EMERGENCY. A situation in which property and/or human health or
life are in immediate jeopardy.



      EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE. A telephone system utilizing a
single three-digit number “911” for reporting police, fire, medical, or
other emergencies.



      MISUSE OF THE EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE. Repeatedly calling
“911” for non-emergency situations or falsely reporting an emergency to
“911”.



      REPEATEDLY. Four or more times within a 30-day period.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-20)  (Ord. O02-02-04, passed - -)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 130.21  IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF FLAMING OR GLOWING SUBSTANCES AND CIGARETTES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, through intentional,
careless, or negligent action, to throw or place any lighted cigarette,
cigar, ashes, or other flaming or glowing substance, or any substance or
thing which may cause a fire, in any place where it may directly or
indirectly start a fire, or who uses or operates a welding torch, tar pot, or
any other device which may cause a fire, who does not clear the flammable
material surrounding the operation or take such other reasonable precautions
necessary to insure against the starting and spreading of fire.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or discharge upon
any highway, right-of-way, sidewalk, or upon any public or private property
any lighted or unlighted cigarette, cigar, or match, any flaming or glowing
substance, or any substance or thing which may cause a fire. This division
does not restrict a private owner in the use of his or her own private
property, unless the placing, depositing, throwing, or discharging of the
item on the property creates a fire hazard as determined by the El Mirage
Fire Chief or designee.



(Ord. O07-10-10, passed 10-25-2007)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.22  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   DELINQUENT ACTS.  Acts which violate the laws of the united states,
state, county, or city, or those acts which would cause or tend to cause the
minor to come under the jurisdiction of a juvenile court, but does not
include traffic violations.



   ILLEGAL DRUGS.  Controlled substances obtained without a legal
prescription.



   JUVENILE DELINQUENT.  A minor whose behavior interferes with the
rights of others or menaces the welfare of the community.



   MINOR.  Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.



   PARENT.  Mother, father, legal guardian and any other person having
the care or custody of a minor or any person acting in the parent's stead who
has custody or control of the minor.



   (B)   It is the continuous duty of the parent of any minor to
exercise reasonable control to prevent the minor from committing any
delinquent act. Included (without limitation) in this continuous duty of
reasonable parental control are the following parental duties:



      (1)   To keep illegal drugs or illegal firearms out of the
home and legal firearms secured in places that are inaccessible to the minor;



      (2)   To know the city's curfew law and to require the minor
to observe the curfew law;



      (3)   To require the minor to attend regular school sessions
and to forbid the minor to be absent from class without parental or school
permission;



      (4)   To arrange proper supervision for the minor when the
parent must be absent:



      (5)   To forbid the minor from engaging in criminal damage,
graffiti, or littering;



      (6)   To forbid the minor from keeping stolen property,
illegally possessing firearms or illegal drugs, or associating with known
juvenile delinquents, and to seek help from appropriate governmental
authorities or private agencies in handling or controlling the minor, when
necessary, if it becomes known to the parent that the minor possesses stolen
property, legal or illegal firearms, illegal drugs, or is associating with
known juvenile delinquents.



   (C)   Whenever a minor is arrested or detained for the commission of
any delinquent act within the city, the parent of the minor shall be
immediately notified by the Police Department advising the parent of such
arrest or detention and the parent's responsibility under this article. A
record of such notifications shall be kept by the Police Department.



   (D)   If a minor commits a delinquent act, the parent shall be
guilty of a violation of this article if it is proven that any act, word, or
nonperformance of parental duty by the parent encouraged, contributed toward,
caused, or tended to cause the commission of the delinquent act by the minor.



   (E)   Upon the first conviction of a violation of this section, the
parent shall be subject to a fine of one $100.. The court may elect to order
parenting classes or counseling in lieu of a fine.



   (F)   Upon the second and/or subsequent convictions of a violation
of this section, the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250.



(Ord. O17-04-04, passed 4-4-2017)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Violation of § 130.20 shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor. In
addition to the penalties elsewhere provided for a Class 1 misdemeanor, the
Court shall require violators to pay restitution to the political subdivision
whose emergency telephone system was misused, in an amount equal to the
expense incurred by that political subdivision to respond to the
non-emergency calls made by the violator. The restitution payments shall not
exceed $100 per call.



(Prior Code, § 11-1-20)



   (C)   A violation of either § 130.21(A) or (B) shall constitute a
Class 1 misdemeanor offense and any person convicted of a violation of either
§ 130.21(A) or (B) shall be punished by a fine of not less than $350 nor
more than $2,500, and mandatory community service of not less than 50 hours
nor more than 100 hours.



(Ord. O02-02-04, passed - -; Ord. O07-10-10, passed 10-25-2007)



CHAPTER 131: GRAFFITI



Section



   131.01   Purpose and intent



   131.02   Definitions



   131.03   Possession of graffiti implements prohibited



   131.04   Limiting access to graffiti implements



   131.05   Storage and display of graffiti implements



   131.06   Graffiti prohibition and removal



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program for
abatement of graffiti from public and private property to reduce blight and
deterioration within the city, protect public safety, and to expedite removal
of graffiti from structures on both public and private property.



   (B)   The City Council finds and determines as follows.



      (1)   The increase of graffiti, on both public and private
property, is creating a condition within the city which results in blight and
deterioration of property values and of the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property for adjacent and surrounding residents and owners, and contributes
to the overall detriment of the city.



      (2)   Graffiti constitutes a public nuisance and a threat to
public safety which must be abated to alleviate the detrimental impact of the
graffiti on the city, and to prevent the further spread of graffiti.



      (3)   Certain categories of graffiti which incite violence are
especially harmful and must be removed as quickly as possible to avoid or
minimize harm to persons and the whole community.



(Prior Code, § 17-1-1)



§ 131.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER. Any aerosol container which is adapted or made
for the purpose of spraying paint.



   BROAD-TIP MARKER. Any marker or similar implement which has a writing
surface which is one-half of an inch or greater and containing anything other
than a solution which can be removed with water after the solution dries.



   GRAFFITI. A drawing or inscribing a message, slogan, sign, or symbol or
mark of any type that is made on any public or private building, structure,
or surface, and that is made without permission of the owner.



   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT. GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT means:



      (1)   Aerosol spray paint containers;



      (2)   Broad-tipped indelible markers (one-half inch or larger)
or etching solution;



      (3)   Slap tags (graffiti stickers/labels professionally
designed);



      (4)   Shoe polish;



      (5)   White tempura paint (also known as white out or liquid
paper);



      (6)   Pencils/pens (only if found in area that items were used
in tagging);



      (7)   Bleeders (applicator dispenses a thin film of specially
formulated liquid paint);



      (8)   Markers;



      (9)   Etching (is the process of using strong acid to cut into
the unprotected parts of metal surface to create a design in intaglio in the
metal.)



   PAINT STICK, GRAFFITI STICK, or BLEEDER. An implement containing paint,
wax, epoxy, or other similar substance.



   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. An owner, occupant, lessor, lessee, manager,
license, or other person having the right to control a property.



(Prior Code, § 17-1-2)  (Ord. O08-07-14, passed 7-10-2008)



§ 131.03  POSSESSION OF GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to possess graffiti implements
with the intent to place graffiti upon any building, public or private, or
any other property, real or personal, owned by any person, firm, or
corporation or any public agency or instrumentality without the express
permission of the owner, manager, or other person responsible for the
property.



   (B)   Possession of any graffiti implement in any public place,
including any building, park facility, or alley or on any private property,
unless an invitee, gives rise to an inference of intent to use the graffiti
implement in violation of this section.



   (C)   Violation of this section by an adult is a Class 1
misdemeanor, punishable by a term of not less than 48 hours in jail and not
less than 80 hours of community service. Violation of this section by a
juvenile is a Class 1 misdemeanor, punishable as provided in A.R.S. Title 8.



(Prior Code, § 17-1-3)    (Ord. O08-07-14, passed 7-10-2008)  Penalty,
see § 131.99



§ 131.04  LIMITING ACCESS TO GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS.



   (A)   No person other than a parent or legal guardian shall sell,
exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be
exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to
any person under the age of 18 years.



   (B)   Evidence that a person, his or her employee, or agent demanded
and was shown acceptable evidence of majority and acted upon that evidence in
a transaction or sale shall be a defense to any prosecution under this
section. Acceptable evidence of majority shall include, but is not limited
to, driver’s license, state-issued identification, or military
identification.



   (C)   This section does not apply to the transfer of graffiti
implements from parent to child, guardian to ward, employer to employee,
teacher to student, or in any other similar relationship when the transfer is
for a lawful purpose.



(Prior Code, § 17-1-4)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.05  STORAGE AND DISPLAY OF GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS.



   (A)   No person who owns, conducts, operates, or manages a business
where aerosol paint containers or broad-tip markers are sold, nor any person
who sells or offers for sale aerosol paint containers or broad-tipped
markers, shall store or display, or cause to be stored or displayed, the
aerosol spray paint containers and broad-tip markers in an area that is
accessible to the public without employee assistance in the regular course of
business pending legal sale or other disposition.



   (B)   Nothing herein shall preclude the storage or display of
aerosol paint containers and broad-tip markers in an area viewable by the
public so long as the items are not accessible to the public without employee
assistance.



(Prior Code, § 17-1-5)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.06  GRAFFITI PROHIBITION AND REMOVAL.



   (A)   Graffiti prohibited. All sidewalks, walls, buildings, fences,
signs, and other structures or surfaces shall be kept free from graffiti when
the graffiti is visible from the street or other public or private property.



   (B)   Notice of violation. If it is determined by the city that
graffiti exists on property in violation of this chapter, the city shall, in
writing, notify the responsible party with a notice of violation. The notice
may be served by certified mail, personal service, posting the subject
property or publishing the notice in the official city newspaper.



   (C)   Contents of notice of violation. The notice of violation shall
identify the property in violation, shall generally describe the location of
the graffiti, and shall direct that the graffiti be abated within 48 hours of
receipt of notice. The notice shall state that in the event the responsible
party fails to abate the graffiti and may bill the responsible party for the
costs. The notice shall state that the responsible party may appeal the
notice by filing a written notice of appeal within the same time period given
to abate the graffiti. The effective date of the notice of violation shall be
the date received if delivered in person or sent by certified mail, or the
date of first publication, if the alternate method of service is used.



   (D)   City’s authority to abate. If the responsible party fails to
abate the graffiti as required by the notice of violation, the city may
proceed to abate the graffiti, and may bill the responsible party for the
costs thereof.



      (1)   The city or its authorized private contractor is
expressly authorized to enter private property and abate graffiti thereon in
accordance with this section.



      (2)   The city’s Police Department shall assist in the
enforcement of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 17-1-6)  (Ord. O08-07-14, passed 7-10-2008)



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   A judge shall not suspend any part of all of the imposition of
any jail time, community service, or fine required by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 17-1-7)



   (C)   Violation of § 131.03 by an adult is a Class 1 misdemeanor,
punishable by a term of not less than 48 hours in jail and not less than 80
hours of community service. Violation of this section by a juvenile is a
Class 1 misdemeanor, punishable as provided for in A.R.S. Title 28.



(Prior Code, § 17-1-3)



   (D)   Violation of § 131.04 is a Class 1 misdemeanor, punishable by
a term of not less than 48 hours in jail and not less than 80 hours of
community service.



(Prior Code, § 17-1-4)



   (E)   Violation of § 131.05 is a civil offense, subject to a fine
of not less than $500.



(Prior Code, § 17-1-5)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   COUNCIL



      II.   EXCHANGE OF PROPERTY



      III.   PROPERTY TAX



      IV.   ZONING



      V.   ANNEXATION



TABLE I: COUNCIL



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




O09-04-03
 
4-9-2009
 
Adopting the 2009 calendar for regular meetings of the Mayor and City Council


O09-11-11
 
11-12-2010
 
Adopting the 2010 calendar for regular meetings of the Mayor and City Council


O10-06-09
 
6-24-2010
 
Placing a question on the ballot at the General Election regarding whether
the city should be divided into six Council election districts


O10-11-18
 
11-4-2010
 
Adopting the 2011 calendar for regular meetings of the Mayor and City Council


O11-10-19
 
10-27-2011
 
Adopting the 2012 calendar for regular meetings of the Mayor and City Council


O12-10-09
 
10-16-2012
 
Adopting the 2013 calendar for regular meetings of the Mayor and City Council


O15-10-10
 
10-20-2015
 
Adopting the 2016 calendar and ratifying the 2014 and 2015 calendars for
regular meetings of the Mayor and City Council


O16-10-09
 
10-4-2016
 
Adopting the 2017 calendar for regular meetings of the Mayor and City Council


O17-10-12
 
10-3-2017
 
Adopting the 2018 calendar for regular meetings of the Common Council fixing
the dates, times and location of such meetings


O18-10-09
 
10-2-2018
 
Amending the 2018 calendar for regular meetings of the Common Council fixing
the dates, times and location of such meetings


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II: EXCHANGE OF PROPERTY



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




O09-05-06
 
5-14-2009
 
Abandoning a portion of an alleyway located at the north nine feet of Lot 3,
Mansfield Tract


O15-04-04
 
4-21-2015
 
Executing any and all documents necessary to facilitate the conveyance of
certain real property, located in the Cactus Park Estates subdivision


R15-05-08
 
5-5-2015
 
Executing any and all documents necessary to facilitate the conveyance of
certain real property, located in the Cactus Park Estates subdivision


O15-12-11
 
12-1-2015
 
Executing any and all documents necessary to facilitate the conveyance of
certain real property, located in the Sundial West 3 subdivision


R15-12-21
 
12-1-2015
 
Executing any and all documents necessary to facilitate the conveyance of
certain real property, located in the Sundial West 3 subdivision


O17-09-10
 
9-7-2017
 
Extending and increasing the corporate limits of the city by annexing certain
county right-of-way contiguous to the city


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III: PROPERTY TAX



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




O09-06-06
 
6-25-2009
 
Levying on each $100 of the assessed value of all property, both real and
personal, within the corporate limits of the city


O10-07-11
 
- -
 
Levying on each $100 of the assessed value of all property, both real and
personal, within the corporate limits of the city


O11-06-10
 
6-23-2011
 
Levying on each $100 of the assessed value of all property, both real and
personal, within the corporate limits of the city


O12-07-07
 
8-7-2012
 
Levying on each $100 of the assessed value of all property, both real and
personal, within the corporate limits of the city


O13-06-09
 
6-4-2013
 
Levying on each $100 of the assessed value of all property, both real and
personal, within the corporate limits of the city


O14-06-05
 
6-17-2014
 
Levying on each $100 of the assessed value of all property, both real and
personal, within the corporate limits of the city


O15-07-06
 
7-7-2015
 
Levying on each $100 of the assessed value of all property, both real and
personal, within the corporate limits of the city


O16-06-05
 
6-21-2016
 
Levying on each $100 of the assessed value of all property, both real and
personal, within the corporate limits of the city


O17-06-06
 
6-20-2017
 
Levying on each $100 of the assessed value of all property, both real and
personal, within the corporate limits of the city


O18-07-07
 
7-3-2018
 
Levying on each $100 of the assessed value of all property, both real and
personal, within the corporate limits of the city


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IV: ZONING



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


O09-01-01
 
2-12-2009
 
Establishing a planned area development overlay for manufactured and/or site
built homes on parts of Pueblo of El Mirage Resort at 11201 N. El Mirage Road


O15-05-05
 
5-19-2015
 
Amending the zoning for the northeast corner of Grand Avenue and Thompson
Ranch Road in the southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 3 North, Range 1
West, Gila and Salt River Base and Meridian of the city zoning map


R15-05-09
 
5-19-2015
 
Approving a general plan amendment of a portion of the 2010 general plan to
be known as Thompson Ranch Partnership located at the northeast corner of
Grand Avenue and Thompson Ranch Road in the southeast quarter of Section 12,
Township 3 North, Range 1 West, Gila and Salt River Base and Meridian of the
city zoning map


O17-12-14
 
12-5-2017
 
Amending the northeast corner of Grand Avenue and Thompson Ranch Road in the
Southeast Quarter of Section 12, Township north, Range 1 west, Gila and Salt
River Base and Meridian of the city zoning map


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE V:  ANNEXATION



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


O17-09-10
 
9-7-2017
 
Extending and increasing the corporate limits of the city by annexing certain
county right-of-way contiguous to the city (Olive Avenue)


O17-12-13
 
12-5-2017
 
Annexing property contiguous to the city (Thompson Ranch South)


 
 
 
 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Arizona Revised Statutes





References to Prior Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO ARIZONA REVISED STATUTES



 

A.R.S. Cites
 
Code Section




1-104
 
10.12


Ch. 2, Art. 3.1
 
53.02


3-1213
 
91.26


9-232
 
32.003


9-233
 
32.020


9-236
 
32.041; 32.043


9-240
 
Adopting Ordinance


9-271
 
31.22–31.24


9-271 et seq.
 
32.001


9-274
 
31.03; 31.04; 31.21; 32.005; 32.046


9-302
 
31.03; 31.20; 32.007


9-303
 
31.20


9-402
 
30.35


9-462
 
154.002


9-462.01–9-462.07
 
154.002


9-463.01
 
155.004


9-499
 
10.17


9-499.07
 
33.52; 33.54


Title 9, Ch. 5, Art. 7
 
151.082


9-500.04
 
94.03


9-500.12
 
10.15


9-581
 
151.105; 151.107


Title 9, Ch. 7, Art. 2
 
32.085


9-462.01(F)
 
154.004


9-802
 
75.01; 95.01


9-813
 
32.086


9-821.01(D)–(F)
 
32.060


11-7-6
 
91.09


11-1014
 
91.09


11-1015
 
91.06


11-1022(D)
 
91.25


11-1024
 
91.21


12-124
 
10.20


Title 13
 
110.99


13-2910
 
91.99


13-3899
 
91.02; 91.06


13-3903
 
10.14; 91.02; 91.06


16-204(B)
 
32.065


16-1019(C)
 
154.130


19-142B
 
32.083


22-402
 
31.25; 33.01


22-426
 
33.38


24-153
 
91.26


Title 26, Ch. 2
 
30.68; 30.70


26-301 et seq.
 
30.67


26-311B
 
32.041; 32.043


28
 
71.13; 71.16; 75.99; 93.01; 75.99; 131.99


Title 28, Ch. 6, Art. 20
 
10.99


Title 28, Ch. 6, Art. 21
 
10.99


28-6-18
 
75.08


28-101
 
71.13


28-232
 
32.006


28-881 et seq.
 
72.07


28-886
 
72.08


28-955 et seq.
 
73.01


28-1008
 
75.07


28-1009
 
75.07


28-1009.01
 
75.07


28-1091
 
75.08


28-1099
 
75.07


28-1100
 
75.07


28-1101
 
75.99


28-1102
 
75.02


28-1103
 
75.08


28-1107
 
75.06


28-1381(K)
 
33.52


28-1382(D)
 
33.52


28-1591
 
10.99; 71.99


28-8461
 
154.151


28-8481
 
154.052


28-8481(J)
 
154.081


32-1021 et seq.
 
33.39


34
 
30.25


34-201
 
30.28


34-603
 
30.25


36-1601
 
95.02


36-2801
 
154.052


36-2801(11)
 
154.020


36-2801.13
 
154.020


38-260
 
32.007


38-431–38-431.09
 
32.022


38-541–38-545
 
32.008


38-545
 
32.064


39-202
 
30.23


39-204
 
30.35


39-205
 
30.23


Title 41, Ch. 16, Art. 1
 
150.095


Title 41, Ch. 16, Art. 2
 
150.095


41-1493
 
154.020


41-1750
 
110.09; 110.20; 111.06


41-2533
 
30.23


41-2579
 
30.23


41-2632
 
30.21


42-231 et seq.
 
33.42


42-303
 
30.68


42-17104–42-17106
 
30.68


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code
 
2009 Code




Appendix A
 
Ch. 155, App. A


Appendix B
 
Ch. 155, App. B


1-1
 
10.01


1-2
 
10.02


1-3-2
 
10.02


1-3-3
 
10.03


1-3-4
 
10.03


1-3-5
 
10.03


1-3-6
 
10.03


1-3-7
 
10.03


1-3-8
 
10.03


1-3-9
 
10.02


1-3-10
 
10.03


1-3-11
 
10.02


1-3-12
 
10.03


1-3-13
 
10.03


1-3-14
 
10.02


1-3-15
 
10.03


1-3-16
 
10.03


1-3-17
 
10.03


1-3-18
 
10.03


1-3-19
 
10.03


1-3-20
 
10.02


1-3-21
 
10.02


1-3-22
 
10.03


1-3-23
 
10.03


1-3-24
 
10.03


1-3-25
 
10.02


1-3-26
 
10.02


1-3-27
 
10.02


1-3-28
 
10.03


1-3-29
 
10.03


1-3-30
 
10.03


1-4-1
 
10.04


1-4-2
 
10.05


1-4-3
 
10.06


1-4-4
 
10.07


1-5
 
10.08


1-6
 
10.09


1-7
 
10.10


1-8
 
10.99


1-9-2
 
10.12


1-11-1
 
10.14


1-11-2
 
10.15


1-11-3
 
10.16


1-11-4
 
10.17


1-11-5
 
10.18


1-11-6
 
10.19


1-11-7
 
10.20


2-1-1
 
32.001


2-1-2
 
32.002


2-1-3
 
32.003


2-1-4
 
32.004


2-1-5
 
32.005


2-1-6
 
32.006


2-1-7
 
32.007


2-1-8
 
32.008


2-2-1
 
32.040


2-2-2
 
32.041


2-2-3
 
32.042


2-2-4
 
32.043


2-2-5
 
32.044


2-2-6
 
32.045


2-2-7
 
32.046


2-3-1
 
32.060


2-3-2
 
32.061


2-3-3
 
32.062


2-3-4
 
32.063


2-3-5
 
32.064


2-4-1
 
32.020


2-4-2
 
32.021


2-4-3
 
32.022


2-4-4
 
32.023


2-4-5
 
32.024


2-4-6
 
32.025


2-4-7
 
32.026


2-4-8
 
32.027


2-4-9
 
32.028


2-5-1
 
32.080


2-5-2
 
32.081


2-5-3
 
32.082


2-5-4
 
32.083


2-5-5
 
32.084


2-5-6
 
32.085


2-5-7
 
32.086


3-1-1
 
31.01


3-1-2
 
31.02


3-1-3
 
31.03


3-1-4
 
31.04


3-1-5
 
31.05


3-1-6
 
31.06


3-2-1
 
31.20


3-2-2
 
31.21


3-2-3
 
31.22


3-2-4
 
31.23


3-2-5
 
31.24


3-2-6
 
31.25


3-2-7
 
31.26


3-3-1
 
30.01


3-3-2
 
30.02


3-3-3
 
30.03


3-3-4
 
30.04


3-3-5
 
30.05


3-3-6
 
30.06


3-5-1
 
30.65


3-5-2
 
30.66


3-5-3
 
30.67


3-5-4
 
30.68


3-5-5
 
30.69


3-5-6
 
30.70


3-6
 
30.50


4-1-1
 
34.01


4-1-3
 
34.02


4-1-4
 
34.03


4-1-5
 
34.04


4-1-6
 
34.05


4-1-7
 
34.06


4-1-8
 
34.07


4-2-1
 
34.20


4-2-2
 
34.21


4-2-3
 
34.22


4-2-4
 
34.23


4-2-5
 
34.24


4-2-6
 
34.25


4-2-7
 
34.26


4-2-8
 
34.27


4-2-9
 
34.28


4-2-10
 
34.29


4-2-11
 
34.30


4-2-12
 
34.31


4-3
 
95.01


4-4-1
 
95.15


4-4-2
 
95.16


4-4-3
 
95.17


4-4-3.5
 
95.17


4-4-4
 
95.18


5-1
 
33.01


5-2-1
 
33.15


5-2-2
 
33.16


5-2-4
 
33.17


5-2-5
 
33.18


5-2-6
 
33.19


5-2-7
 
33.20


5-2-8
 
33.21


5-2-9
 
33.22


5-3-1
 
33.35


5-3-2
 
33.36


5-3-3
 
33.37


5-3-4
 
33.38


5-3-5
 
33.39


5-3-6
 
33.40


5-3-7
 
33.41


5-3-8
 
33.42


5-3-9
 
33.43


6-1-1
 
91.01


6-1-2
 
91.02


6-1-3
 
91.03


6-1-3(B)
 
91.99


6-1-4
 
91.04, 91.99


6-1-5
 
91.05


6-1-5(F)
 
91.99


6-1-6
 
91.06


6-1-7
 
91.07


6-1-8
 
91.08


6-1-9
 
91.09


6-2-1
 
91.20


6-2-2
 
91.21


6-2-2(C)
 
91.99


6-2-3
 
91.22


6-2-3(C)
 
91.99


6-2-4
 
91.23


6-2-5
 
91.24


6-2-6
 
91.25


6-2-7
 
91.26


6-2-8
 
91.27, 91.99


6-3-1
 
91.40


6-3-2
 
91.41


6-3-2(P)
 
91.99


6-3-3
 
91.42


6-3-4
 
91.99


8-1-1
 
111.01


8-1-2
 
111.02


8-1-3
 
111.03


8-1-4
 
111.04


8-1-5
 
111.05


8-1-6
 
111.06


8-1-7
 
111.07


8-2
 
112.01


8-3-1
 
110.01


8-3-2
 
110.02


8-3-3
 
110.03


8-3-4
 
110.04


8-3-5
 
110.05


8-3-6
 
110.06


8-3-7
 
110.07


8-3-8
 
110.08


8-3-9
 
110.99


Ch. 9
 
35.01


10-1-1
 
52.01


10-1-2
 
52.02


10-1-3
 
52.03


10-1-4
 
52.04


10-2-1
 
52.15


10-2-2
 
52.16


10-2-3
 
52.17


10-2-4
 
52.18


10-3-1
 
52.30


10-3-2
 
52.31


10-3-3
 
52.32


10-3-4
 
52.33


10-3-5
 
52.34


11-1-1
 
130.01


11-1-2
 
130.02


11-1-3
 
130.03


11-1-4
 
130.04


11-1-5
 
130.05


11-1-6
 
130.06


11-1-7
 
130.07


11-1-8
 
130.08


11-1-9
 
130.09


11-1-10
 
130.10


11-1-11
 
130.11


11-1-12
 
130.12


11-1-13
 
130.13


11-1-14
 
130.14


11-1-15
 
130.15


11-1-16
 
130.16


11-1-17
 
130.17


11-1-18
 
130.18


11-1-19
 
130.19


11-1-20
 
130.20; 130.99


12-1
 
92.01


12-2-1
 
92.15


12-2-2
 
92.16


12-2-3
 
92.17


12-2-4
 
92.18


12-2-5
 
92.19


12-2-6
 
92.20


12-2-7
 
92.21


12-2-8
 
92.22


12-2-9
 
92.23


12-2-10
 
92.24


12-2-11
 
92.25


12-2-12
 
92.26


12-2-13
 
92.27


12-2-14
 
92.28


13-1-1
 
70.01


13-1-2
 
70.02


13-1-3
 
70.03


13-1-4
 
70.04


13-1-5
 
70.05


13-2-1
 
71.01


13-2-2
 
71.02


13-2-3
 
71.03


13-2-4
 
71.04


13-2-5
 
71.05


13-2-6
 
71.06


13-2-7
 
71.07


13-2-8
 
71.08


13-2-9
 
71.09


13-2-10
 
71.10


13-2-11
 
71.11


13-2-12
 
71.12


13-2-13
 
71.13


13-2-14
 
71.14


13-2-15
 
71.15; 71.99


13-3-1
 
72.01


13-3-2
 
72.02


13-3-3
 
72.03


13-3-4
 
72.04


13-3-5
 
72.05


13-3-6
 
72.06


13-3-8
 
72.09


13-3-9
 
72.10


13-3-10
 
72.11; 72.99


13-4-2
 
73.01


13-4-3
 
73.02


13-5-1
 
74.01


13-5-2
 
74.02


13-5-3
 
74.03


13-5-4
 
74.04


13-5-5
 
74.05


13-5-6
 
74.06


13-5-7
 
74.99


13-6-1
 
75.01


13-6-2
 
75.02


13-6-3
 
75.03


13-6-4
 
75.04


13-6-5
 
75.05


13-6-6
 
75.06


13-6-7
 
75.07


13-6-8
 
75.08


13-6-9
 
75.99


13-6-10
 
75.09


13-6-11
 
75.10


13-6-12
 
75.11; 75.99


14-1-1
 
50.001


14-1-2
 
50.002


14-2-1
 
50.015


14-2-2
 
50.016


14-2-3
 
50.017


14-3-1
 
50.030


14-3-2
 
50.031


14-4-1
 
50.045


14-4-2
 
50.046


14-5-1
 
50.060


14-5-2
 
50.061


14-5-3
 
50.062


14-5-4
 
50.063


14-5-5
 
50.064


14-5-6
 
50.065


14-5-7
 
50.066


14-6-1
 
50.080


14-6-2
 
50.081


14-6-3
 
50.082


14-7-1
 
50.095


14-7-2
 
50.096


14-7-3
 
50.097


14-7-4
 
50.098


14-7-5
 
50.099


14-7-6
 
50.100


14-7-7
 
50.101


14-7-8
 
50.102


14-7-9
 
50.103


14-7-10
 
50.104


14-7-11
 
50.105


14-8-1
 
50.150


14-8-2
 
50.151


14-10-1
 
50.120


14-10-2
 
50.121


14-10-3
 
50.122


14-10-4
 
50.123


14-10-5
 
50.124


14-10-6
 
50.125


14-10-7
 
50.126


14-10-8
 
50.127


14-10-9
 
50.128


14-10-10
 
50.129


14-10-11
 
50.130


14-10-12
 
50.131


14-10-13
 
50.132


14-10-14
 
50.133; 50.999


14-10-15
 
50.134


14-10-16
 
50.135


14-10-17
 
50.136


14-10-18
 
50.999


14-11-1
 
50.150


14-11-2
 
50.003; 50.151


14-11-3
 
50.003; 50.152


15-1-1
 
155.001


15-1-2
 
155.002


15-1-3
 
155.003


15-1-4
 
155.004


15-1-5
 
155.100


15-1-6
 
155.101


15-1-7
 
155.102


15-1-8
 
155.103


15-1-9
 
155.104


15-2-1
 
155.005


15-2-2
 
155.005


15-3-1
 
155.030


15-3-2
 
155.031


15-3-3
 
155.032


15-4-1
 
155.050


15-4-2
 
155.051


15-4-3
 
155.052


15-4-4
 
155.053


15-4-5
 
155.054


15-4-6
 
155.055


15-4-7
 
155.056


15-4-8
 
155.057


15-4-9
 
155.058


15-5-1
 
155.080


15-5-2
 
155.081


15-5-3
 
155.082


15-5-4
 
155.083


15-5-5
 
155.084


15-6-1
 
155.105


15-6-2
 
155.999


16-1
 
51.001


16-2-1
 
51.015


16-2-2
 
51.016


16-3
 
51.030


16-4-1
 
51.045


16-4-2
 
51.046


16-4-3
 
51.047


16-4-4
 
51.048


16-4-5
 
51.049


16-4-6
 
51.050


16-4-7
 
51.051


16-4-8
 
51.052


16-4-9
 
51.053


16-4-10
 
51.054


16-4-11
 
51.055


16-5-1
 
51.070


16-5-2
 
51.071


16-5-3
 
51.072


16-5-4
 
51.073


16-5-5
 
51.074


16-5-6
 
51.078


16-5-7
 
51.075


16-5-8
 
51.076


16-5-9
 
51.077


16-5-10
 
51.078


16-5-11
 
51.079; 51.999


16-6-1
 
51.090


16-6-2
 
51.091


16-6-3
 
51.092


16-6-4
 
51.093


16-6-5
 
51.094


16-6-6
 
51.095


16-6-7
 
51.096


16-7-1
 
51.110


16-7-2
 
51.111


16-7-3
 
51.112


16-7-4
 
51.113


16-7-5
 
51.114


16-8-1
 
51.125


16-8-2
 
51.126


16-8-3
 
51.127


16-8-4
 
51.128


16-9-1
 
51.140


16-9-2
 
51.141


16-10
 
51.999


17-1-1
 
131.01


17-1-2
 
131.02


17-1-3
 
131.03; 131.99


17-1-4
 
131.04; 131.99


17-1-5
 
131.05; 131.99


17-1-6
 
131.06


17-1-7
 
131.99


18-1
 
151.001


18-2
 
151.002


18-2-1
 
151.003


18-2-2
 
151.004


18-2-3
 
151.005


18-2-4
 
151.006


18-2-5
 
151.007


18-2-6
 
151.008


18-2-7
 
151.009


18-2-8
 
151.010


18-2-9
 
151.011


18-2-10
 
151.012


18-2-11
 
151.013


18-2-12
 
151.014


18-2-13
 
151.015


18-2-14
 
151.016


18-2-15
 
151.999


18-3
 
151.030


18-3-1
 
151.031


18-3-2
 
151.032


18-3-3
 
151.033


18-3-4
 
151.034


18-4
 
151.050


18-4-1
 
151.051


18-4-2
 
151.052


18-4-3
 
151.053


18-4-4
 
151.054


18-5
 
151.065


18-5-1
 
151.066


18-6
 
151.080


18-6-1
 
151.081


18-6-2
 
151.082


18-6-3
 
151.083


18-6-4
 
151.084


18-6-5
 
151.085


18-6-6
 
151.086


18-6-7
 
151.087


18-6-8
 
151.088


18-6-9
 
151.089


18-6-10
 
151.090


18-7
 
151.105


18-7-1
 
151.106


18-7-2
 
151.107


18-7-5
 
151.108


18-7-6
 
151.109


18-7-7
 
151.110


18-7-8
 
151.111


18-7-9
 
151.112


18-7-10
 
151.113


18-8
 
151.125


18-8-1
 
151.126


18-8-2
 
151.127


18-8-3
 
151.128


18-8-4
 
151.129


18-9
 
151.140


18-10
 
151.150


19-1
 
152.001


19-2
 
152.002


19-3
 
152.015


19-3-1
 
152.016


19-3-2
 
152.017


19-4
 
152.030


19-5
 
152.045


19-5-1
 
152.046


19-5-2
 
152.047


19-5-3
 
152.048


19-6
 
152.060


19-6-1
 
152.061


19-6-2
 
152.062


19-6-3
 
152.063


19-7
 
152.075


19-7-1
 
152.076


19-7-2
 
152.077


19-7-3
 
152.078


19-8
 
152.090


19-8-1
 
152.091


19-8-2
 
152.092


19-9
 
152.105


19-9-1
 
152.106


19-9-2
 
152.107


19-10
 
152.120


19-11
 
152.135


19-11-1
 
152.136


19-11-2
 
152.137


19-11-3
 
152.138


19-11-4
 
152.139


19-11-5
 
152.140


19-11-6
 
152.141


19-11-7
 
152.142


19-12
 
152.155


19-12-1
 
152.156


19-12-2
 
152.157


19-12-3
 
152.158


19-13.1-1
 
152.170


19-13.1-2
 
152.171


19-13.1-3
 
152.172


19-13.1-4
 
152.173


19-13.1-5
 
152.174


19-13.1-6
 
152.175


19-13.1-7
 
152.176


19-13.2-1
 
152.190


19-13.2-2
 
152.191


19-13.2-3
 
152.192


19-13.2-4
 
152.193


19-13.2-5
 
152.194


19-13.2-6
 
152.195


19-14
 
152.205


19-14-1
 
152.206


19-15-1
 
152.215


19-15-2
 
152.216


19-15-3
 
152.217


19-16
 
152.230


19-16-1
 
152.231


19-16-2
 
152.232


19-16-3
 
152.233


19-17-1
 
152.245


19-17-2
 
152.999


19-17-3
 
152.246


20-1-1
 
90.01


20-1-2
 
90.02


20-1-3
 
90.03


20-1-4
 
90.04


20-1-5
 
90.05


20-1-6
 
90.06


20-1-7
 
90.07


20-1-8
 
90.08


20-1-9
 
90.09


20-1-10
 
90.10


20-1-11
 
90.11


20-1-12
 
90.12


20-1-13
 
90.13


20-1-14
 
90.14


20-1-15
 
90.15


21-1-1
 
154.001


21-1-2
 
154.002


21-1-3
 
154.003


21-1-5
 
154.005


21-1-6
 
154.006


21-1-7
 
154.007


21-2-1
 
154.035


21-2-2
 
154.036


21-2-3
 
154.037


21-2-4
 
154.038


21-2-5
 
154.039


21-3-1
 
154.020


21-4-1
 
154.050


21-4-2
 
154.051


21-4-3
 
154.052


21-5-12
 
154.065


21-5-13
 
154.066


21-5-14
 
154.067


21-5-15
 
154.068


21-6-1
 
154.095


21-6-2
 
154.096


21-6-3
 
154.097


21-6-4
 
154.098


21-6-5
 
154.099


21-6-6
 
154.100


21-6-7
 
154.101


21-6-8
 
154.102


21-6-9
 
154.103; 154.999


21-6-10.1
 
154.125


21-6-10.2
 
154.126


21-6-10.3
 
154.127


21-6-10.4
 
154.128


21-6-10.5
 
154.129


21-6-10.6
 
154.130


21-6-10.7
 
154.131


21-6-10.8
 
154.132


21-6-10.9
 
154.133


21-6-10.10
 
154.134


21-6-10.11
 
154.135


21-6-11
 
154.104


21-6-12
 
154.105


21-6-13
 
154.106


21-6-14
 
154.107


21-6-15
 
154.108


21-6-16
 
154.109


21-6-17
 
154.110


21-7-1
 
154.150


21-7-2
 
154.151


21-7-2.2
 
154.152


21-7-3
 
154.153


21-7-4
 
154.154


21-7-5
 
154.155; 154.999


21-7-6
 
154.156


21-7-7
 
154.157


21-7-8
 
154.158


21-7-9
 
154.159


21-8-1
 
154.999


21-8-2
 
154.160


22-1-10
 
53.99


23-1-1
 
94.01


23-1-2
 
94.02


23-1-3
 
94.03


23-1-4
 
94.04


23-1-5
 
94.05


23-1-6
 
94.06


23-1-7
 
94.07


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




R06-11-33
 
- -
 
90.01–90.15


R97-11-32
 
11-13-1997
 
155.105


R05-04-13
 
4-28-2005
 
31.01; 31.20; 34.01; 34.02; 34.04; 34.05; 34.22; 34.23; 34.26; 34.27


R06-07-20
 
- -2006
 
53.01–53.09; 53.99


6-11-32
 
- -2006
 
35.01


R07-07-17
 
7-12-2007
 
91.01–91.09; 91.20–91.27; 91.40–91.42; 91.99


R07-12-31
 
12-13-2007
 
155.105


R07-12-32
 
12-13-2007
 
93.01–93.06


R08-03-10
 
3-27-2008
 
35.01


R09-08-28
 
8-27-2009
 
35.01


R13-07-23
 
7-9-2013
 
153.001 - 153.006


R14-08-18
 
8-13-2014
 
150.001 - 150.005; 150.095 - 150.101; 150.115; 150.999


R15-05-08
 
5-5-2015
 
T.S.O. II


R15-05-09
 
5-19-2015
 
T.S.O. IV


R15-12-21
 
12-1-2015
 
T.S.O. II


R16-06-17
 
6-21-2016
 
30.20 - 30.35


R16-09-20
 
9-6-2016
 
30.07


R17-02-04
 
2-7-2017
 
71.16


R18-02-04
 
2-22-2018
 
31.20, 31.21


R18-06-07
 
6-19-2018
 
32.020, 32.021, 32.025, 32.060, 32.061


R19-03-05
 
3-19-2019
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I, II, III, IV


R19-04-07
 
4-2-2019
 
32.066


 
 
 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




O00-02-05
 
- -
 
50.062


O00-11-17
 
- -
 
130.18


O01-01-01
 
- -
 
130.19


O02-02-04
 
- -
 
130.20; 130.99


O02-03-02
 
- -
 
130.19


O09-06-04
 
- -
 
130.07


O88-06-007
 
10-13-1988
 
155.001–155.005; 155.030-155.032; 155.050-155.058; 155.080-155.084;
155.100-155.105; 155.999, Ch. 155, App. A & B


O00-01-04
 
1-27-2000
 
30.07


O00-05-09
 
7-27-2000
 
71.12; Ch. 76, Sch. I


O01-12-08
 
12-20-2001
 
71.12; Ch. 76, Sch. I


O04-05-15
 
5-27-2004
 
34.31


O04-07-25
 
7-22-2004
 
32.065


O05-04-05
 
5-12-2005
 
31.01; 30.70; 31.20; 34.01; 34.02; 34.04; 34.05; 34.22; 34.23; 34.26; 34.27;
95.01


O05-08-07
 
8-25-2005
 
32.003


O06-1-20
 
1-11-2006
 
35.01


O06-05-07
 
5-25-2006
 
32.020


O06-07-12
 
8-31-2006
 
53.01–53.09; 53.99


O06-07-13
 
8-31-2006
 
71.12; Ch. 76, Sch. I


O06-08-17
 
9-14-2006
 
130.07


O06-11-21
 
12-14-2006
 
90.01–90.15


O07-04-03
 
4-12-2007
 
110.20


O07-07-06
 
7-12-2007
 
91.01–91.09; 91.20-91.27; 91.40-91.42; 91.99


O07-10-10
 
10-25-2007
 
130.21; 130.99


O07-12-11
 
12-13-2007
 
93.01–93.06


O08-03-03
 
3-13-2008
 
94.01–94.07; 94.99


O08-03-04
 
3-27-2008
 
35.01


O08-04-05
 
4-10-2008
 
72.07; 72.08; 72.99


O08-06-10
 
7-10-2008
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


O08-07-11
 
7-10-2008
 
154.020


O08-07-12
 
7-10-2008
 
154.085–154.088


O08-07-13
 
7-10-2008
 
152.170–152.176; 152.190-152.195


O08-07-14
 
7-10-2008
 
131.02; 131.03; 131.06


O08-09-16
 
9-25-2008
 
32.003; 32.009; 32.060; 32.062; 32.063


O08-10-17
 
10-9-2008
 
94.03–94.05; 94.07


O09-01-01
 
2-12-2009
 
T.S.O. IV


O09-04-02
 
4-9-2009
 
32.020


O09-04-03
 
4-9-2009
 
32.020, T.S.O. I


O09-04-04
 
4-23-2009
 
95.01


O09-04-05
 
5-14-2009
 
Adopting Ordinance


O09-05-06
 
5-14-2009
 
T.S.O. II


O09-06-06
 
6-25-2009
 
T.S.O. III


O09-10-12
 
10-8-2009
 
154.090


O09-11-11
 
11-12-2009
 
T.S.O. I


O10-01-01
 
2-11-2010
 
154.128—154.130


O10-01-02
 
1-14-2010
 
154.052


O10-02-05
 
2-11-2010
 
Adopting Ordinance


O10-04-03
 
4-8-2010
 
154.052


O10-05-06
 
5-13-2010
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


O10-05-07
 
5-27-2010
 
32.025


O10-06-08
 
6-24-2010
 
50.015; 50.031; 50.045; 50.062; 50.063; 50.066; 50.082; 50.153; 51.015;
51.095; 52.04


O10-06-09
 
6-24-2010
 
T.S.O. I


O10-07-11
 
- -
 
T.S.O. II


O10-08-12
 
8-26-2010
 
33.40


O10-10-14
 
10-28-2010
 
96.01


O10-10-15
 
11-4-2010
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


O10-10-16
 
10-14-2010
 
31.20; 31.21; 31.24


O10-10-17
 
10-28-2010
 
95.01; 95.02


O10-11-18
 
11-4-2010
 
T.S.O. I


O11-01-01
 
1-13-2011
 
Adopting Ordinance


O11-01-03
 
1-13-2011
 
51.049


O11-02-04
 
2-10-2011
 
50.015; 50.031


O11-04-06
 
4-14-2011
 
154.020


O11-03-07
 
3-10-2011
 
33.50 - 33.56


O11-04-05
 
4-14-2011
 
154.126; 154.127; 154.129


O11-04-06
 
4-14-2011
 
154.020; 154.052


O11-04-08
 
4-14-2011
 
110.06, 110.07


O11-04-09
 
4-28-2011
 
31.20; 31.21


O11-06-10
 
6-23-2011
 
T.S.O. III


O11-07-11
 
7-14-2011
 
32.025


O11-08-12
 
8-25-2011
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


O11-08-13
 
8-25-2011
 
52.15


O11-08-14
 
8-25-2011
 
33.15; 33.17 - 33.19


O11-09-17
 
9-22-2011
 
91.05; 154.004; 154.050; 154.052; 154.053; 154.065 - 154.068; 154.098;
154.099; 154.101; 154.103; 154.109; 154.110; 154.154


O11-10-18
 
10-13-2011
 
154.130


O11-10-19
 
10-27-2011
 
T.S.O. I


O12-02-01
 
2-21-2012
 
154.129


O12-02-04
 
2-21-2012
 
110.07


O12-07-07
 
8-7-2012
 
T.S.O. III


O12-07-08
 
7-17-2012
 
Adopting Ordinance


O12-10-09
 
10-16-2012
 
T.S.O. I


O12-09-06
 
9-18-2012
 
154.081


O12-11-10
 
11-8-2012
 
154.020; 154.052


O12-11-11
 
11-8-2012
 
154.126; 154.129


O12-11-12
 
11-8-2012
 
92.29


O12-05-03
 
5-22-2012
 
110.01 - 110.09; 110.20; 110.99


O13-02-03
 
2-5-2013
 
154.086; 154.089


O13-04-07
 
4-16-2013
 
52.16


O13-06-08
 
6-4-2013
 
51.049


O13-06-09
 
6-4-2013
 
T.S.O. III


O13-07-10
 
7-2-2013
 
154.130


O13-07-11
 
7-9-2013
 
154.131


O13-07-12
 
7-9-2013
 
153.001 - 153.006


O13-08-13
 
8-20-2013
 
52.18


O14-01-01
 
1-7-2014
 
92.30


O14-05-02
 
5-6-2014
 
154.050; 154.065; 154.132


O14-05-03
 
5-6-2014
 
154.126; 154.129


O14-06-04
 
6-3-2014
 
154.101


O14-06-05
 
6-17-2014
 
T.S.O. III


O14-07-06
 
7-1-2014
 
154.052


O14-08-07
 
8-13-2014
 
150.001 - 150.005; 150.095 - 150.101; 150.115; 150.999


O15-02-03
 
2-17-2015
 
154.052


O15-04-04
 
4-21-2015
 
T.S.O. II


O15-05-05
 
5-19-2015
 
T.S.O. IV


O15-07-06
 
7-7-2015
 
T.S.O. III


O15-08-07
 
8-10-2015
 
Adopting Ordinance


O15-10-08
 
10-6-2015
 
154.020; 154.052


O15-10-10
 
10-20-2015
 
T.S.O. I


O15-12-11
 
12-1-2015
 
T.S.O. II


O15-12-12
 
12-1-2015
 
154.052


O16-01-01
 
1-5-2016
 
50.066


O16-03-03
 
3-1-2016
 
154.020; 154.107


O16-05-04
 
5-17-2016
 
154.130


O16-06-05
 
6-21-2016
 
T.S.O. III


O16-06-06
 
6-21-2016
 
30.20 - 30.35


O16-09-08
 
9-6-2016
 
30.07


O16-10-09
 
10-4-2016
 
32.020; T.S.O. I


O16-11-10
 
11-1-2016
 
71.13; 71.15


O16-11-11
 
11-1-2016
 
33.15


O16-12-12
 
12-6-2016
 
Adopting Ordinance


O17-02-01
 
2-7-2017
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


O17-02-02
 
2-7-2017
 
71.16


O17-04-03
 
4-4-2017
 
91.01


O17-04-04
 
4-4-2017
 
130.07; 130.22


O17-06-06
 
6-20-2017
 
T.S.O. III


O17-06-07
 
6-20-2017
 
30.07


O17-08-08
 
8-15-2017
 
154.052


O17-08-09
 
8-15-2017
 
154.053


O17-09-10
 
9-7-2017
 
T.S.O. II


O17-10-11
 
10-3-2017
 
Adopting Ordinance


O17-10-12
 
10-3-2017
 
T.S.O. I


O17-12-13
 
12-5-2017
 
154.050, T.S.O. V


O17-12-14
 
12-5-2017
 
T.S.O. IV


O17-12-15
 
12-5-2017
 
32.021


O18-01-01
 
1-4-2018
 
154.110


O18-02-02
 
2-22-2018
 
154.110


O18-02-03
 
2-22-2018
 
31.20, 31.21


O18-02-04
 
2-22-2018
 
32.001


O18-06-05
 
6-19-2018
 
32.020, 32.021, 32.025, 32.060, 32.061


O18-06-06
 
6-19-2018
 
31.20


O18-07-07
 
7-3-2018
 
T.S.O. III


O18-08-08
 
8-14-2018
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


O18-10-09
 
10-2-2018
 
T.S.O. I


O18-10-12
 
10-16-2018
 
154.103


O18-11-14
 
11-20-2018
 
73.03


O18-12-15
 
12-4-2018
 
154.052


O19-03-02
 
3-19-2019
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I, II, III, IV


O19-04-03
 
4-2-2019
 
32.066


 
 
 
 
 




 



CITY OF EL MIRAGE, ARIZONA
ZONING CODE; LAND USAGE
VOLUME 2



Supplement 2019 S-10 contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. O19-04-03, passed 4-2-2019



TITLE XV:  ZONING CODE; LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   BUILDING CODE





         151.   PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY; ENCROACHMENTS





         152.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT; OFF-SITE CONSTRUCTION
IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS





         153.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT





         154.   ZONING CODE





         155.   SUBDIVISIONS




CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING CODE



Section



Building Code



   150.001   Adoption of Building Codes



   150.002   Conformance to Zoning Ordinance



   150.003   Moving of buildings



   150.004   Professional certification requirements for Building
Inspector



   150.005   Building Inspector



Mobile and Manufactured Housing Standards



   150.095   Adoption of standards



   150.096   Utility connections



   150.097   Accessory structures



   150.098   Skirting



   150.099   Attached patio, carport, porch, garage or storage room



   150.100   Drainage



   150.101   Ground anchoring



Construction Sound Transmission Control (Noise)



   150.115   Building operations



 



   150.999   Penalty



BUILDING CODES; AMENDMENTS



§ 150.001  ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODES.



   (A)   International Building Code; Amendments.  The certain
document designated and marked as the 2012 International Building Code and
all appendices contained therein, three copies of which are on file
electronically in the office of the City Clerk of the city and that portion
of the certain document entitled El Mirage Amendments applicable to the 2012
International Building Code, three copies of which are on file in the office
of the City Clerk of the city, together are hereby adopted as the Building
Code for the city by reference as if set forth herein in full and made part
and parcel of the section for regulating and controlling the installing,
construction, remodeling, alteration, repair and conversion of buildings
within the corporate limits of the city, and it is hereby declared to be
unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter, repair, change, move, remove,
maintain or use any house, building or structure in the city, or cause or
permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the Building Code
as herewith adopted by the Council of the city.



   (B)   International Residential Code; Amendments.  The certain
document designated and marked as the 2012 International Residential Code and
all appendices contained therein, three copies of which are on file
electronically in the office of the City Clerk of the city and that portion
of the certain document entitled El Mirage Amendments applicable to the 2012
International Residential Code, three copies of which are on file in the
office of the City Clerk of the city, together are hereby adopted as the
Residential Building Code for the city by reference as if set forth herein in
full and made part and parcel of the section for regulating and controlling
the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair moving,
improvement, removal, equipping, use, occupying or maintaining any
residential building on premises within the city, and it is hereby declared
to be unlawful to construct, erect, enlarge, alter, repair, maintain, move, 
improve, demolish, equip, use, occupy  any one- and two-family residential
building or premises within the city, or cause or permit the same to be done,
contrary to or in violation of any provisions of the Residential Code as
herewith adopted by the Council of the city.



   (C)   National Electric Code; Amendments.  The certain document
designated and marked as the 2011 National Electric Code and all appendices
contained therein, three copies of which are on file electronically in the
office of the City Clerk of the city and that portion of the certain document
entitled El Mirage Amendments applicable to the 2011 National Electric Code,
three copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the
city, together are hereby adopted as the Electric Code for the city by
reference as if set forth herein in full and made part and parcel of the
section for regulating and controlling the installing, construction,
remodeling, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, use and removal of
houses, buildings, structures and premises and of electrical installations of
any type whatsoever therein or thereupon  within the corporate limits of the
city, and it is hereby declared to be unlawful to construct, erect, install,
remodel, alter, repair, change, convert, use, remove, maintain or demolish
any house, building or structure or premises or any electrical installation
of any type whatsoever therein or thereupon within the city, or cause or
permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the Electric Code
as herewith adopted by the Council of the city.



   (D)   International Fire Code; Amendments.  The certain document
designated and marked as the 2012 International Fire Code and all appendices
contained therein, three copies of which are on file electronically in the
office of the City Clerk of the city and that portion of the certain document
entitled El Mirage Amendments applicable to the 2012 International Fire Code,
three copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the
city, together are hereby adopted as the Fire Code for the city by reference
as if set forth herein in full and made part and parcel of the section for 
establishing regulations affecting or relating to structures, processes,
premises and safeguards regarding: the hazard of fire and explosion arising
from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices;
Conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of
structures or premises; Fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from
occupancy or operation; Matters related to the construction, extension,
repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression or alarm systems; and
conditions affecting the safety of fire fighters and emergency responders
during emergency operations within the city, or cause or permit the same to
be done, contrary to or in violation of any provisions of the Fire Code as
herewith adopted by the Council of the city.



   (E)   International Plumbing Code; Amendments.  The certain
document designated and marked as the 2012 International Plumbing Code and
all appendices contained therein, three copies of which are on file
electronically in the office of the City Clerk of the city and that portion
of the certain document entitled El Mirage Amendments applicable to the 2012
International Plumbing Code, three copies of which are on file in the office
of the City Clerk of the city, together are hereby adopted as the Plumbing
Code for the city by reference as is set forth herein in full and made part
and parcel of the section for regulating and controlling the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation alteration, repair
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, removal, use, or maintenance
of any plumbing systems on premises within the city, and it is hereby
declared to be unlawful to cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to
or in violation of any provisions of the Plumbing Code as herewith adopted by
the Council of the city.



   (F)   International Mechanical Code; Amendments.  The certain
document designated and marked as the 2012 International Mechanical Code and
all appendices contained therein, three copies of which are on file
electronically in the office of the City Clerk of the city and that portion
of the certain document entitled El Mirage Amendments applicable to the 2012
International Mechanical Code, three copies of which are on file in the
office of the City Clerk of the city, together are hereby adopted as the
Mechanical Code for the city by reference as if set forth herein in full and
made part and parcel of the section for regulating and controlling the
design, construction, quality of materials, operation, installation,
alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, removal, use, or
maintenance of any heating, ventilating, comfort-cooling or refrigeration
systems, incinerators, or other miscellaneous heat- producing appliances, 
within the city, and it is hereby declared to be unlawful to cause or permit
the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provisions of the
Mechanical Code as herewith adopted by the Council of the city.



   (G)   International Fuel Gas Code; Amendments.  The certain
document designated and marked as the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code and
all appendices contained therein, three copies of which are on file
electronically in the office of the City Clerk of the city and that portion
of the certain document entitled El Mirage Amendments applicable to the 2012
International Fuel Gas Code, three copies of which are on file in the office
of the City Clerk of the city, together are hereby adopted as the Mechanical
Code for the city by reference as if set forth herein in full and made part
and parcel of the section for regulating and controlling the design,
construction, quality of materials, operation, installation, alteration,
repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, removal, use, or maintenance of
any fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances within the city, and it is
hereby declared to be unlawful to cause or permit the same to be done,
contrary to or in violation of any provisions of the Fuel Gas Code as
herewith adopted by the Council of the city.



   (H)   International Existing Building Code; Amendments.  The
certain document designated and marked as the 2012 International Existing
Building Code and all appendices contained therein, three copies of which are
on file electronically in the office of the City Clerk of the city and that
portion of the certain document entitled El Mirage Amendments applicable to
the 2012 International Existing Building Code, three copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the city, together are hereby adopted
as the Existing Building Code for the city by reference as if set forth
herein in full and made part and parcel of the section for the use of
alternative approaches to achieve compliance with minimum requirements to
safeguard the public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected
by the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation of
existing buildings and it is hereby declared to be unlawful to cause or
permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the Existing
Building Code as herewith adopted by the Council of the city.



   (I)   International Property Maintenance Code.  The certain
document designated and marked as the International Property Maintenance Code
and all appendices contained therein, three copies of which are on file
electronically in the office of the City Clerk of the city and that portion
of the certain document entitled El Mirage Amendments applicable to the 
International  Property Maintenance Code, three copies of which are on file
in the office of the City Clerk of the city, together are hereby adopted as
the Property Maintenance Code for the city.



      (1)   Enforcement; Violations; Penalties; Inspections.  Any
Code Enforcement official, building official, police officer or other person
designated by the City Manager may inspect buildings or land to determine
compliance with the International Property Maintenance Code, as herewith
adopted by the Council of the city.



      (2)   Violations; Civil or criminal infractions.  A violation
of any provision of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted
herein, may be prosecuted by the city, in its sole discretion, as either a
civil infraction or a class 1 misdemeanor offense. Each day a violation
exists may be deemed a separate offense. A citation for a civil infraction of
an alleged violation of the International Property Maintenance Code, as
adopted herein, may be issued by any city code enforcement official, building
official, police officer or any other person authorized by the City Manager.



      (3)   Penalty; Civil infraction. A civil infraction shall be
heard by either the city court or a hearing officer appointed by the Mayor
and Council of the City of El Mirage. Any person found responsible by the
city court or a hearing officer for a civil infraction of the International
Property Maintenance Code as adopted herein, shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $50 or more than $1,000 per violation.



      (4)   Penalty; Class 1 misdemeanor.  Any person found guilty
of a criminal violation (class 1 misdemeanor) of the Property Maintenance
Code as adopted herein, shall be subject to imprisonment not to exceed 180
days per violation and/or a fine not to exceed $2,500 per violation, unless
the violator is an enterprise in which case the fine shall not exceed $20,000
per violation.



      (5)   Costs and expenses.  In addition to any penalty, fine,
and/or jail time imposed for a violation of the Property Maintenance Code as
adopted herein, a person found to be in violation shall also be ordered to
reimburse the city all costs and expenses incurred by the city in prosecuting
the violation and abating the violation.



   (J)   International Energy Conservation Code; Amendments.  The
certain document designated and marked as the International Energy
Conservation Code and all appendices contained therein, three copies of which
are on file electronically in the office of the City Clerk of the city and
that portion of the certain document entitled El Mirage Amendments applicable
to the  International Energy Conservation Code, three copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the city, together are hereby adopted
as the Energy Code for the city by reference as if set forth herein in full
and made part and parcel of the section to regulate the design and
construction of buildings for the effective use and conservation of energy
over the useful life of each building. This code is intended to provide
flexibility to permit the use of innovative approaches and techniques to
achieve this objective. This code is not intended to abridge safety, health
or environmental requirements contained in other applicable codes or
ordinances and it is hereby declared to be unlawful to cause or permit the
same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the Energy Code as herewith
adopted by the Council of the city.



   (K)   International Green Construction Code.  The certain document
designated and marked as the International Green Construction Code and all
appendices contained therein, three copies of which are on file
electronically in the office of the City Clerk of the city are hereby adopted
as the Green Construction Code for the city as is set forth herein in full
and made part and parcel of the section as an overlay document to be used
voluntarily in conjunction with the other codes and standards adopted by the
city. The provisions of this code shall apply to the design, construction,
addition, alteration, change of occupancy, relocation, replacement, repair,
equipment, building site, maintenance, removal and demolition of every
building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such
buildings or structures and to the site on which the building is located.
This code is intended to safeguard the environment, public health, safety and
general welfare through the establishment of requirements to reduce the
negative impacts and increase the positive impacts of the built environment
on the natural environment and building occupants. This code is not intended
to abridge or supersede safety, health or environmental requirements under
other applicable codes or ordinances.



   (L)   The Uniform Code For the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings,
1997 edition.  The certain code entitled Uniform Code for the Abatement of
Dangerous Buildings, 1997 edition, is hereby adopted as the Uniform Code for
the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings of the city and made part of this
chapter the same as though the code was specifically set forth in full
herein, and at least three copies of the code shall be filed in the office of
the City Clerk and kept available for the public use and inspection.



(Ord. O14-08-07, passed 8-13-2014; Res. R14-08-18, passed 8-13-2014)



§ 150.002  CONFORMANCE TO ZONING ORDINANCE.



   Whenever a building permit is issued and a building inspection
performed, the building must conform to the provisions of Chapter 154 of this
code in addition to the provision of this chapter.



(Ord. O14-08-07, passed 8-13-2014; Res. R14-08-18, passed 8-13-2014)



§ 150.003  MOVING OF BUILDINGS.



   (A)   In addition to any other requirements of law or city
ordinances, the moving of any building into the city shall be governed by all
international codes and standards set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   Requirements of the International Building Code shall apply
for moving buildings into the city limits.



   (C)   In addition to the provisions provided in the International
Building Code, any building shall not be moved into the corporate limits
until which time as the Building Inspector, Building Official or City Manager
has issued a building permit. The application for permit must fully comply
with the provisions of § 105 of the International Building Code, unless
otherwise exempted or waived by the responsible city official. Prior to
receiving a building permit for moving any building into or within the city
which does not comply with §§ 150.095 et seq., the applicant shall post a
bond in favor of the city in a sum determined by the Building Official, which
shall be in an amount no less than $10,000. The bond shall be conditioned
that a certificate of occupancy be issued for the building in no less than
180 days from the issuance of a building permit or within any extension
period granted pursuant to division (D) of this section or the bond shall be
forfeited.



   (D)   Every permit issued by the Building Department under the
provisions of this section shall expire by limitations and shall be void if
the building or work authorized by the permit is not completed within 180
days from the date of permit. An applicant may apply for an extension in
writing which may be granted by the City Council in its discretion, which may
or may not waive forfeiture of any bond. When granted an extension of expired
permits, all permits shall be renewed by paying one-half the amount required
for a permit within seven days after approval by the Council.



   (E)   Military barracks and apartment structures will not be allowed
to be moved into the city.



(Ord. O14-08-07, passed 8-13-2014; Res. R14-08-18, passed 8-13-2014)



§ 150.004  PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   (A)   All building inspectors employed by the city shall, within six
months of commencing such employment and thereafter maintain certification as
a building inspector from the International Code Council (ICC).



   (B)   The City Manager may require building inspectors to obtain and
thereafter maintain such additional ICC certifications as (s)he determines
are necessary job qualifications. Any building inspector employed by the city
at the time the additional requirement is imposed shall have six months
thereafter to obtain the additional certification.



   (C)   Building inspectors employed by the city on the effective date
of this chapter shall have six months to obtain building inspector
certification from the ICC.



(Ord. O14-08-07, passed 8-13-2014; Res. R14-08-18, passed 8-13-2014)



§ 150.005  BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   The Building Inspector and administrative authority, as such may be
referenced in any section of the chapter for all matters pertaining to any
building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical or any other inspections, shall be
vested in the office of City Manager or such other person the Manager may
designate.



(Ord. O14-08-07, passed 8-13-2014; Res. R14-08-18, passed 8-13-2014)



MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOUSING STANDARDS



§ 150.095  ADOPTION OF STANDARDS.



   The certain set of standards, composing A.R.S. Title 41, Chapter 16,
Articles 1 and 2 of the Department of Fire, Building and Life Safety,
Statutes and Rules, adopted by the Secretary of State and revised June 13,
2013 of the Office of Manufactured Housing, and as the same may be amended
from time to time, is hereby adopted as the Mobile and Manufactured Housing
Standards of the city and made a part of this chapter the same as though the
standards were specifically set forth in full herein. Copies of the standards
are on file electronically.



(Ord. O14-08-07, passed 8-13-2014; Res. R14-08-18, passed 8-13-2014)



§ 150.096  UTILITY CONNECTIONS.



   All utility connections shall be pursuant to:



   (A)    Currently adopted International Plumbing Code;



   (B)    Currently adopted National Electric Code; and



   (C)    Currently adopted International Fuel Gas Code.



(Ord. O14-08-07, passed 8-13-2014; Res. R14-08-18, passed 8-13-2014)



§ 150.097  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the installation, assembly,
connections or construction of any accessory structure shall be pursuant to
the applicable requirements of:



   (A)   The currently adopted International Building Code;



   (B)   The currently adopted International Residential Code;



   (C)   The currently adopted International Plumbing Code;



   (D)   The currently adopted International Mechanical Code; and



   (E)   The currently adopted National Electric Code.



(Ord. O14-08-07, passed 8-13-2014; Res. R14-08-18, passed 8-13-2014)



§ 150.098  SKIRTING.



   Skirting shall be installed in accordance with the Manufactured Housing
Installation Requirements of the Arizona Department of Fire, Building and
Life Safety, Office of Manufactured Housing with an effective date of
9-13-2013.



(Ord. O14-08-07, passed 8-13-2014; Res. R14-08-18, passed 8-13-2014)



§ 150.099  ATTACHED PATIO, CARPORT, PORCH, GARAGE OR STORAGE ROOM.



   The following specifications shall apply to the construction or
assembly of an attached patio, carport, porch, garage or storage room:



   (A)   Materials.



      (1)   Roof coverings may be metal, plastic, wood, or other
approved material.



      (2)   Floor decking may be wood, concrete or other approved
material.



   (B)   All roofs shall be constructed so as to withstand 20 pounds
per square foot live load, 20 pounds per square foot uplift load.



   (C)   Construction and assembly specifications shall be certified to
comply with this chapter by:



      (1)   Structural reports;



      (2)   Certified engineering calculations; or



      (3)   Approval of the City Building Department.



(Ord. O14-08-07, passed 8-13-2014, Res. R14-08-18, passed 8-13-2014)



§ 150.100  DRAINAGE.



   Drainage of at least one-half inch per foot shall be provided for the
first ten feet adjacent to all sides of a mobile home. Where property lines,
walls, slopes, or other physical conditions prohibit this slope, the site
must be provided with drains or swales or otherwise graded to drain water
away from the structure.



(Ord. O14-08-07, passed 8-13-2014; Res. R14-08-18, passed 8-13-2014)



§ 150.101  GROUND ANCHORING.



   When a unit is anchored, the anchoring shall be consistent with the
Manufactured Housing Installation Requirements of the Arizona Department of
Fire, Building and Life Safety, Office of Manufactured Housing with an
effective date of 9-13-2013.



(Ord. O14-08-07, passed 8-13-2014; Res. R14-08-18, passed 8-13-2014)



CONSTRUCTION SOUND TRANSMISSION CONTROL (NOISE)



§ 150.115  BUILDING OPERATIONS.



   (A)   Building Operations; Permits from the Building Official.  The
erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any
building in any residential district or section, other than between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. from the first day of May to and including the
30th day of September and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
beginning the first day of October to and including the 30th day of April on
Monday through Saturday with year round hours of 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on
Sundays, except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public
health, safety, and welfare, and then only with a permit from the Building
Official, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 30 days,
while the emergency continues. If the Building Official should determine that
the public health, safety and welfare will not be impaired by the building
within the hours specified herein, and if (s)he shall further determine that
loss or inconvenience would not result to any party in interest, (s)he may
grant permission for the work to be done at times other than specified
herein, upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is
awarded or during progress of the work.



   (B)   Excavation of streets; Permits from the Public Works
Director.  The excavation of streets, highways in any residential district
or section, other than the hours specified in division (A) above, except in
the case of urgent necessity to the interest of public health, safety and
welfare then only with a permit from the Public Works Director, which permit
may be granted for a period not to exceed 30 days, while the emergency
continues. If the Public Works Director should determine that the public
health, safety and welfare will not be impaired by the excavation of streets
and highways within the hours specified in division (A) above, and if (s)he
shall further determine that loss or inconvenience should not result to any
party in interest, (s)he may grant permission for he work to be done other
than the specified division (A) above, upon application being made at the
time the permit for work is awarded or during the progress of work.



   (C)   Exception.  No work shall be conducted on any legal federal,
state or city holiday unless urgent necessity exists as described in division
(A) above and until full compliance with those regulations set forth therein.



(Ord. O14-08-07, passed 8-13-2014; Res. R14-08-18, passed 8-13-2014)



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of the
Technical Codes shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, punishable by a
fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six
months, or by both fine and imprisonment. Each day the violation continues
shall be a separate offense.



   (C)   In addition to any criminal penalties provided in this code, a
violation of § 150.003 shall be punishable by imposition of a civil fine in
an amount up to $500 for each day the violation continues.



(Ord. O14-08-07, passed 8-13-2014; Res. R14-08-18, passed 8-13-2014)



CHAPTER 151:  PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY; ENCROACHMENTS



Section



Encroachment Permits Generally



   151.001   Definitions



   151.002   Encroachment permit required



   151.003   Exceptions to permit requirement



   151.004   Application



   151.005   Other licenses



   151.006   Determination of appropriate permit, need for a license,
and appropriate encroachment fees



   151.007   Non-interference with public works



   151.008   Terms and conditions of all encroachment permits



   151.009   Terms of construction



   151.010   Supervision and inspection work



   151.011   Abandonment or removal



   151.012   Condemnation by city



   151.013   Encroachment permit is revocable



   151.014   Termination



   151.015   Appeal



   151.016   Cease and desist orders



Minor and Other Miscellaneous Encroachment Permits



   151.030   Minor encroachment permit, Class 1 permit



   151.031   Criteria for minor encroachment permit



   151.032   Class 1 permit process



   151.033   Street closures for neighborhood block party



   151.034   Pavement restoration and fees



   151.035   Special condition



Encroachment Permit for Sidewalk Furniture, Class 2 Permit



   151.050   General provisions



   151.051   Criteria for sidewalk furniture encroachment permit, Class
2



   151.052   Special terms and conditions for the permit described in
this subchapter



   151.053   Class 2 permit process



   151.054   Pavement restoration and fees



Landscape Maintenance Encroachment Permit, Class 3 Permit



   151.065   General provisions



   151.066   Class 3 permit process



Telecommunications Services, Class 4 Encroachment Permit



   151.080   General provisions



   151.081   Purpose and findings



   151.082   Telecommunication license



   151.083   Application for telecommunications license or franchise



   151.084   Terms and conditions applicable to telecommunication
licenses



   151.085   Application process for telecommunication license



   151.086   Revocation



   151.087   Application for a telecommunications encroachment permit



   151.088   Required information for license and permit



   151.089   Application process for telecommunication encroachment
permit



   151.090   Compensation and other fees



Fiber Optic Cable, Interstate Services, and Other Communication Facilities
Excluded from the Definition of “Telecommunication”, Class 5



   151.105   General provisions



   151.106   Purpose and findings



   151.107   Fiber optic cable license



   151.108   Revocation



   151.109   Permit application process



   151.110   Required information for both license and permit



   151.111   Special terms and conditions for the permit described in
this subchapter



   151.112   Application approval



   151.113   Fees



Cable Television, Class 6



   151.125   Cable services/television and related services



   151.126   Purpose and findings



   151.127   Cable services/television license



   151.128   Encroachment permit application process



   151.129   Fees



Utilities, Class 7



   151.140   Utilities encroachment permit



Other Street Excavation Permits



   151.150   Street excavation encroachment permit, Class 8



   151.999   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Public Works Encroachment and Inspection



ENCROACHMENT PERMITS GENERALLY



§ 151.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CABLE SERVICES. The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming and other programming services, together with subscriber
interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of the programming
and programming services.



   COMMERCIAL MOBILE RADIO SERVICES. Two-way voice commercial mobile radio
services as defined by the federal Communications Commission in 47 U.S.C. §
157.



   DEPARTMENT. The department, division, or city employee to whom
responsibility for the administration of this chapter has been delegated by
the City Manager. Generally, the DEPARTMENT will be the City Public Works
Department and persons seeking permits pursuant to this chapter may obtain
necessary forms and information from the permit counter in the Public Works
Department.



   ENCROACH or ENCROACHMENT. Includes, but is not limited to, the
performance of any of the following acts:



      (1)   Excavating, filling, or disturbing the surface;



      (2)   Erecting or maintaining any flag, banner, decoration,
post, sign, pole, fence, guardrail, wall, loading platform, newsstand,
mailbox, pipe, conduit, wire, or other structure on, over, or under the
surface of any public place, highway, or watercourse;



      (3)   Planting any tree, shrub, grass, or other growing thing;



      (4)   Placing or leaving any rubbish, brush, earth, or other
material of any nature whatsoever;



      (5)   Constructing, placing, maintaining on, over, or under
the surface of any public place, right-of-way, street, pathway, sidewalk,
driveway, curb, gutter, paving, or other surface or subsurface drainage
structure or facility, any pipe, conduit, wire, cable, or telecommunication
facility;



      (6)   Traveling by any vehicle or combination of vehicles or
object of dimension, weight, or other characteristic prohibited by law
without a permit;



      (7)   Lighting or building a fire;



      (8)   Constructing, placing, planting, or maintaining any
structure, embankment, excavation, or other objects adjacent to a
right-of-way or watercourse which causes or will cause an encroachment; and/or



      (9)   The application of paint or other marking materials to
any pavement or curb.



   FACILITIES. The plant, equipment, and property, including but not
limited to boxes, poles, wires, pipe, conduits, pedestals, antenna, and other
appurtenances placed in, on, or under highways.



   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission or a designated
representative.



   FRANCHISE. The same as defined under Article XIII of the Arizona
Constitution.



   HIGHWAY. The full width of the right-of-way of any road, street,
highway, alley, land, or pedestrian walkway used by or for the general
public, whether or not the road, street, highway, alley, land, or pedestrian
right-of-way has been improved or accepted for maintenance by the city.
HIGHWAY also means and includes land which by deed, conveyance, agreement,
easement, dedication, usage, or process of law is reserved for or dedicated
to the general public for street, highway, alley, public utility, or
pedestrian walkway purposes.



   LICENSE. Any authorization granted under these licensing requirements
or other sections of this code, in terms of a privilege, permit, license, or
otherwise to construct, install, operate, and/or maintain telecommunications
facilities to provide telecommunications services, a fiber optic cable
system, a cable television system, or any other use in the city.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any property owned, maintained, or controlled by the city.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The same as HIGHWAY as defined hereinabove.



   STREET. The same as HIGHWAY as defined hereinabove.



   TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDER. A telecommunications corporation who
constructs, installs, operates, and maintains telecommunications facilities
in the city.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The transmission, between or among points specified
by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the
form or content of the information as sent and received. The term does not
include commercial mobile radio services, pay phone services, interstate
services or cable services.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS  CORPORATION. Any public service corporation to the
extent that it provides telecommunications services in the state.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The offering of telecommunications for a
fee directly to the public or to such users as to be effectively available
directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.



(Prior Code, Art. 18-1)



§ 151.002  ENCROACHMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall encroach nor place any encroachment upon,
over, or under the surface of any public place, highway, right-of-way,
pathway, street, sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter, paving, or other surface
or subsurface drainage structure or facility for any purpose whatsoever,
without first obtaining a permit from the city in accordance with the
provisions set forth herein.



   (B)   No person shall excavate, erect, construct, place, or maintain
any pipe, conduit, wire, cable, or other structure on, over, or under the
surface of any public place, highway, right-of-way, pathway, street,
sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter, paving, or other surface or subsurface
drainage structure or facility for any purpose whatsoever, without first
obtaining a permit from the city in accordance with the provisions set forth
herein.



   (C)   No person shall erect, place, display, maintain, or use any
obstruction, booth, stand, counter, furniture, sign, flag, or temporary or
permanent fixture upon any public place, highway, street, sidewalk, alley, or
other public right-of-way for any purpose whatsoever, without first obtaining
a permit from the city in accordance with the provisions set forth herein.



   (D)   No work or activity of any nature shall be performed in a
public place or right-of-way without  first obtaining a permit from the city
in accordance with the provisions set forth herein. The Department shall
provide the forms for and set forth the rules, regulations, and procedures
governing the issuance of permits.



   (E)   No person shall discharge or cause or allow to flow or run,
any water or other liquid upon any highway, alley, public place, or
right-of-way within the city unless authorized, in writing, by the Department
consistent with this chapter.



(Prior Code, Art. 18-2)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.003  EXCEPTIONS TO PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   The placement of traffic-control markings on pavements and
curbs by the city and the marking of pavements, curbs, and sidewalks by
utility companies, engineers, and surveyors to indicate the location of
underground utility lines and monuments in connection with surveying, design,
construction, and maintenance work pursuant to a franchise, license, or other
agreement with or permission from the city may be done without a permit;
however, all other pavement, curb, and sidewalk markings require a permit.



   (B)   An encroachment permit for public utilities and other
continuing uses may contain provisions allowing continuing maintenance of the
permittee’s facilities in the public rights-of-way and highways without
securing a new and separate permit for each maintenance activity.



   (C)   This chapter does not prevent any person from maintaining any
pipe or conduit lawfully on or under any public highway, or from making
excavations necessary for the preservation of life or property when an urgent
necessity therefore arises while city offices are closed. A person making an
emergency use or encroachment on a public street shall apply for a permit
therefore within one calendar day after the offices of the city are opened
and shall pay all applicable fees, perform required pavement restoration, and
comply with all other applicable requirements of this chapter.



   (D)   The city is not required to obtain permits from itself
pursuant to this chapter, however, contractors or other persons performing
work under contract with the city or on behalf of the city in the city
highway must obtain appropriate permits and comply with all the regulations
set forth in this chapter, notwithstanding the provisions of § 151.008(G).



   (E)   There are some public utilities who have ownership or easement
interests in property obtained prior to the city obtaining ownership interest
in that same property. Nothing in this chapter shall extinguish those prior
interests in the property.



(Prior Code, § 18-2-1)



§ 151.004  APPLICATION.



   (A)   The city shall prescribe and provide a regular form of
application for the use of applicants for permits required by this chapter.
The application shall show such information and details as the city deems
necessary to establish the exact location, nature, dimensions, duration, and
purpose of the proposed use or encroachment, and shall be submitted to the
Department together with the non-refundable application fee and other
applicable fees established by Council resolution.



   (B)   The applications shall be accompanied by construction plans,
engineered designs, maps, sketches, diagrams, or similar exhibits. The same
shall be of the size and in the quantity prescribed by the city and of
sufficient clarity to illustrate the method of construction, design,
location, dimensions, nature, and purpose of the proposed encroachment and
its relation to existing and proposed facilities in the right-of-way.



   (C)   The applicant shall also enclose with or attach to the
application a certified statement that the applicant will obtain any and all
other licenses, permits, or approvals required by the city or any other
governmental agency or other private party except as required under §
151.084(F).



   (D)   No substantial changes shall be made in the plans, design,
location, dimensions, character, or duration of the encroachment or use as
granted by the permit except upon authorization of the city. Any changes made
without prior authorization are made at the applicant’s risk.



(Prior Code, § 18-2-2)



§ 151.005  OTHER LICENSES.



   An encroachment permit shall not be issued until any such other
required licenses, permits, or approvals are first obtained and certification
thereof filed with the city, provided, however, some very complex
encroachment permits for proposals also needing a license from the city may,
at the discretion of the Department, be processed simultaneously with the
application for the license.



(Prior Code, § 18-2-3)



§ 151.006  DETERMINATION OF APPROPRIATE PERMIT, NEED FOR A LICENSE, AND
APPROPRIATE ENCROACHMENT FEES.



   (A)   Upon review of the application and other required documents,
unless otherwise determined by City Council action, the Department shall
determine which class of encroachment permit is appropriate, whether the use
sought to be made of the city’s highways requires a license or use
agreement, which of the fees adopted by Council resolution apply to this
permit, whether other fees, charges, or taxes apply to the use, and which
approval process must be followed for that application. Additional licenses
or fees may be required pursuant to other provisions of this code or other
state or federal laws.



   (B)   If a person files applications for more than one type of
encroachment permit or one or more licenses together with an application for
an encroachment permit, the Department may combine the applications and issue
one encroachment permit authorizing encroachments to be used for more than
one license or franchise. In no event, however, may required licenses be
combined, and applicants shall be required to apply for and obtain a separate
license or franchise for each activity as required herein.



   (C)   The City Council will establish a base application processing
fee to be paid for each type of encroachment permit, however, for complex
applications the non-refundable application processing fee shall be in an
amount established by the Department as necessary to recover all reasonably
related costs, including outside consultants, incurred by the city to review
and process the application.



   (D)   Applications for encroachment permits and all documents and
other information required to be submitted will be reviewed by such city
staff or retained consultants as deemed necessary by the Department. Based on
the review, the encroachment permit application may be approved,
conditionally approved, or denied by the Department. If the city finds that
the application is in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, it
may issue a permit for the use of encroachment, attaching such conditions as
are necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the public, including
but not limited to aesthetic considerations. If the city finds the
application is in conflict with the provisions of this chapter or any state
or federal law, the permit shall be denied and the applicant given written
reasons for the denial. No permit is valid unless signed by an authorized
representative of the city.



(Prior Code, § 18-2-4)



§ 151.007  NON-INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC WORKS.



   No permit shall be granted for a use which would unduly interfere with
the public works of the city, endanger the public, or permanently restrict,
block, or interfere with traffic.



(Prior Code, § 18-2-5)



§ 151.008  TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF ALL ENCROACHMENT PERMITS.



   (A)   Indemnification. No encroachment permit shall be issued until
the permittee has executed and filed with the city an indemnity agreement
satisfactory to the City Attorney. However, in the event that an encroachment
permit is issued and the permittee has not executed and filed the indemnity
agreement, the commencement of work thereunder shall be the permittee’s
agreement to indemnify the city as further set forth herein. The permittee
shall be responsible for and indemnify the city from all claims, demands,
expenses, or liability including but not limited to personal injury and
property damage arising out of or related to work performed by the permittee
under the permit, arising out of the failure on the permittee’s part to
perform work under the permit, and arising from or caused by the structures
or encroachments placed in, on, or under the city’s right-of-way. If any
claim of such liability is made against the city, its officers, or employees,
the permittee shall defend, indemnify, and hold the city harmless from the
claim, including claims alleging the negligence of the city, its officers,
and employees.



   (B)   Insurance.



      (1)   No applicant shall be entitled to an encroachment permit
unless he or she shall have filed and maintained on file with the city a
certificate certifying that he or she and/or his or her company or business
firm carried public liability and property damage insurance issued by an
insurance carrier authorized to do business in the state, insuring the
applicant and the city and its agents, against loss by reason of injuries to
or death of persons, or damages to property arising out of or related to work
performed by the applicant, its agents, or employees while performing any
work under the permit. The insurance shall be primary and provide coverage
for all liability assumed by the applicant under division (A) of this
section, and shall be provided by the permittee in the following minimum
amounts:



         (a)   One million dollars for death of, or injury to,
any one person in any one accident;



         (b)   One million dollars for death of, or injuries to,
more than one person in any one  accident; and



         (c)   One million dollars for damages to property. The
city may require higher insurance coverage when appropriate.



      (2)   Failure by the applicant to provide the city with such a
certificate, and failure by the city to demand the filing by the permittee of
such a certificate before such a permit is issued, shall not be deemed to
waive the permittee’s obligation to provide the insurance. The insurance
certificate shall remain in effect and be kept on file with the city until
all work to be performed by the permittee under the permit has been
completed. When an encroachment involves a permanent obstruction, the
insurance certificate requirements shall remain in effect until the
construction is removed. The insurance certificate shall provide that
coverage cannot be canceled or expire without providing ten days’ written
notice of the action to the city.



   (C)   Performance bonds or other financial security. The Department
may require as a condition of issuing any encroachment permit, the applicant
to post performance bonds or other approved financial security to ensure
satisfactory completion of any work to be performed in, on, or under any
public place, highway, or right-of-way and to ensure adequate maintenance of
encroachments.



   (D)   Commencement of work. The permittee shall begin the work or
use authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter within 180 days
from date of issuance, unless a different period is stated in the permit. If
the work or use is not so begun, then the permit shall become void. The
permittee shall complete the work or use authorized by the permit within the
time specified in the permit. Where an encroachment involves a permanent
installation or obstruction, conditions so specified in the permit, license,
or other agreement with the city shall remain in effect until the
construction or obstruction is removed.



   (E)   Term. All permits shall specify the time, not longer than one
year, within which work or construction in the highway must be completed.
Permits for continued use of the highway shall be issued for a specified
period of time. All permits may be renewed or extended upon such terms as are
consistent with the provisions of this chapter.



   (F)   Relocation. Any encroachment including but limited to pipes,
conduit, wire, cable, appurtenances, or other structures or facilities
installed or maintained in, on, or under any public place, right-of-way, or
highway, shall be relocated, at the sole expense of the permittee, as may be
necessary to facilitate a public purpose or any city project. The pavement
restoration fee shall be waived by the Public Works Director for any
relocation required by the city and is not an improvement for the owner of
the facility. The relocations shall be under the same terms and conditions as
the initial installation allowed pursuant to permit. The Department will not
exercise the right to require the relocation in an unreasonable or arbitrary
manner.



   (G)   Assignment. Encroachment permits shall be applied for by and
issued to the person or company who will make use of the permit and not to
the contractor who has been employed to construct the improvements, provided,
however, all contractors and subcontractors who will be performing work in
the highway shall be named and identified in the encroachment permit
application. The rights granted by the permit shall not be assignable without
the express prior written consent of the Department.



   (H)   Supplemental. The Department may require additional conditions
for the issuance of a permit as are applicable and necessary to meet specific
situations, for public safety, and to ensure compliance with this chapter and
all other city, state, or federal regulations.



   (I)   Acceptance. Acceptance of any permit granted under the
provisions of this chapter shall not become effective until written
acceptance thereof shall have been filed by the permittee with the
Department. By accepting this permit, the permittee covenants and agrees to
perform and be bound by each and all of the terms and conditions imposed by
the city, and the permit.



   (J)   Conflict. In the event there is a conflict between the
provisions of this chapter and the provisions contained in a franchise or
license granted by the city to an applicant, the provisions of the franchise
or license shall prevail.



(Prior Code, § 18-2-6)



§ 151.009  TERMS OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   All work done or uses made under the permits shall be to the
satisfaction of the city and shall be in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the encroachment permit and all adopted regulations, standards,
and specifications of the city including the regulations and specifications
for pavement restoration. Installation of all facilities shall meet the
standard specifications, details, and requirements of the Department. The
Department may require a permittee to retain an approved utility line
identification or locator service such as Arizona Blue Stake.



   (B)   The permittee shall, to the satisfaction of the city, repair
all water and sanitary service lines, streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, or
other property, structures, improvements, or facilities damaged by
construction or operation pursuant to the permit. All such repairs shall be
done in accordance with city standard specifications, details, and
requirements of the Department.



   (C)   No pavement cuts in new streets.



      (1)   Permission to excavate in new streets shall not be
granted for two years after completion of street construction,
reconstruction, or renovation (major rehabilitation). Utilities shall
determine alternate methods of making necessary repairs to avoid excavating
in new streets. Exceptions to the above are as follows:



         (a)   Emergency which endangers life or property;



         (b)   Interruption of essential utility service;



         (c)   Work that is mandated by city, county, state, or
federal legislation;



         (d)   Service for buildings where no other feasible
means of providing service exists; and



         (e)   The Public Works Director may authorize street
cuts at his or her discretion if unplanned/unknown conditions occur resulting
in the city’s best interest to authorize a street cut.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section, a street is considered
“new” when it is first constructed, when it is reconstructed, or when it
is renovated. Renovation shall mean a major rehabilitation which may include
mill and overlay or other similar roadway improvement work that physically
modifies the surface of the roadway prior to applying new roadway surface or
other similar work as determined by the City Public Works Director/designee.
Reconstruction shall mean completely rebuilding all the lanes of the street
by removing all the pavement and aggregate base course material,
re-compacting the sub-base, and restoring the base material and then
completely re-paving for a distance approved by the City Public Works
Director. The Public Works Director/designee shall determine the date of
completion for new streets and the date each street was last reconstructed or
renovated, based on the date the street was opened or reopened for traffic.



      (3)   In addition to the payment of the pavement restoration
fee (as defined herein), a condition of any street cut permit for cutting the
pavement of a street within one year of construction, reconstruction, or
renovation, shall be that the permittee renovate such street for a minimum of
the full width of all lanes directly impacted by the cut(s) (outside lane
includes to the curb) and for arterial streets and for collector streets as
more specifically directed by the City Public Works Director/designee. Slurry
seal, micro seal, or other methods of sealing may be required as directed by
the Public Works Director/designee. All permits which are issued under
divisions (A) through (C) above shall be in accordance with the city approved
Standard Details and Specifications.



   (D)   Pavement restoration fee.



      (1)   Whenever any encroachment permit is required to cut
into, open, bore, attach to, or make any break or disturbance to the street
pavement of any arterial or collector street within the city, the permittee
shall, in addition to the repairs required by this city code, pay to the city
the pavement restoration fee established by Council resolution in the City
Fee Schedule. The pavement restoration fee adopted by Council resolution
shall be reviewed annually with the budget for street repair.



      (2)   The pavement restoration fee shall be paid prior to or
at the time a street cut permit is issued. In the event changes or amendments
to the street cut permit are required which would result in a change in the
amount of the pavement restoration fee, an adjusted fee shall be assessed.
Utilities that possess a franchise or license agreement for service within
the city and have demonstrated reliable on time payment may request billing
on a monthly basis for pavement restoration fee.



      (3)   The Public Works Director may authorize or waive payment
of the fee by the city upon finding that a street cut was made on an
emergency basis to avoid a threat to public health, life, or safety, or in an
extraordinary circumstance the fee may be paid by the city upon approval of
the City Council.



   (E)   Construction signs required for work. Whenever any work which
requires a pavement cut is being done in the city streets, easements, or
right-of-way for which approval by the city of a traffic control plan is
required, the person or persons performing the work shall maintain at the
site of such work at all times during which any such work is being done,
signage meeting the requirements set forth below and providing information to
the public as follows:



      (1)   If the work will take one week or longer to perform, the
signage shall:



         (a)   Be installed so that the bottom of the sign is at
lease seven feet above grade, or as otherwise approved by the City Public
Works Director/designee;



         (b)   Be at least three feet by five feet in size or
large enough to contain all the information required below whichever is
larger;



         (c)   Be placed in such positions that they can be read
by traffic from each direction;



         (d)   Be colored “construction orange” with block
letters;



         (e)   Have block letters at least six inches in height;
and



         (f)   Contain the following information: the name of the
company for whom the work is being performed, the name of the contractor
actually performing the work, a general description of the work to be done,
the time frame within which the work will be performed, i.e. the date work
will commence and the date all work will be completed, and a 24-hour contact
phone number where persons may speak with a representative of the company for
whom the work is being performed or may leave a request to speak with such a
representative and for which all calls will be returned by such a
representative within 24 hours.



      (2)   If the work will take less than one week to perform the
signage shall:



         (a)   Be installed on temporary supports at an approved
location;



         (b)   Be placed in such positions that they can be read
by traffic from each direction;



         (c)   Be colored “construction orange” with black
letters;



         (d)   Have block letters at least six inches in height;
and



         (e)   Contain the following information: the name of the
company for whom the work is being performed and a 24-hour contact phone
number where persons may speak with a representative of the company for whom
the work is being performed or may leave a request to speak with such a
representative and for which all calls will be returned by such a
representative within 24 hours.



(Prior Code, § 18-2-7)



§ 151.010  SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION WORK.



   (A)   The city may make any inspections deemed necessary in
connection with permits issued under this subchapter. During the
construction, the city will inspect all trenching, backfilling, street or
pavement cuts, and other work as deemed necessary by the Department. Bus
shelters and other construction utilizing electrical connections must obtain
an electrical inspection from the city.



   (B)   In addition to obtaining an encroachment permit pursuant to
this chapter, before beginning any excavation in any city right-of-way,
construction of or on any highway, sidewalk, curb, gutter, or driveway
approach, planting, trimming, or removing trees, making, placing, or causing
an obstruction in any city right-of-way, the permittee shall notify the city
at least 24 hours in advance of the exact date and time work will commence
unless, in the case of a continuing maintenance permit this requirement is
not imposed. Upon completion of all work authorized in the permit, the
permittee shall notify the city.



   (C)   No work shall be deemed to be completed until notification of
completion is given and the work is approved by the city.



(Prior Code, § 18-2-8)



§ 151.011  ABANDONMENT OR REMOVAL.



   (A)   Upon the expiration of any encroachment permit, if the
permittee shall not have acquired an extension or renewal thereof and
accepted the same, it may remove its structures, cable, equipment, or other
facilities and appurtenances. The Public Works Director may allow abandonment
in place if the structures, cable, equipment, or other facilities do not
conflict with future projects.



   (B)   If the permittee abandons use of structures, cable, equipment,
or other facilities placed in the right-of-way pursuant to the permit, then
at city’s option, city may require the permittee to remove all such
structures, cable, equipment, or facilities or may elect to accept ownership,
in which case, title to the structure, cable equipment, or other facilities
shall vest in the city. Abandonment shall be presumed if the permittee does
not remove its property, equipment, structures, facilities, or other property
placed in the highway, within 180 days after expiration or termination of the
permit. The permit may specify a different time period after which
abandonment may be presumed.



(Prior Code, § 18-2-9)



§ 151.012  CONDEMNATION BY CITY.



   Nothing in the permit shall be construed to deny the city the right to
acquire the property of the permittee by the exercise of the right of eminent
domain in accordance with the Arizona Revised Statutes.



(Prior Code, § 18-2-10)



§ 151.013  ENCROACHMENT PERMIT IS REVOCABLE.



   (A)   All encroachment permits may be revoked by the Department when
the right-of-way, highway, or any portion thereof, occupied and used by the
permittee is needed or required for a public use, and upon notice from the
city, the permittee shall promptly remove all property belonging to the
permittee from the right-of-way.



   (B)   If at any time the Department finds that the delay in the
completion of the work or use authorized by an encroachment permit is due to
lack of diligence on the part of the permittee, it may cancel the permit and
restore the right-of-way to its former condition unless the restoration is
completed by the permittee. The permittee shall reimburse the city upon
demand for all expenses incurred by the city in restoring the public place or
right-of-way.



(Prior Code, § 18-2-11)



§ 151.014  TERMINATION.



   All permits granted hereunder are subject to termination by the
Department if:



   (A)   The permittee fails to comply with the requirements of the
permit or this chapter or any other rule or regulation validly adopted by the
City Council applicable to the permit granted hereunder; or



   (B)   The permittee fails to pay when due, any fee as required by
the permit or this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 18-2-12)



§ 151.015  APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Department acting under this
chapter may appeal the decision to the City Council. The aggrieved person
shall file notice, in writing, with the City Clerk within seven days after
final action of the Department. The City Council may affirm, modify, or
reverse the action of the Department. The decision of the City Council shall
be final.



(Prior Code, § 18-2-13)



§ 151.016  CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.



   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
code, the Director of Public Works and/or designee may order the unauthorized
work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in the doing
or causing the unauthorized work to be done, and any such person shall
forthwith stop the unauthorized work. Any person performing work in the
highway shall have a copy of a valid encroachment permit issued by the city
at the site and make the permit available for inspection by the city at all
times work is being performed or property or equipment is located in the
highway.



(Prior Code, § 18-2-14)



MINOR AND OTHER MISCELLANEOUS ENCROACHMENT PERMITS



§ 151.030  MINOR ENCROACHMENT PERMIT, CLASS 1 PERMIT.



   Upon review of the application, the Department shall determine whether
a minor encroachment permit is suitable for the encroachment requested in the
application. A minor encroachment permit may be issued for temporary, short
term, small, or inconsequential encroachments. Some examples of encroachments
that may be suitable for a minor encroachment permit are: public telephones;
news racks; placing temporary traffic barricades in the street; and placing
merchandise on the sidewalk for a temporary sale. The determination by the
Department regarding whether a minor encroachment is appropriate shall be
final.



(Prior Code, Art. 18-3)



§ 151.031  CRITERIA FOR MINOR ENCROACHMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   The intent of these standards and requirements is to ensure
safe access and movement for pedestrians and motorists alike, and to ensure
uniform placement, aesthetics, and maintenance, while protecting city
liability when the items are placed within public right-of-way. It is not the
purpose of this section to prevent those encroachments which serve a public
purpose, such as public telephones and news racks, from using the public
highway but only to regulate the uses to the extent necessary to protect the
public safety.



   (B)   For those commercial uses such as sidewalk sales, the purpose
is to ensure not only the public safety but also that public property is not
allowed to be used by the permittee to gain an unfair economic advantage over
competitors. For that reason time and use restrictions will be imposed.



(Prior Code, § 18-3-1)



§ 151.032  CLASS 1 PERMIT PROCESS.



   Persons desiring a minor encroachment permit (Class1), shall make
application to the Department together with a signed indemnification
agreement in the form prescribed by the city and proof of insurance in the
amounts established by the city’s Public Works Director for the use. The
application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application processing
fee in an amount established by Council resolution as necessary to recover
the costs incurred by the city to review and process the application. The
Department shall review the application to ensure the indemnification and
insurance requirements have been met and the proposed placement of the
encroachment for public safety considerations and approve, conditionally
approve, or deny the permit.



(Prior Code, § 18-3-2)



§ 151.033  STREET CLOSURES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD BLOCK PARTY.



   (A)   Persons desiring to temporarily close a neighborhood street
for a block party shall obtain a permit from the city’s Police Department
pursuant to this section. There is no fee for this permit.



   (B)   The applicant must comply with the following additional
requirements:



      (1)   Obtain, complete, and sign an agreement to adhere and
comply with the requirements as set forth herein;



      (2)   Obtain the signatures of every property owner within the
area/block, on the form provided, consenting to the traffic closure;



      (3)   Submit agreement with attachments to the city five
working days in advance of the date of closure;



      (4)   Sign for and provide for the pick-up and return of
street barricades. All barricades shall be returned to the City Street
Division the next normal business day following the closure date;



      (5)   Erect the necessary portable barricades for street
closure;



      (6)   Remove all barricades with one hour of the closure time;



      (7)   Under no circumstances will the block party extend
beyond 11:00 p.m.;



      (8)   Assume all liability and agree not to hold the city
responsible for any accidents, bodily injury, or damage to private property
resulting from street closure as stated on the attached agreement;



      (9)   The applicant/responsible person will be billed and
shall reimburse the city for all actual costs for the repair or replacement
of any damaged or missing barricades and any city property that may be
damaged or destroyed during the block party (i.e., stop signs, speed signs,
and the like); and



      (10)   The applicant/responsible person will be responsible
for cleaning the street of debris and other garbage.



   (C)   The city will do the following:



      (1)   The city will provide the applicant/responsible person
with a copy of these regulations at the time the applicant obtains a street
closure permit and agreement to ensure understanding and compliance of these
regulations;



      (2)   The Public Works Department will verify addresses listed
on the street closure permit and agreement submitted by the applicant;



      (3)   The Director of Public Works will approve/disapprove all
applications for street closure/block party. Note: approval will not be
granted for closure of collector streets nor the first block of any street
where it intersects with a major street;



      (4)   The city will provide the necessary street barricades to
the applicant upon receipt of notification from the Police Department. The
Public Works Department will notify the Street Division 24 hours in advance
of the applicant securing necessary barricades; and



      (5)   The Police Department will notify the Fire and Public
Works Departments of times, date, and location by sending a copy of the
approved street closure agreement.



(Prior Code, § 18-3-3)



§ 151.034  PAVEMENT RESTORATION AND FEES.



   If the proposed encroachment includes cutting into, attachment to, or
any break in the sidewalk or street pavement, the permittee shall be required
to pay the pavement damage fee established by Council and to restore the
pavement when the encroachment is removed in accordance with the pavement
restoration regulations and specifications adopted by the city.



(Prior Code, § 18-3-4)



§ 151.035  SPECIAL CONDITION.



   Class 1 encroachment permits shall comply with the special conditions
set forth in divisions (D) and (E) of § 151.052 herein.



ENCROACHMENT PERMIT FOR SIDEWALK FURNITURE, CLASS 2 PERMIT



§ 151.050  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   Upon review of the application, the Department shall determine whether
a sidewalk furniture encroachment permit is suitable for the encroachment
requested in the application. Examples of the type of encroachments which may
be approved by this permit are as follows:



   (A)   Sidewalk furniture such as tables, umbrella, chairs, benches,
planters, and flower pots, all of which must be moveable;



   (B)   Ornamentations such as clocks, statues, totem poles, barber
shop poles, flags, and seasonal decorations, none of which may constitute
outdoor merchandise display. In cases where the ornamentation is a symbol of
the business activity, e.g., a barber pole for a barber shop, a clock for a
watch shop, and the like, the ornamentation shall be considered as a sign
element, subject to the total allowable sign face area as measured in a front
elevation view, in accordance with the standards set forth herein;



   (C)   Awnings, canopies, porte-cocheres; and



   (D)   Bus shelters, bicycle racks, and lockers.



(Prior Code, Art. 18-4)



§ 151.051  CRITERIA FOR SIDEWALK FURNITURE ENCROACHMENT PERMIT, CLASS 2.



   Sidewalk furniture in the central downtown area is allowed due to the
unique characteristics of that neighborhood, to encourage economic
development in the downtown area and because of the constraints caused by the
older style of development. The intent of these standards and requirements is
to ensure safe access and movement for pedestrians and motorists alike, and
to ensure uniform placement, aesthetics, and maintenance, while protecting
city liability when the items are placed within public right-of-way.



(Prior Code, § 18-4-1)



§ 151.052  SPECIAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR THE PERMIT DESCRIBED IN THIS
SUBCHAPTER.



   (A)   Business signs on sidewalks and colonnades are subject to the
provisions and restrictions of §§ 154.125 through 154.136. A-frame signs
are prohibited in the public right-of-way, and on private property if readily
visible from the public right-of-way. Merchandise display within sidewalks
and colonnades are prohibited other than for special events. None of the
permitted elements may be for the purpose of serving or consuming alcoholic
beverages within the public right-of-way.



   (B)   Permits for sidewalk furniture may only be granted for
sidewalks adjoining property classified as Neighborhood Commercial (C-1),
Community Commercial (C-2), Regional Commercial (C-3), or Planned Area
Development (P.A.D.) for commercial retail use, provided, however, bus
shelters, bicycle racks, and lockers may be granted in all zones.



   (C)   Furniture may only be placed on the sidewalk or colonnade
adjoining a building owned or occupied by the permittee except for bus
shelters, bicycle racks, and lockers.



   (D)   Any and all elements placed on the sidewalk or within the
colonnade shall be maintained in a state of cleanliness and good repair, and
shall not cause conditions of trash, litter, debris, noise, glare, dust, or
other nuisance. Responsibility for the maintenance shall rest with the owner
of the permitted elements, or with the person(s) responsible for the
placement if different from the owner.



   (E)   Permits shall be conditioned to ensure that placement of
furniture and the like on the public right-of-way does not interfere with,
impede, or inconvenience the use of the sidewalk or public way by the public.



      (1)   A minimum five-foot unobstructed sidewalk width parallel
to storefronts and free from any parking overhang shall be maintained at all
times, and in addition, a minimum five-foot wide unobstructed access way
shall be maintained to the street and parking area(s), directly aligned with
the storefront entry.



      (2)   A minimum seven-foot vertical clearance shall be
maintained for any element such as flags, flower pots, or other
ornamentations that project more than 12 inches horizontally, mounted on
exterior walls or columns, or hung from canopy ceilings. In addition, all
installations and mountings shall provide clearances in conformance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and successor amendments. The method
of any installation or mounting on any part of the city-owned colonnade may
not interfere with the city’s ability to maintain the colonnade.



      (3)   No placement(s) shall encroach upon any required parking
space(s), landscape area, fire lane, handicapped access ramp, or handicapped
access route.



      (4)   All placements shall maintain safe visibility of
vehicular traffic and pedestrians, in accordance with standards prescribed by
the city’s Street Design Manual and Standard Details.



      (5)   All placements shall maintain clear visibility and
access to all traffic signs, control devices, and other safety installations.



      (6)   All modification(s) to the exterior color, building
material, or other architectural feature shall be consistent with any
development plan previously approved by the city.



(Prior Code, § 18-4-2)



§ 151.053  CLASS 2 PERMIT PROCESS.



   (A)   Persons desiring a sidewalk furniture encroachment permit,
Class 2, shall make application to the Department together with a signed
indemnification agreement in the form prescribed by the city and proof of
insurance in the amounts established by the City Risk Manager for the use.
The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application
processing fee in an amount established by Council resolution as necessary to
recover the costs incurred by the city to review and process the applications.



   (B)   The Department shall review the application to ensure the
indemnification and insurance requirements have been met and the proposed
placement of the encroachment complies with the requirements set forth herein
and for public safety considerations and approve, conditionally approve, or
deny the permit.



(Prior Code, § 18-4-3)



§ 151.054  PAVEMENT RESTORATION AND FEES.



   If the proposed encroachment includes cutting into, attachment to, or
any break in the sidewalk or street pavement, the permittee shall be required
to pay the pavement damage fee established by Council and to restore the
pavement when the encroachment is removed in accordance with the pavement
restoration regulations and specifications adopted by the city. Other fees,
charges, or taxes may be imposed depending on the use made of the city
highways.



(Prior Code, § 18-4-4)



LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE ENCROACHMENT PERMIT, CLASS 3 PERMIT



§ 151.065  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   Licensed landscape contractors and utility companies, upon written
application to and approval by the Department, may be granted continuing
encroachment permits to perform landscaping, planting, trimming of trees, and
landscaping maintenance in public rights-of-way and highways without securing
a new encroachment permit for each separate job. Homeowners associations
doing or causing landscaping work to be done must obtain a permit in
accordance with this chapter. Individual and private residents doing work
adjacent to their own residences need not obtain a permit but must not
interfere with traffic and create any dangerous condition. Any work performed
in public rights-of-way or highways shall comply with city standard
specifications for planting and landscaping. Permission granted to a
homeowner’s association, licensed contractor, or utility company shall
continue until revoked. The Department may revoke any permit issued under
this section for non-conformance with the provisions of this chapter or any
other applicable regulation.



(Prior Code, Art. 18-5)



§ 151.066  CLASS 3 PERMIT PROCESS.



   (A)   Persons desiring a landscape maintenance encroachment permit,
(Class 3), shall make application to the Department together with a signed
indemnification agreement in the form prescribed by the city and proof of
insurance in the amounts established by the city for such use. The
application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application processing
fee in an amount established by Council resolution as necessary to recover
the costs incurred by the city to review and process the application.



   (B)   The Department shall review the application to ensure the
indemnification and insurance requirements have been met, and approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the permit.



(Prior Code, § 18-5-1)



TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES, CLASS 4 ENCROACHMENT PERMIT



§ 151.080  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   The Department shall determine, through the application process,
whether an applicant meets the definition of a telecommunications services
provider.



(Prior Code, Art. 18-6)



§ 151.081  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish policy
governing the management of highways for the provision of telecommunications
services to enable the city to:



      (1)   Issue licenses and franchises on a competitively neutral
and non-discriminatory basis, to telecommunications corporations who use the
highways to provide telecommunications services, except in cases where state
law forbids establishment of a license or franchise requirement;



      (2)   Manage the highways in order to minimize the impact and
cost to the city citizens of the placement of telecommunications facilities
within highways;



      (3)   Manage the highways so as to maximize their efficient
use, thereby minimizing the foreclosure of future additional uses of each
rights-of-way; and



      (4)   Minimize congestion, inconvenience, visual impact, and
other adverse effects from the use on the city’s highways.



   (B)   The City Council finds that the city’s highways constitute a
valuable public asset:



      (1)   Having been acquired and maintained by the city over
many years at great taxpayer expense;



      (2)   Providing uniquely valuable property that private
telecommunications providers may wish to use for profit-making purposes that
may not necessarily benefit all the residents of the city; and



      (3)   Comprising significant assets which the city must manage
as a public fiduciary trust to enhance the public health, safety, and welfare.



   (C)   Therefore, in this subchapter, the City Council intends:



      (1)   To ensure that locally elected officials manage local
highways consistent with their fiduciary trust obligations;



      (2)   To ensure compliance with public health, safety, and
welfare measures for highways;



      (3)   To encourage public-private partnerships to provide
telecommunications facilities needed for the most cost-effective delivery of
public services, including schools, libraries, police and fire protection, as
well as private services;



      (4)   To conserve the limited physical capacity of the
highways held in public trust by the city; and



      (5)   To assure that the city’s current and ongoing costs of
granting and regulating private access to and use of the highways are fully
paid by the persons seeking the access and causing the costs.



(Prior Code, § 18-6-1)



§ 151.082  TELECOMMUNICATION LICENSE.



   (A)   No person shall place, install, construct, operate, or
maintain any telecommunications equipment, facilities, or system for
telecommunications services in, upon, or under the surface of any highway,
public place, street, or right-of-way, unless a telecommunications license,
franchise, or state grant has first been obtained in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. In addition to obtaining the telecommunications
license as provided herein, the person must also obtain a telecommunications
encroachment permit, Class 4, as required herein.



   (B)   A telecommunications provider may obtain a telecommunications
license by application filed with the City Manager, pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter or at the applicant’s choice, may obtain a
telecommunications franchise from the electorate at the provider’s expense,
pursuant to Article XIII of the Arizona Constitution and the provisions of
this chapter. Any telecommunications corporation that was providing
telecommunications service within the State of Arizona as of October 31, 1997
pursuant to a grant made to it or its lawful predecessors prior to the
effective date of the Arizona Constitution may continue to provide
telecommunications services pursuant to that state grant, until the State
grant is lawfully repealed, revoked, or amended, and need not obtain any
further authorization from the city to provide telecommunications services;
provided, however, that the entity must in all other respects comply with the
requirements applicable to telecommunications corporations, as provided in
A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 5, Article 7.



   (C)   A telecommunications license pursuant to this chapter shall
not authorize the use of the highways to provide any other service; nor shall
the issuance of the same invalidate any franchise, license, or permit that
authorizes the use of the highways for such other services; nor shall the
fact that a telecommunication corporations hold a franchise, license, or
permit to make any other use of the highway or to provide any other service,
authorize installation, maintenance, construction, or operation of
telecommunications facilities in any highway in the city, or permit the
license to provide telecommunications services by means of the facilities
without obtaining a telecommunications license or franchise hereunder.



   (D)   Any telecommunications license or franchise granted shall not
be exclusive.



(Prior Code, § 18-6-2)



§ 151.083  APPLICATION FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE OR FRANCHISE.



   A telecommunications provider desiring a telecommunications license or
franchise shall file an application with the City Manager requesting, at the
applicant’s election, either a franchise or license, in the form prescribed
by the City Manager, together with that part of the non-refundable
application processing fee in the amount of $75. The full fee shall be paid
on demand from the city and shall be in an amount established by the City
Manager as necessary to recover all related costs directly incurred by the
city to review and process the application. At the discretion of the
Department, an application for a telecommunications license may be processed
simultaneously with the same applicant’s application for an encroachment
permit for the installation of the telecommunication system facilities. The
city may retain outside experts to assist in the review and processing of
complex telecommunications license and encroachment permit applications and
all related costs incurred by the city for the experts shall be recovered
through the application processing fee.



(Prior Code, § 18-6-3)



§ 151.084  TERMS AND CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO TELECOMMUNICATION LICENSES.



   (A)   The applicant shall maintain insurance of the types and in the
amounts specified by the city, and provide proof of insurance as required by
the city; post performance bonds and security funds required; shall agree to
fully indemnify the city, its officers, agents, boards, and commissions, in a
form satisfactory to the city; and shall agree that it shall have no recourse
whatsoever against the city, its officers, agents, boards, commissions
agents, or employees for any loss, costs, expense, or damages arising out of
any provision or requirement of the city because of the enforcement of the
license or franchise, or because of defects in this chapter; or the license
or franchise issued or as a result of any damage that may result from the
city’s exercise of its rights under the license, or applicable provisions
of law.



   (B)   The initial license term shall be for a period of five years
and may be renewed for five-year terms.



   (C)   A telecommunication license is personal to the licensee. In
the event of a transfer, the transferee shall submit a binding agreement to
the city stating that it has read, accepts, and agrees to be bound by the
license, and assumes all obligations, liabilities, and responsibility under
the license for the acts and omissions of the licensee, known and unknown,
for all purposes and the licensee gives written notice of the transfer or
change of control to the city.



   (D)   The licensee shall produce books and records for the city’s
inspection and copying, prepare reports, respond to questions, and permit the
city to have access to its facilities as the city may request in order to
determine whether the licensee has complied with its obligations under the
license or other applicable law or regulation.



   (E)   The applicant shall agree to maintain accurate maps showing
the location of all its facilities including all the facilities it will use
in the highways within the city, and to comply with such other mapping
requirements that the city may establish from time to time. The applicant
shall provide map information upon request by the city at no cost.



   (F)   The applicant shall provide proof to the city that the
applicant has received a certificate of public convenience and necessity from
the Arizona Corporation Commission which authorizes the applicant to provide
telecommunications services within the city.



   (G)   The applicant shall agree to comply with highway use
requirements that the city may establish from time to time.



   (H)   The applicant shall agree to comply with and be bound by the
administrative and enforcement provisions as may be prescribed from time to
time by the city.



   (I)   The licensee and the city shall meet at periods not exceeding
three years or upon request of either to discuss changes in the
telecommunications laws, regulations, technology, competing services, the
needs of the community, and other factors impacting telecommunications. As a
result of these discussions, this subchapter or any license granted hereunder
may be modified by the city and the licensee to respond to the change in
laws, regulations, technology, competing services, the right-of-way
management needs of the community, or other factions impacting
telecommunications.



   (J)   In the event there is a conflict between the provisions of
this subchapter and the provisions contained in a franchise or license
granted by the city to an applicant, the provisions of the franchise or
license shall prevail.



(Prior Code, § 18-6-4)



§ 151.085  APPLICATION PROCESS FOR TELECOMMUNICATION LICENSE.



   Applications for a telecommunications license shall be reviewed by such
outside expert consultants as deemed necessary by the City Manager, who shall
set the application for hearing by the City Council and make recommendations
to the Council who shall approve, deny, or conditionally approve the
application. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city need not issue or renew
a telecommunications license, or schedule a franchise election if the
applicant has previously had its telecommunications license or franchise
revoked.



(Prior Code, § 18-6-5)



§ 151.086  REVOCATION.



   (A)   Every license shall be subject to revocation, subject to
notice and hearing as set forth herein, for the following reasons.



      (1)   The license fails to comply with the terms and
conditions of the license or other applicable law.



      (2)   The licensed fails to make the payments in the amounts
and at the times specified in the license agreement or in this subchapter.



      (3)   The licensee ceases to be a telecommunications services
provider in the city.



      (4)   The licensee fails to maintain current, accurate
as-built plans and maps showing the location of all facilities installed or
constructed in the city.



   (B)   Provided, however, a license shall not be revoked unless the
licensee is given written notice of the defect in performance and fails to
cure the defect within 60 days of the notice, except where the city finds
that the defect in performance is due to intentional misconduct, is a
violation of criminal law, or is part of a pattern of violations where the
licensee has already had notice and opportunity to cure.



(Prior Code, § 18-6-6)



§ 151.087  APPLICATION FOR A TELECOMMUNICATIONS ENCROACHMENT PERMIT.



   A person desiring a telecommunications encroachment permit shall file
an application with the Department, in the form prescribed by the Department,
together with that part of the non-refundable application processing fee
established by Council resolution. The full fee shall be paid on demand from
the city and shall be in an amount established by the City Manager as
necessary to recover all actual costs incurred by the city to review and
process the application.



(Prior Code, § 18-6-7)



§ 151.088  REQUIRED INFORMATION FOR LICENSE AND PERMIT.



   Applications for a telecommunications encroachment permit or for a
telecommunications license or franchise shall contain the information listed
below unless waived by the Department as not applicable to the application
being filed. For example, when only a permit is necessary, the information
listed in division (B) would not be required and, when only a license is
being applied for, the information listed in divisions (C), (D), (E), and (F)
would not be required:



   (A)   The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the applicant,
including those for responsible parties during the application, construction,
and implementation process. This includes a 24-hour emergency telephone
contact;



   (B)   A copy of the applicant’s valid certificate of public
convenience and necessity which has been issued by the Arizona Corporation
Commission;



   (C)   A detailed description and map indicating all areas proposed
to be served and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all
equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire service area
together with a chart comparing the schedule with the city’s proposed
street maintenance schedule;



   (D)   A detailed, site-specific description and map indicating each
place where the applicant desires to encroach, every street, right-of-way, or
easement which may be affected and what equipment, cable, conduit, structure,
or other facility applicant desires to construct;



   (E)   The name and license number of the contractor who will be
performing the work; and



   (F)   A copy or abstract of any agreement covering the permit area,
if existing between the applicant and the local telephone and/or other
utilities providing for the use of any facilities of the utility including
but not limited to poles, lines, or conduits.



(Prior Code, § 18-6-8)



§ 151.089  APPLICATION PROCESS FOR TELECOMMUNICATION ENCROACHMENT PERMIT.



   Applications for telecommunication encroachment permits shall be
reviewed by such outside expert consultants and other city staff, as deemed
necessary by the Department, who shall approve, deny, or conditionally
approve the applications unless the encroachment permit application was
combined with an application for a telecommunication license, in which event
the City Council shall approve, deny, or conditionally approve the two
applications together.



(Prior Code, § 18-6-9)



§ 151.090  COMPENSATION AND OTHER FEES.



   (A)   Entities subject to this permit shall pay:



       (1)   The encroachment permit application processing fee
which covers the actual cost of reviewing and processing the encroachment
permit application;



      (2)   The inspection fee which covers the actual cost of
inspection of the construction, work, or installation to ensure it meets all
city requirements;



      (3)   A fee to recover all of the actual costs associated with
construction, maintenance, and operation of the permittee’s facilities in
the highway, including but not limited to all reasonable costs associated
with damage caused to the highway; and



      (4)   In addition to the encroachment permit fees, the
permittee is also required to obtain a telecommunications license and will be
required to pay application processing fees for the license and the license
or franchise fees as set forth in its license agreement with the city.



   (B)   (1)   Each of these fees will be established by Council
resolution, provided however the application processing fee may be
established based on cost as set forth hereinabove. All application fees,
permits, and charges shall be levied on a competitively neutral and
non-discriminatory basis and directly related to the costs incurred in
providing services relating to the granting or administration of applications
or permits.



      (2)   These fees and charges also shall be reasonably related
in time to the occurrence of the costs.



(Prior Code, § 18-6-10)



FIBER OPTIC CABLE, INTERSTATE SERVICES, AND OTHER COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
EXCLUDED FROM THE DEFINITION OF “TELECOMMUNICATION”, CLASS 5



§ 151.105  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   A fiber optics communication system is an interstate network of fiber
optic cables and all related property including conduit, carrier pipe, cable
fibers, repeaters, power sources, and other attachments and appurtenances
necessary for fiber optics communication but which is excluded from
telecommunications and telecommunication services as defined in A.R.S. §
9-581. The Department shall determine through the application process whether
this permit is appropriate for an applicant’s activities. Providers of
local cable services are exempted from the requirement to obtain a license or
permit in this section.



(Prior Code, Art. 18-7)



§ 151.106  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   The City Council recognizes the findings set forth hereinabove in §
151.081 and finds them relevant and applicable to licenses and encroachment
permits for fiber optic cable and other services regulated by this section of
the code.



(Prior Code, § 18-7-1)



§ 151.107  FIBER OPTIC CABLE LICENSE.



   (A)   No person shall place, install, construct, operate, or
maintain any fiber optic equipment, facilities, or system for fiber optic
communication services, an interstate services or other communication,
conduction, or transmission facilities excluded from the definition of
telecommunications and telecommunication services as defined by Arizona State
Statute, in, upon, or under the surface of any highway, public place, street,
or right-of-way, unless a fiber optic cable license has first been obtained
in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. In addition to
obtaining the fiber optic cable license as provided herein, any person
desiring to place, install, construct, operate, or maintain such facilities
in, upon, or under any highway must also obtain a fiber optic cable, (Class
5), encroachment permit, as required herein.



   (B)   The requirement to obtain a fiber optic cable license set
forth in this section does not apply to those activities or operations of a
telecommunications corporation which meets the requirements set forth in
A.R.S. § 9-581.



   (C)   A fiber optic cable license pursuant to this subchapter shall
not authorize the use of the highways to provide any other service; nor shall
the issuance of the same invalidate any franchise, license, or permit that
authorizes the use of the highways for such other services; nor shall the
fact that a person holds a franchise, license, or permit to make any other
use of the highway or to provide or operate any other service, authorize
installation, maintenance, construction, or operation of fiber optic cable,
interstate services, or other facilities required to be licensed by this
section in any highway in the city, or permit the licensee to provide fiber
optic cable services by means of the facilities without obtaining a fiber
optic cable license hereunder.



   (D)   A fiber optic cable license is personal to the licensee.
Except as provided in the license, no transfer or change of control over the
licensee, (including but limited to, forced or voluntary sale, merger,
consolidation, receivership, or any other means) shall occur unless prior
application is made to the city and the city’s prior written consent is
obtained, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld or delayed.



   (E)   The licensee shall produce books and records for the city’s
inspection and copying, prepare reports, respond to questions, and permit the
city to have access to its facilities as the city may request in order to
determine whether the licensee has complied with its obligations under the
license or other applicable law or regulation.



   (F)   The applicant shall agree to provide and maintain accurate
maps showing the location of all its facilities including all the facilities
it will use in the highways within the city, and to comply with such other
mapping requirements that the city may establish from time to time.



   (G)   The applicant shall agree to comply with highway use
requirements that the city may establish from time to time.



   (H)   The applicant shall agree to comply with and be bound by the
administrative and enforcement provisions as may be prescribed from time to
time by the city.



   (I)   The applicant must agree to abide by such other conditions and
terms as required by the City Council upon consideration of the application.



   (J)   In the event there is a conflict between the provisions of
this subchapter and the provisions contained in a franchise or license
granted by the city to an applicant, the provisions of the franchise or
license shall prevail.



(Prior Code, § 18-7-2)



§ 151.108  REVOCATION.



   (A)   A fiber optic cable license shall be subject to revocation for
the same reasons and upon the same notice and hearing provisions as set forth
in § 151.086, except division (A)(3) therein is not a basis for revocation
of the license regulated in this subchapter.



      (1)   The licensee fails to comply with the terms and
conditions of the license or other applicable law.



      (2)   The licensee fails to make the payments in the amounts
and at the times specified in the license agreement or in this subchapter.



      (3)   The licensee fails to provide current, accurate,
as-built plans and maps showing the location of all facilities installed or
constructed in the city.



   (B)   Provided, however, a license shall not be revoked unless the
licensee is given written notice of the defect in performance and fails to
cure the defect within 60 days of the notice, except where the city finds
that the defection performance is due to intentional misconduct, is a
violation of criminal law, or is part of a pattern of violations where the
licensee has already had notice and opportunity to cure.



(Prior Code, § 18-7-5)



§ 151.109  PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS.



   (A)   Any person desiring an encroachment permit pursuant to this
section shall file an application with the Department, in the form prescribed
by the city, together with that part of the non-refundable application
processing fee established by Council resolution. The full fee shall be paid
on demand from the city and shall be in an amount established by the
Department as necessary to recover all reasonably related costs incurred by
the city to review and process the application.



   (B)   This encroachment permit shall not be construed to be a
franchise or a license as that term is used in the Constitution of the State
of Arizona and the city code of the city and is required in addition to the
fiber optic license required herein.



(Prior Code, § 18-7-6)



§ 151.110  REQUIRED INFORMATION FOR BOTH LICENSE AND PERMIT.



   Applicants shall submit all of the applicable information listed
hereinabove in § 151.088.



(Prior Code, § 18-7-7)



§ 151.111  SPECIAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR THE PERMIT DESCRIBED IN THIS
SUBCHAPTER.



   In addition to the general terms and conditions for all encroachment
permits listed above, permits issued pursuant to this section shall also
comply with the following conditions.



   (A)   (1)   At the option of the Department, the permittee may be
required to construct conduits, ducts, and associated appurtenances such as
pull boxes, which will become the property of the city upon completion of
construction, in lieu of payment of annual and/or permit fees.



      (2)   It is intended that fees be computed as described in the
fee resolution adopted by Council and waived only to the extent of equal
value received by construction in kind. The city may, as its option, rent or
sell to others the conduits, duct(s), and other appurtenances which are
determined to be in excess of its needs.



   (B)   The permittee shall, without cost to the city, allow the use
by the city of space in the then existing conduits and subways for wires,
fire alarms, police, traffic control, and all other applicable municipal
purposes as determined by the license agreement with the city.



   (C)   In addition to the indemnification required in the general
encroachment permit terms hereinabove, the permittee shall agree to
indemnify, defend, and save the city harmless from any losses, expenses, or
lost revenues incurred by the permittee other than the reasonable cost of
repair to the permittee’s cable and appurtenances damaged as the result of
negligence by employees of the city.



(Prior Code, § 18-7-8)



§ 151.112  APPLICATION APPROVAL.



   Applications for an encroachment permit pursuant to this section shall
be reviewed by such outside expert consultants and city staff as deemed
necessary by the Department who shall approve, deny, or conditionally approve
the applications unless the encroachment permit application was combined with
an application for a fiber optic cable license, in which event the City
Council may approve, deny, or conditionally approve the two applications
together.



(Prior Code, § 18-7-9)



§ 151.113  FEES.



   (A)   In addition to the non-refundable encroachment permit
application processing fee which covers the cost of reviewing and processing
the applications; the inspection fees which cover the cost of inspection of
the construction, work, or installation to ensure it meets all city
requirements; a fee to recover all of the reasonable costs associated with
construction, maintenance, and operation of a permittee’s facilities in the
highway, including but not limited to all reasonable costs associated with
damage caused to the highway; persons subject to this permit are also
required to obtain a fiber optic cable license and thus will be required to
pay the license application processing fee and shall also pay an annual
license fee established by resolution of the City Council. This fee shall be
based on one of the following:



      (1)   On the gross income from the business;



      (2)   On the fair market value of the property to be used; or



      (3)   Any other basis which the Council determines is
appropriate and in the best interests of the city.



   (B)   The fee shall be paid annually in advance at the issuance of
the permit and within 30 days of the anniversary date of the issuance of the
permit.



(Prior Code, § 18-7-10)



CABLE TELEVISION, CLASS 6



§ 151.125  CABLE SERVICES/TELEVISION AND RELATED SERVICES.



   An example of cable services/television and related services to which
the following sections apply is cable services. The City Council shall
determine through the application process whether an applicant meets the
definition of a cable services/television services provider.



(Prior Code, Art. 18-8)



§ 151.126  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   The City Council recognizes the findings set forth hereinabove in §
151.081 and finds them relevant and applicable to licenses and encroachment
permits for cable services/television and other services regulated by this
section of the code.



(Prior Code, § 18-8-1)



§ 151.127  CABLE SERVICES/TELEVISION LICENSE.



   In addition to obtaining the encroachment permit required herein, any
applicant desiring to place, install, construct, operate, or maintain any
cable services/television equipment, facilities, or system for television
services in, upon, or under the surface of any public place, street, or
right-of-way, must also obtain or already have a cable services/television
license in accordance with the provisions the non-codified cable
services/television licensing Ord. 2539.



(Prior Code, § 18-8-2)



§ 151.128  ENCROACHMENT PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS.



   Any person desiring an encroachment permit pursuant to this section
shall file an application with the Department, in the form prescribed by the
city, together with that part of the non-refundable application processing
fee established by Council resolution. The full fee shall be paid on demand
from the City and shall be in an amount established by the City Manager as
necessary to recover all reasonably related costs incurred by the city to
review and process the application.



(Prior Code, § 18-8-3)



§ 151.129  FEES.



   In addition to the non-refundable encroachment permit application
processing fee which covers the cost of reviewing and processing the
application, the inspection fees which cover the cost of inspection of the
construction, work, or installation to ensure it meets all city requirements
and a fee to recover all of the reasonable costs associated with
construction, maintenance, and operation of a permittee’s facilities in the
highway, including but not limited to all reasonable costs associated with
damage that is directly or indirectly caused to the highway; persons subject
to this permit shall also pay the license application processing fees and
other fees pursuant to the cable television license issued by the city which
shall represent a fair return to the public for use of public property.



(Prior Code, § 18-8-4)



UTILITIES, CLASS 7



§ 151.140  UTILITIES ENCROACHMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   Application process.  Any person desiring an encroachment
permit pursuant to this section shall file an application with the Department
in the form prescribed by the city, together with that part of the
non-refundable application processing fee established by Council resolution.
The full fee shall be paid on demand from th city and shall be in an amount
established by the City Manager as necessary to recover all reasonably
related costs incurred by the city to review and process the application.



   (B)   Special terms and conditions for the encroachment permit
described in this section. In addition to the general terms and conditions
for all encroachment permits listed above, permits issued pursuant to this
section shall also comply with the following conditions:  All utility lines
pipes, conduits and facilities and appurtenances thereto shall be placed
underground except stations and high voltage lines, 69 kv and greater and
except in exceptional circumstances where the Department finds there is no
feasible method to accomplish the purpose of the item for which the request
is made underground.



   (C)   Fees.



      (1)   Entities subject to this permit shall pay:



         (a)   The encroachment permit application processing fee
which covers the cost of reviewing and processing the application provided,
however, public utility corporations, counties, state agencies and adjacent
cities,  for conformity, will not be required to pay the permit application
processing fee;



         (b)   The inspection fee which covers the cost of
inspection of the construction, work, or installation to insure it meets all
city requirements;



         (c)   A fee to recover all of the reasonable costs
associated with construction, maintenance and operation of permittee’s
facilities in the highway, including but not limited to all reasonable and
supportable costs associated with the damage caused to the highway; and



         (d)   In addition to the permit fees, the permittee
shall also pay such use fees as spelled out in their use agreement with the
city.



      (2)   Each of these fees will be established by Council
resolution provided however that application processing fee may be
established based on cost as set forth hereinabove.



   (D)   Examples.  Examples of utilities for which this permit would
be applicable would be non-city owned or operated water, sewer, irrigation,
effluent, electric, and gas lines.



(Prior Code, Art. 18-9)



OTHER STREET EXCAVATION PERMITS



§ 151.150  STREET EXCAVATION ENCROACHMENT PERMIT, CLASS 8.



   This permit provided for by this section applies to any person desiring
to place, in stall construct, operate or maintain any pipe, equipment, lines,
cable or other facilities in, upon or under the surface of any highway,
public place, street or right-of-way but for which use not of the other
classes of encroachment permit is deemed applicable.



   (A)   Purpose and findings. The City Council recognizes the findings
set forth hereinabove in § 151.081 and finds them relevant and applicable to
licenses and encroachment permits for all street excavation encroachment
permits regulated by this section of the code.



   (B)   Application process.  Applications for permits pursuant to
this section shall be processed, conditioned, and approved in the same manner
as any one of the above listed encroachment permits as determined by the
Department.



   (C)   Fees.



      (1)   Entities subject to this permit shall pay:



         (a)   The encroachment permit application processing fee
which covers the cost of reviewing and processing the application;



         (b)   The inspection fee which covers the cost of
inspection of the construction, work or installation to insure it meets all
city requirements;



         (c)   A fee to recover all of the reasonable costs
associated with construction, maintenance, and operation of permittee’s
facilities in the highway, including but not limited to all reasonable costs
associated with damage caused to the highway; and



         (d)   In addition to the permit fees, the permittee
shall also pay use fees as set forth in the encroachment permit or in any use
agreement with the city required as a condition of this encroachment permit.



      (2)   Each of these fees will be established by Council
resolution, provided however the application processing fee may be
established based on cost as set forth hereinabove.



(Prior Code, § 18-10)



§ 151.999  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
severally, for each and every such violation and non-compliance, be punished
as provided in City Code Ord. O87-07-004.



(Prior Code, § 18-2-15)



APPENDIX A:  PUBLIC WORKS ENCROACHMENT AND INSPECTION



1.   Encroachment permit



   a.   Class 1 encroachment permit application base fee [§§ 151.030
to 151.035]:  $75.



   b.   Class 2 encroachment permit application base fee [§§ 151.050
to 151.054]:  $75.



   c.   Class 3 encroachment permit application base fee [§§ 151.065,
151.066]:  $75.



   d.   Class 4 encroachment permit application base fee [§§ 151.080
to 151.090]:  $75.



   e.   Class 5 encroachment permit application base fee [§§ 151.105
to 151.113]:  $75.



   f.   Class 6 encroachment permit application base fee [§§ 151.125
to 151.129]:  $75.



   g.   Class 7 encroachment permit fee [§ 151.140]:  $75.



   h.   Class 8 encroachment permit fee [§ 151.140]:  $75.



2.    Cable television license application base fee [§§ 151.125 to
151.129]:  $5,000.



3.   License applications base fee for all encroachment licenses, except
cable:  $2,000.



4.   Penalty assessment for failure to obtain encroachment or street cut
permit:  $1,000.



5.   Pavement damage restoration fee:  (reserved).



6.   Within two years of construction of new streets, renovation or
reconstruction of a street:



   For each cut: (per square yard of cut):  $30.



   For cuts within the first two years, the fee is in addition to the
requirement for street sealing in accordance with City Code § 151.009 (per
sq. yd. of cut).



7.    After construction of new streets, renovation or reconstruction of a
street:



   For Each Cut: (per square yard of cut):  $30.



8.    From three to five years after construction of new streets or
renovation of a street:  $25.50.



9.     From five to ten years after construction of new streets or
renovation of reconstruction of a street:  $20.



10.    Within one year prior to a city street renovation or reconstruction
project approved in the capital improvement program of the city’s annual
budget:  No charge.



The minimum fee shall be based on one square yard. If a pavement cut is so
extensive, or the cuts in one area are so numerous that the permittee prefers
to perform a renovation (major rehabilitation) of the street in accordance
with the Public Works Department requirements, or the full width of any
impacted lane and the full length of any cuts plus pavement seal as required
to reconstruct the street to the satisfaction of the Public Works Department.



11.   If a pothole cut is done in advance of construction that will remove
that portion of the pavement within a reasonable time as specified by the
Public Works Department, no fee will be charged.



12.   Plan review fees:



   a.   Fees for review of plans and specifications for parcels of
ground to be fully developed with this submittal shall be as follows:



 

ACRES
 
FEE
 
ADDITIONAL FEE/ACRE


Up to 10 acres
 
$250
 
+ $75 per acre


10-25 acres
 
$1,000
 
+ $65 per acre


25-50 acres
 
$2,000
 
+$40 per acre


50 acres
 
$3,000
 
+ $30 per acre



 



   b.   Fees for review of plans and specifications for parcels of
ground which are to be subdivided into large sections for future development
and for which the major infrastructure only is to be developed with this
submittal shall be as follows:



 

ACRES
 
PLAN REVIEW FEE
 
ADDITIONAL FEE/ACRE


Up to 10 acres
 
$62.50
 
$18.75


10-25 acres
 
$250
 
$16.25


25 to 50 acres
 
$500
 
$10


50 acres
 
$750
 
$7.50



 



   c.   Fees for review of plans and specifications for the individual
developments within the parcels shall be charged in accordance with division
12.a. above, except the acreage used for fee computation shall not include
perimeter rights-of-way which have been previously dedicated and approved.



   d.   Fees for review of the plan revisions which are initiated by
the developer or required due to an error or oversight of the developer after
plans have been approved by the Public Works Department, shall be charged the
flat rate for each revision or set of revisions reviewed:  $100.



13.   Street clean up fee [§ 152.078] non-refundable:  $100.



14.   Application for disposition of roadway or easement [§ 152.232]



   a.   ROW vacation application fee (developed residential):  $400.



   b.   ROW vacation application fee (non-residential):  $500.



   c.   ROW appraisal fee (deposit of $200 required):  actual cost.



15.   Reimbursement agreement transaction fee [§ 152.142]:  5% of
agreement amount.



16.   Median and street light construction buy-in assessment [§§ 152.155
to 152.158 and §§ 152.215 to 152.217]



 

1/2 FRONT FOOT
 
PER FOOT


   a.   Median construction
 
$10.50 LF


   b.   Street lighting in median
 
$100 LF


   c.   Landscaping in median
 
$1.75 SF


   d.   Street lighting behind curb
 
$9 LF



 



17.   Inspection and testing fees [§ 152.077]



 

PAVEMENT
 

UNIT

 

FEE/UNIT ($/UNIT)





Paving public right of way/private streets & drives
 

SY

 

$0.26



Parking areas
 

SY

 

$0.07



Overlay (all)
 

SY

 

$0.09



Alley surface
 

SY

 

$0.26



Street sign bases
 

EA

 

$10



Street sign (city)
 

EA

 

$80



Mill & overlay
 

SY

 

$0.18





 



 

CONCRETE
 

UNIT

 

FEE/UNIT ($/UNIT)





Driveway or alley entrance
 

EA

 

$19.57



Valley gutter
 

LF

 

$0.26



Apron
 

EA

 

$8



Curb and gutter
 

LF

 

$0.14



Sidewalk
 

SF

 

$0.05



Catch basin
 

EA

 

$22.25



Sidewalk ramp
 

EA

 

$17





 



 

WATER
 

UNIT

 

FEE/UNIT ($/UNIT)



Water pipe (4" or larger)
 

LF

 

$0.41



Water services
 

LF

 

$0.35



Pavement cut
 

SY

 

$17.40



Tapping sleeve and valve
 

EA

 

$60



Landscape irrigation system with backflow device
 

EA

 

$35



Fire line
 

LF

 

$0.41




 



 

SEWER
 

UNIT

 

FEE/UNIT ($/UNIT)



Sewer pipe (8" or larger)
 

LF

 

$0.42



Sewer service
 

LF

 

$0.31



Manhole
 

EA

 

$31.50



Pavement cut
 

SY

 

$17.40



Cleanout/drop connection
 

EA

 

$31




 



 

DRAINAGE
 

UNIT

 

FEE/UNIT ($/UNIT)





Retention basin (grading)
 

ACRE

 

$50



Irrigation pipe
 

LF

 

$0.78



Stormwater pipe (including box culverts)
 

LF

 

$0.84



Headwalls
 

EA

 

$31



Pavement cut
 

SY

 

$17.40



Drywells
 

EA

 

$56



Stormwater retention pipe
 

LF

 

$0.84





 



 

UTILITIES
 

UNIT

 

FEE/UNIT ($/UNIT)



Utility trenching in ROW/easement
 

LF

 

$0.16



Boring
 

EA

 

$15



Pavement cut
 

SY

 

$20



Service drops
 

EA

 

$15



Offsite after hours inspection
 

HR

 

$73




 



 

PERMITS
 

UNIT

 

FEE/UNIT ($/UNIT)



Permit application fee (non-refundable)
 

EA

 

$75




 



CHAPTER 152:  PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT; OFF-SITE CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT
REQUIREMENTS



Section



General Provisions



   152.001   Definitions



   152.002   Design requirements



Required Improvements



   152.015   General provisions



   152.016   Improvement extensions



   152.017   Improvement inclusions



Undergrounding of Overhead Utility Lines



   152.030   General provisions



Off-Site Construction; Permits, Plans, and Specifications



   152.045   General provisions



   152.046   Plan and specification contents; procedure for approval



   152.047   Subsequent plan review



   152.048   Approval



Fee for Review of Off-Site Improvement Plans and Specifications



   152.060   General provisions



   152.061   Previously developed land



   152.062   Double fee



   152.063   Waiving of fee



Inspection and Testing of Off-Site Construction



   152.075   General provisions



   152.076   Time limit



   152.077   Fees for inspection and testing



   152.078   Street cleanup fee



Approval, Acceptance, and Assurances of Construction



   152.090   General provisions



   152.091   Partial acceptance



   152.092   Final acceptance



Performance Bond or Cash Deposit; Off-site Improvements



   152.105   General provisions



   152.106   Time to complete work



   152.107   Bond return



Validity of Permit



   152.120   General provisions



Deferral of Off-site Improvements



   152.135   General provisions



   152.136   Notice to proceed



   152.137   Performance bond



   152.138   Partial construction



   152.139   Benefit study



   152.140   Credit



   152.141   City participation



   152.142   Reimbursement agreement



Street Financing Policy



   152.155   General provisions



   152.156   Street improvement costs



   152.157   Local



   152.158   Collectors and arterials



Scalloped Street Assessments



   152.170   Resolution of intent to order improvements



   152.171   Notice of assessments



   152.172   Adoption and imposition of assessments



   152.173   Right-of-way



   152.174   Limitations on assessments



   152.175   Collection; payment and satisfaction



   152.176   Appeals; severability



Accelerated Public Improvements



   152.190   Policy



   152.191   Construction of accelerated public improvements



   152.192   Authorization of repayment agreements



   152.193   Repayment agreements; terms; collections; and costs



   152.194   Reimbursement amounts payable to city



   152.195   Notice of intention to approve accelerated public
improvements



Private Streets



   152.205   General provisions



   152.206   Permits and inspection



Traffic Signals and Streetlights



   152.215   Traffic signal system development fee



   152.216   Fees



   152.217   Traffic signal and streetlight reimbursement agreements



Disposition of Unnecessary Rights-of-Way



   152.230   General provisions



   152.231   Reservation of easements



   152.232   Application for disposition of roadway or easement



   152.233   Decision to dispose of roadway or easement



Enforcement



   152.245   Cease and desist orders



   152.246   Appeal procedure



   152.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEVELOPER. The individual, firm, corporation, association, syndicate,
trust, or other legal entity that files the application and initiates
proceedings for the development of land, including but not limited to a
subdivision, minor division of land, site development plan, and/or a zone
change in accordance with this code. The DEVELOPER need not be the owner of
record of the land.



   MEDIAN. A raised or flush area designed to separate and control
vehicular movement.



   OFF-SITE CONSTRUCTION. Construction, erection, or installation or any
change or addition to lands, structures, equipment, facilities, or materials
located above or below ground within any street, alley, easement, or
rights-of-way in the city. OFF-SITE CONSTRUCTION includes construction of
improvements on private property which will later be dedicated to the city or
which will serve as community infrastructure even though remaining private
property.



   OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENT. Those improvements, infrastructure, or facilities
a developer is required to or does construct or install in conjunction with
the development or redevelopment of any property and any off-site
construction, including common infrastructure, adjacent to or related to
property for which a city permit is being sought for purposes of development,
redevelopment, or construction. On-site retention basins and other drainage
facilities, overhead utility lines, water lines, or pipes four or more inches
in diameter, sewer lines or pipes eight or more inches in diameter, together
with water and sewer services and their appurtenances, shall be deemed
OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS as regulated by this chapter of the code.



   OVERHEAD UTILITY LINES. Those historically conveyed by a series of
conductors mounted on poles or other above ground structures. Included are
electric service lines, electric distribution lines (under 69 kilovolt),
telephone cables and lines, and lines for other communications systems such
as cable-transmitted television.



   PRIVATE STREET. A street not owned or maintained by the city.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement,
dedication, usage, zoning condition, process of law, or other means is
reserved for or dedicated to the general public for street, highway, alley,
public utility, or pedestrian walkway purposes and accepted by the city.



   UNDERGROUND or UNDERGROUNDING. The placement of utilities at or below
ground with the attendant removal of aboveground poles, conductors, and
appurtenances as applicable.



(Prior Code, Art. 19-1)



§ 152.002  DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All off-site improvements shall be designed, engineered,
constructed, and installed in accordance with the regulations adopted in §
150.001 of the city code and with all other applicable regulations adopted by
the city, state or federal government.



   (B)   Right-of-way width and street cross section shall be as
specified in the City Code and the Planning and Zoning Regulations.



   (C)   The Public Works Director shall determine street
classifications.



(Prior Code, Art. 19-2)



REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS



§ 152.015  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   As a condition of approval of any subdivision, minor division of land,
or site development plan, the developer shall be required to design,
engineer, construct, and install all off-site improvements on and adjacent to
the site to be developed, in accordance with the requirements set forth in
the city code and the zoning code and regulations, the encroachment permit
code, and this chapter. This requirement applies to all land developed or
redeveloped under the provisions of any of the above listed chapters.



(Prior Code, Art. 19-3)



§ 152.016  IMPROVEMENT EXTENSIONS.



   Improvements shall, as a minimum, extend to the center of abutting
streets or rights-of-way and may extend beyond the center when median islands
and two-way traffic requirements necessitate an extension. When the property
to be redeveloped abuts a canal, drain, wash, irrigation ditch, or similar
facility, the off-site construction shall include full improvements to the
facility.



(Prior Code, § 19-3-1)



§ 152.017  IMPROVEMENT INCLUSIONS.



   Improvements shall also include tapers or transitional areas on either
side of the project site necessary to provide a safe, smooth traffic flow
between existing and newly constructed street sections. Any additional
right-of-way necessary for the construction, including applicable legal fees,
shall be the responsibility of the developer.



(Prior Code, § 19-3-2)



UNDERGROUNDING OF OVERHEAD UTILITY LINES.



§ 152.030  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The developer shall place underground all overhead utility
lines, either within a proposed development or redevelopment project or
within public rights-of-way or easements adjacent to the project, prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy. This requirement shall apply to all
projects submitted for approval or re-approval under the provisions of the
site development in the zoning code. Utility poles and lines are defined
herein as the poles, structures, wire, aerial cables, and related facilities
used in the distribution of electricity or in the transmission of
telecommunications, telegraph, data, radio, or television communications.
This requirement includes both new and existing utility lines on and adjacent
to the project, including lines which extend across public streets, alleys,
and/or easements adjacent to the property being developed or redeveloped.
Existing utility lines adjacent to a project shall be under-grounded up to
the first existing pole beyond the limits of the property. This requirement
includes the undergrounding of all existing overhead service lines attached
to the lines to be removed along with necessary conduit, supports,
restoration and the like, necessary to convert the service line from overhead
to underground. The requirement shall apply regardless of the existence of
easements for overhead lines. When high-voltage power lines (above 12 KV or
similar) are present, all lines other than the high-voltage lines shall be
placed underground.



   (B)   Equipment appurtenant to the underground facilities, such as
surface-mounted transformers, pull boxes, pedestal cabinets, service
terminals, telephone splice closures, concealed ducts, or other similar
on-the-ground facilities normally used with or as design approved by the
Public Works Director, may be maintained above ground with the written
permission of the Public Works Director for the specific facility to be left
above ground.



   (C)   The developer or owner of a development or redevelopment
project shall be responsible to make necessary arrangements with the affected
utility companies for the installation of required underground facilities,
including the payment of any cost therefore as a condition of plan approval.
Nothing contained herein is intended to obligate a providing utility company
to install the underground facilities without reimbursement.



   (D)   In those instances where poles to be removed include street
lights, the street lights will be replaced with freestanding poles by the
developer in accordance with current street light standards.



   (E)   Relief from undergrounding requirements may be considered
under the following conditions.



      (1)   Deferment of undergrounding may be requested by a
developer in cases where the utility frontage is small (generally less than
1,000 feet in length). When deferment is approved, the developer shall obtain
an estimate of undergrounding costs from all affected utility companies. The
developer shall then be required to provide a cash deposit, letter of credit,
certificate of deposit, or other security acceptable to the City Attorney, in
an amount equal to the estimated under-grounding costs, as provided by the
utility company, associated with the utility frontage of the project. The
developer shall also be required to install the ductwork (conduit) required
by the utility companies for the future undergrounding prior to issuance of
certificate of occupancy. Phasing of projects will be considered based on the
particular situation. On projects for which plans are approved in phases, the
developer may request delay in payment of estimated costs until approval of
plans for the largest phase involving undergrounding, at which time payment
for the entire project shall be required. The obligation to pay at the time
of a subsequent phase shall be secured by an agreement which shall bind the
owner and subsequent buyers for undergrounding costs along the entire
applicable frontage. Monies received will be held in an account by the city
to be used at whatever time the applicable area is converted by the city,
utility companies, or other parties to underground utilities.



      (2)   Exemption may be considered where the developer can show
that undergrounding will be an unusual economic hardship and the costs of the
undergrounding are disproportionate in terms of the utility frontage and the
proportionate frontage of the project under consideration. Examples are cases
where development occurs in an area where adjacent land on both sides is
already developed (infill situation), and in cases involving additions or
modifications to existing sites which represent a minor portion of the total
site.



      (3)   All requests for relief must be presented in writing to
the Planning and Development Director prior to plan approval. Consideration
for approval shall be in accordance with the purpose, intent, and objective
of this section. The Planning and Development Director shall approve or
disapprove all formal requests for relief. High-voltage lines which remain
after the undergrounding are not considered as grounds for relief. Aesthetics
is only one of many reasons for undergrounding of which public safety is
paramount. Completion of undergrounding and/or payment of costs shall be
required prior to granting of a certificate of occupancy. All new service
lines installed shall be underground even though relief may be granted for
adjacent existing lines.



   (F)   The requirements set forth above shall not apply to new
utility poles and wires erected for purely temporary purposes such as
providing temporary building construction power, emergency power, telephone
service, or the furnishing of power to temporary outdoor activities. A permit
for the temporary use shall be obtained from the Public Works Director. The
length of the temporary use shall be specified in the permit and may not
exceed six months. An additional six-month permit may be issued upon a
finding of necessity by the Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, Art. 19-4)



OFF-SITE CONSTRUCTION; PERMITS, PLANS, AND SPECIFICATIONS



§ 152.045  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The developer must obtain an encroachment permit in accordance
with Chapter 151, prior to commencing any work in or on the city highway,
street, public property, or right-of-way. In addition, plans and
specifications for and construction of all off-site construction must be
reviewed and approval obtained pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   Approval of off-site construction plans and specifications is
required by the Public Works Department prior to issuance of an encroachment
permit for off-site construction.



(Prior Code, Art. 19-5)



§ 152.046  PLAN AND SPECIFICATION CONTENTS; PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL.



   (A)   Plans and specifications shall be submitted indicating that
off-site improvements are planned for the project in conformance with city
code, standards, regulations, and requirements. These off-site improvement
plans and specifications shall be submitted in triplicate with all other
building plans and applications together with the plan review fee established
by Council resolution. The developer must obtain written approval from the
Public Works Director for all off-site improvement plans and specifications
prior to issuance of a building permit, encroachment permit, or other permit
necessary to commence work.



   (B)   The off-site construction plans and specifications shall be
prepared and signed by a professional engineer who is qualified and
registered by the State of Arizona to practice in the particular field of
competency required by the type of improvements.



   (C)   Engineering plans and specifications shall be in conformance
with accepted engineering practice and shall conform to the City Code,
regulations, and requirements, and be prepared to the satisfaction of the
Public Works Director. Vertical and horizontal control surveys shall be tied
and referenced or two existing city-approved benchmarks and two section
corners or quarter corners. Incomplete or partial submittals will not be
accepted.



(Prior Code, § 19-5-1)



§ 152.047  SUBSEQUENT PLAN REVIEW.



   Plans submitted more than three times to gain acceptance shall not be
further reviewed until an additional plan review fee of one-third the amount
of the first plan review fee is paid to the city for each subsequent review.



(Prior Code, § 19-5-2)



§ 152.048  APPROVAL.



   (A)   Approval of off-site construction plans and specifications
shall be valid as basis to issue construction permits for a period not to
exceed one year after date of approval. Approval of off-site plans and
specifications shall continue to be valid provided construction has commenced
and that no suspension or abandonment of the work has occurred. Plans for
which construction is not started within one year shall be resubmitted and
shall be deemed a new submittal and all fees and charges shall apply.



   (B)   Approval of plans and specifications by the Public Works
Director does not relieve the design professional of responsibility for
errors or omissions and for the correction of them and liability caused by
their occurrence unless they were required to be added or omitted by the
Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, § 19-5-3)



FEE FOR REVIEW OF OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENT PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



§ 152.060  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Plan review fees in an amount established by Council
resolution shall be paid at the time plans are submitted. The plan review
process shall be deemed started at the time first submission of preliminary
or final subdivision or site plans are accepted for review by the Public
Works Director or his or her designee, and the plan review fee shall be paid
before any review action is undertaken.



   (B)   Fees shall be based on acreage being developed, and acreage
shall be computed and certified by the developer’s engineer to include all
lands being developed including adjacent rights-of-way improved and the
computation shall be submitted together with the off-site improvement plans.



(Prior Code, Art. 19-6)



§ 152.061  PREVIOUSLY DEVELOPED LAND.



   Fees for lands previously developed or included in a previously
approved development shall be computed based on the net acreage of the site
(not including previously dedicated and improved rights-of-way and easements).



(Prior Code, § 19-6-1)



§ 152.062  DOUBLE FEE.



   Failure to secure a permit for off-site construction prior to
commencing work will result in a charge of double the amount of the regular
fee.



(Prior Code, § 19-6-2)



§ 152.063  WAIVING OF FEE.



   Fees associated with city projects may be waived by the Public Works
Director if the project is required by the city and in the city’s best
interest. In certain demonstrated hardship cases fees may be waived at the
discretion of the Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, § 19-6-3)



INSPECTION AND TESTING OF OFF-SITE CONSTRUCTION



§ 152.075  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   During off-site construction the city shall provide construction
review, including testing of materials, to assess conformity to current city
standard specifications and drawings.



   (A)   Inspection of the work by the Public Works Director or his or
her designee shall not be considered as direct control of the individual
worker and the work. The direct control shall be solely the responsibility of
the contractor.



   (B)   Any work done or materials used without inspection and testing
or test results approved by an authorized representative of the city may be
ordered removed and replaced. Failure to reject any defective work or
materials shall not in any way prevent later rejection when the defect is
discovered nor obligate the Public Works Director to final acceptance.



   (C)   The Public Works Director, for the purpose of expediting and
facilitating the progress of the work, shall not inspect all materials, and
each part or detail of the work. The Public Works Director shall be furnished
at any time with such information and assistance by the contractor as is
required to make a complete and detailed inspection.



   (D)   No work will be accepted which is installed prior to
dedication of rights-of-way.



(Prior Code, Art. 19-7)



§ 152.076  TIME LIMIT.



   Completion of off-site construction within the public rights-of-way
under permit shall be accomplished within one year after issuance of the
permit unless otherwise specifically stated in the permit. This period may be
extended if a hardship is acknowledged by the Public Works Director for
economic reasons, strikes, unavailability of materials, unseasonable weather,
or other good and sufficient cause. If an extension of time is not granted,
the plans shall be resubmitted for review and a new permit covering the
remaining work to be completed shall be required. Fees required under the
review and new permit shall be charged according to the fee schedule in
effect at the time the new review is requested or new permit is issued.



(Prior Code, § 19-7-1)



§ 152.077  FEES FOR INSPECTION AND TESTING.



   (A)   Fees for inspection and testing shall be paid to the city at
the time a permit is issued for construction work. The fee shall be computed
on the basis of costs per unit of the various construction items and shall be
outlined in the current fee schedule adopted by Council resolution. Quantity
estimates of the various items involved shall be calculated and certified by
the engineer who prepared the plans and specifications for the improvements
and shall be submitted to the Public Works Director or his or her designee on
forms supplied by the city at the time application for a permit for the work
is made.



   (B)   Any repetition of tests or inspection required because of
inferior materials or workmanship, as determined by the city-approved test,
shall be performed at the developer’s expense and shall be paid to the city
by the developer when notified by the Public Works Director or his or her
designee. This service does not relieve the contractor for the discovery of
errors, and the correction of them, nor of the responsibility of properly
performing the work.



(Prior Code, § 19-7-2)



§ 152.078  STREET CLEANUP FEE.



   A refundable street cleanup fee will be charged to the developer at the
time of plan submittal review. The fee will be in an amount established by
separate resolution. It shall be the developer’s to ensure that cit streets
are maintained free of construction debris.



   (A)   City Inspectors will provide the developer with written notice
when violations are observed. The developer shall have four hours, from the
time of written notice receipt, to remove the debris. Failure to respond
shall result in the levying of an assessment against the fee in the amount of
the city’s cost for street cleanup, including an initial administrative
charge as set by resolution.



   (B)   Upon subdivision/site build-out and the filing of a notice of
termination with the environmental protection agency, the cleanup fee will be
refunded less any charges, including the administrative charge. If the fee
was depleted and additional cleanup was required, the outstanding balance
will be collected prior to final inspection.



(Prior Code, § 19-7-3)



APPROVAL, ACCEPTANCE, AND ASSURANCES OF CONSTRUCTION



§ 152.090  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   Upon completion of all improvements in accordance with the city
standards, the Public Works Director or his or her designee shall acknowledge
in writing acceptance of the off-site improvements. Acceptance shall be
conditioned upon a one-year warranty for workmanship, materials, and
equipment by the developer. After the lapse of the one-year period dated from
the letter of acceptance, the improvements shall be considered the
maintenance responsibility of the city. If, during the one-year period, the
developer is required to replace or repair any improvements, the developer
shall secure a new encroachment permit without payment of fee to cover the
necessary work. Plans and specifications together with the plan review fee
for the replacement or repair shall be submitted for review and approval
unless waived by the Public Works Director or his or her designee.



(Prior Code, Art. 19-8)



§ 152.091  PARTIAL ACCEPTANCE.



   If, at any time during the prosecution of the project, the contractor
substantially completes a unit or portion of the project, such as a
structure, utility service, or a section of the road pavement, the developer
may request the Public Works Director or his or her designee to make final
inspection of that work. If the Public Works Director or his or her designee
finds, upon inspection, that the work has been satisfactorily completed in
compliance with plans and specifications, he or she may conditionally accept
the work as being completed. Acceptance in such cases is conditional on the
remaining work being completed without damage and including any final grading
adjustments or other minor work. The partial acceptance shall in no way void
or alter any plans and specifications.



(Prior Code, § 19-8-1)



§ 152.092  FINAL ACCEPTANCE.



   (A)   Upon due notice from the contractor of presumptive completion
of the entire project, the Public Works Director or his or her designee will
make an inspection. If all construction provided for and contemplated by the
plans and specifications is found completed to the satisfaction of the Public
Works Director or his or her designee, that inspection shall constitute the
final inspection and the Public Works Director or his or her designee will
make the final acceptance. The contractor will be notified in writing of this
acceptance as of the day of the final inspection.



   (B)   If, however, the inspection disclosed any work, in whole or in
part, as being unsatisfactory, the Public Works Director or his or her
designee will give the contractor the necessary instructions for correction
of same, and the contractor shall immediately comply with and execute the
instructions. Upon correction of the work, another inspection will be made
which shall constitute the final inspection, provided the work has been
satisfactorily completed. In that event, the Public Works Director or his or
her designee will make the final acceptance and notify the contractor in
writing of the final acceptance as of the date of the last and final
inspection.



(Prior Code, § 19-8-2)



PERFORMANCE BOND OR CASH DEPOSIT; OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS



§ 152.105  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The Community Development Department, building inspection
division, shall deny final approval and certificate of occupancy of any
building until the required off-site improvements are completed and have been
inspected and approved by the Public Works Director, unless performance of
the off-site improvements is guaranteed by a performance bond, approved by
the City Attorney and the Public Works Director, or a cash deposit is made
with the city in an amount fixed by the city. Under such circumstances, the
Public Works Director will grant a conditional acceptance. Warranty period
will not begin until the date of final (unconditional) acceptance.



   (B)   The city may require an occupancy clearance agreement to
document the requirements of this section. Model homes may be occupied for
sales purposes only subject to the occupancy clearance agreement and
satisfactory off-sites to service the models as approved by the city.



(Prior Code, Art. 19-9)



§ 152.106  TIME TO COMPLETE WORK.



   The developer shall complete work required in the approved off-site
improvement plans within 30 calendar days after issuance of the conditional
acceptance by the Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, § 19-9-1)



§ 152.107  BOND RETURN.



   (A)   The performance bond or cash deposit or a portion thereof
shall be retained by the city to provide completion of the work should the
developer fail or refuse to do so as in § 152.091.



   (B)   The performance bond or cash deposit or unused portion thereof
shall be returned to the depositor upon the approval of the Public Works
Director after completion and acceptance of the off-site improvements.
Acceptance in such cases is conditional upon the remaining work being
completed without damage to the off-site improvement so accepted and
including any final grade adjustments or other minor work.



(Prior Code, § 19-9-2)



VALIDITY OF PERMIT



§ 152.120  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and
specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of,
any violation of any of the provisions of this code. No permit presuming to
give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code shall be
valid, except insofar as the work or use which is authorized is lawful.



   (B)   The issuance of a permit based upon plans and specifications
shall not prevent the Public Works Director from requiring correction of
errors in the plans and specifications or from preventing construction
operations from being carried on there under when in violation of this code
or of any other ordinance of the city.



(Prior Code, Art. 19-10)



DEFERRAL OF OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS



§ 152.135  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   The Public Works Director may direct that construction of off-site
improvements, or portions thereof, be deferred when the improvements are
impractical or premature because of traffic conditions, unavailability of
necessary right-of-way, the potential for creation of scalloped streets, or
other conditions detrimental to orderly development, and/or because of the
known and acknowledged formation or pending formation of an improvement
district. Engineering plans for all off-site improvements shall be prepared,
submitted, and approved in accordance with § 152.030, whether or not
construction is deferred. Common infrastructure plans will not be required
unless determined by the Public Works Director to have a direct impact on the
abutting off-sites, such as a bridge or railroad crossing on or adjacent to
the parcel to be developed. Plans will include an analysis of drainage and
establishment of grades on both sides of the roadway for a minimum of
one-fourth mile beyond the project limits in each direction unless waived or
reduced by the Public Works Director. The developer of the property for which
a deferral has been issued shall enter into an agreement with the city which
shall be recorded to run with the land, and shall post an assurance as set
forth below to guarantee the required improvements will be constructed when
directed by the Public Works Director.



(Prior Code, Art. 19-11)



§ 152.136  NOTICE TO PROCEED.



   The Public Works Director will give written notice to proceed with the
construction of the improvements previously deferred when necessitated by
road condition, current or projected traffic, adjacent construction, or other
conditions which require additional access. The developer shall start
construction of the improvements within 90 calendar days from the date of the
notice and shall conclude the construction within a reasonable time, but in
no event longer than 180 days from the beginning of construction, in
accordance with plans approved by the city. If the developer fails to
construct any of the off-site improvements when directed, or fails to timely
complete construction of the off-site improvements, the city may construct
the improvements, or may complete construction of the improvements, and
obtain payment therefore from the surety issuing the assurance. The
developer’s obligation will be satisfied when all required improvements
have been constructed by the developer or another party, or when all required
improvements have been constructed by an improvement district formed at the
discretion of the city.



(Prior Code, § 19-11-1)



§ 152.137  PERFORMANCE BOND.



   The Public Works Director shall require the posting of performance
bonds, letters of credit, assurances, or such other security as may be
appropriate and necessary to assure the installation of all off-site
improvements whenever a deferral of construction has been issued or project
phasing will permit occupancy of any structure prior to final acceptance of
all improvements. The security shall remain in full force and effect until
such time as all required off-site improvements are constructed and accepted.
In the case of projects which are divided into a number of large parcels
subject to additional subdivision at a later time, only the major
infrastructure necessary to serve all parcels and adjacent land shall be
subject to these requirements. The form of the assurance must be acceptable
to the City Attorney and will be in an amount fixed by the Public Works
Director. Receipt of an acceptable assurance will be required at the time of
approval of improvement plans.



(Prior Code, § 19-11-2)



§ 152.138  PARTIAL CONSTRUCTION.



   When it is impractical for the city to accept a financial assurance
because the schedule for city improvements is undetermined or unreasonably
far into the future, or if for any other reason the improvements are
constructed by the developer, the Public Works Director will order the
construction of one or both sides of sufficient roadway necessary to ensure
an orderly traffic flow. The cost of construction of improvements beyond the
center of abutting streets or beyond the property limits (other than tapers
and other transitional items) shall be applied toward the amount of the
developer’s total obligation set forth in the benefit study, or the
developer may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the city to recover
costs from other developers as prescribed in § 152.142 below.



(Prior Code, § 19-11-3)



§ 152.139  BENEFIT STUDY.



   The benefit study shall be utilized as the basis of determining a
developer’s full off-site improvement obligation. Use of the benefit study
is required to ensure that the costs of the common infrastructure are
equitably borne by all property owners in the subject study area. The amount
and the purpose of the obligation for each property owner shall be stated in
the benefit study subject to adjustment for inflation based on the ENR
Construction Cost Index published by McGraw-Hill, Inc., and actual
construction costs. When development occurs in areas which have not been
included in benefit studies, the obligations will be estimated by the Public
Works Director or, at the developer’s option, may be determined by a
developer-funded benefit study.



(Prior Code, § 19-11-4)



§ 152.140  CREDIT.



   (A)   When improvements are developer-constructed, the developer
will be credited for the improvements he or she constructs against the
developer’s obligation set forth in the benefit study. Improvements for
which credit is applied must be those set forth in the benefit study, but
need not be those specific obligations set forth for any particular property.
Where possible, the credit will be established with physical quantities such
as lineal feet of curb and gutter, square feet of asphalt and the like. Where
physical quantities cannot be established, such as portions of railroad
crossings, portions of canal improvements and the like, the obligation to be
met shall be the estimated current value for the item as set forth in the
benefit study.



   (B)   The benefit study analysis and determination of credit for
work performed will be accomplished by the city’s benefit study consultant
at developer expense. If the improvements to be installed by the developer do
not satisfy the full obligation of the property as set forth in the benefit
study, the developer may:



      (1)   Install additional improvements, credited at values
established by the benefit study as opposed to actual costs, up to the value
of the developer’s full obligation;



      (2)   Pay the cash differential which will be held in a trust
account for use only for the designated improvements; or



      (3)   Provide an appropriate security, approved by the City
Attorney, to guarantee construction of the remainder of the developer’s
obligation when determined necessary by the Public Works Director as set
forth in division (B)(2) above.



(Prior Code, § 19-11-5)



§ 152.141  CITY PARTICIPATION.



   When development occurs prior to initiation of city improvements, the
city will not be obligated to participate in the developer’s off-site
construction costs; however, when funds budgeted for city participation in
the developer’s off-site improvements are available, the City Council may
authorize the use of the funds to defray the developer’s common
infrastructure costs. The amount of the defrayal shall not exceed the amount
of city participation set forth in the benefit study for the developer’s
property.



(Prior Code, § 19-11-6)



§ 152.142  REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT.



   When the value of improvements constructed exceeds the developer’s
obligation as determined by the benefit study, the developer may be entitled
to enter into a reimbursement agreement with the city to provide for recovery
of costs from others who develop later on land adjacent to the streets
constructed by the developer. In those cases where existing development will
preclude property owner reimbursement, the City Council may authorize
reimbursement from city funds subject to availability of funds. The Public
Works Director shall determine the amount of improvements eligible for
reimbursement, and the determination shall be made a part of the agreement.
Reimbursement shall be made on the basis of the benefit study. Procedures for
establishing agreements and collection and payment of buy-ins shall be as set
forth in § 152.048.



(Prior Code, § 19-11-7)



STREET FINANCING POLICY



§ 152.155  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   The cost of all improvements of streets located on or adjacent to new
subdivision areas to be developed or redeveloped shall be the full
responsibility of the developer, except that when improvements are
constructed under improvement district financing.



(Prior Code, Art. 19-12)



§ 152.156  STREET IMPROVEMENT COSTS.



   The cost of street improvements adjacent to already developed areas and
within or adjacent to new subdivisions or developing areas, whether platted
or unplatted, shall be as set forth below.



(Prior Code, § 19-12-1)



§ 152.157  LOCAL.



   The cost of improvements to local and minor collector streets shall be
the responsibility of the abutting property owners.



(Prior Code, § 19-12-2)



§ 152.158  COLLECTORS AND ARTERIALS.



   The cost of improvements to major collector and minor and major
arterial streets shall be as follows.



   (A)   Where street improvements have not been previously constructed
in accordance with city standards, the abutting property owners shall be
responsible for costs of all improvements to city standards to the street
centerline adjacent to the property, including but not limited to curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, asphaltic pavement, tree removals, ditch removals,
scuppers and retention basins, irrigation piping, and structures. Where
applicable, the property owner shall share with other property owners the
cost of streetlights, traffic-control devices, striping, landscaping,
intersection construction, temporary pavement, pavement transitions, and
miscellaneous removals.



      (1)   Where medians are required, the owner of the property
first developing shall install the full median, including curbing, street
lighting, and landscaping. The developer required to install a full median
may request the city to enter into an agreement providing for reimbursement
of that portion of the costs which would have been the responsibility of
subsequent developers. Reimbursement shall be made on the basis of front
footage as determined by the Public Works Director at the rate of half the
front foot current cost less the reimbursement transaction fee established by
Council resolution which shall be retained by the city to cover
administrative costs.



      (2)   Reimbursement shall be made by the city upon receipt of
payment from the adjacent or abutting property owners. The agreements shall
be requested of the city by the developer within one year from the date of
acceptance of the improvements and shall run for a period not to exceed 15
years from the date of execution by the Public Works Director, who is hereby
authorized to execute the agreements in accordance with the provisions of
this section. The agreements shall automatically terminate at the end of the
15-year period.  The Public Works Director shall establish in July, on an
annual basis, the current cost of construction medians, streetlight, and
landscaping installations to be used in determining reimbursement charges.
Such current cost shall include engineering, construction, and inspection
costs.



      (3)   Buy-ins for medians shall be collected by the city only
when a valid reimbursement agreement is in force. They shall be paid at the
time of plan or plat approval.



   (B)   Where the abutting property is an owner-occupied single-family
residential use, the costs for the improvement shall be calculated on the
basis of local street standards for that portion of the property frontage
reasonably related to the single-family residential use, and the difference
in cost assumed as a responsibility of the city. The abutting property owners
shall be responsible for the cost of the 19 feet of pavement nearest the
right-of-way property line based upon local street standards together with
the necessary curbs, gutters, four-foot-wide sidewalks, and other
miscellaneous work required to construct the street improvement.



   (C)   Where the street improvements have been constructed in
accordance with city standards in effect at the time of the construction, the
street reconstruction shall be at no cost to the property owner if the
construction or reconstruction is initiated by the city or persons other than
the property owner.



   (D)   If the construction or reconstruction is undertaken by the
abutting property owner as an improvement to his or her property, the costs
shall be borne by the property owner in accordance with this subchapter.



   (E)   If the construction or reconstruction is initiated by a third
party as part of an improvement to an adjacent or nearby property, the cost
of construction or reconstruction shall be borne by the third party unless
the property owner agrees to assume a share of the improvement costs.



(Prior Code, § 19-12-3)



SCALLOPED STREET ASSESSMENTS



§ 152.170  RESOLUTION OF INTENTION TO ORDER IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Upon the determination of the City Engineer that the public
health, safety, welfare, and convenience requires the construction of streets
prior to the development of the adjacent property, a resolution of intention
to order the improvement shall be submitted to the City Council for approval
as set forth below.



   (B)   Each property owner that may be subject to any assessments
under this subchapter shall receive written notice of the City Council
consideration of the resolution of intention described above at least ten
calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. An affidavit of mailing of
such notice shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.



   (C)   If the City Council receives any written objections, prior to
acting on the resolution of intention to order improvements, the City Council
shall hold a public hearing. The public hearing shall be for the purpose of
receiving comment on whether the proposed improvements are required for the
public health, safety, welfare, and convenience.



   (D)   After the public hearing is concluded, the City Council shall
determine whether the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience require
the street improvements. If the City Council so determines, then the City
Council shall adopt the resolution of intention to order the improvement. The
determination shall include that the street improvements shall be constructed
or improved at city expense. The expense shall be assessed against each
property owner in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (E)   The resolution of intention to order the improvement shall
contain:



      (1)   A description of the street, road or highway to be
improved;



      (2)   A general description of the proposed improvements,
including the estimated total cost and cost per linear foot; and



      (3)   The estimated cost of assessment for each affected
parcel of property.



   (F)   The City Council's decision on necessity for street
improvements and construction shall be final and conclusive, and such
decision shall result in the assessment of property under this subchapter,
subject to appeal as set forth below.



(Prior Code, § 19-13.1-1)  (Ord. O08-07-13, passed 7-10-2008)



§ 152.171  NOTICE OF ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   Not more than 20 calendar days after the City Council adopts
the resolution of intention to order improvements, the City Engineer or
designee shall serve a written notice of assessments, by any means
permissible under the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, upon each owner of
real property adjacent to the improvement and subject to assessment.



   (B)   The notice of assessments shall contain:



      (1)   The name, address and tax parcel number of the property
owner served;



      (2)   The total assessment against the property for the
proposed improvement;



   (C)   The notice of assessments shall advise the property owners of
their right to submit written objections to the amount of assessment to the
city or to appear in person at a public hearing to object to the amount of
assessment. Objections shall be filed within 15 calendar days after receipt
of the notice of assessments. Upon receipt of an objection, a public hearing
shall be scheduled before the City Council on the objections and confirming
of assessments. The public hearing shall be at least 30 days after notice was
served upon each property owner.



(Prior Code, § 19-13.1-2)  (Ord. O08-07-13, passed 7-10-2008)



§ 152.172  ADOPTION AND IMPOSITION OF ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   The City Council shall hold a public hearing on all objections
to the assessments.



   (B)   At the public hearing, or at any time thereafter to which the
hearing may be continued, the City Council shall hear and rule upon all
objections. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive as
to all errors, informalities and irregularities which the City Council might
have remedied or avoided at any time during the progress of the proceedings.
If the City Council determines that the objections should be granted, the
City Engineer shall reissue the notice of assessment. If the City Council
determines that the objections shall be overruled, the City Council shall
adopt an order and resolution overruling all objections and confirming the
assessments established by the City Engineer.



   (C)   The order and resolution confirming the assessments and
describing the property against which the assessments are imposed shall be
recorded in the office of the Maricopa County Recorder, together with a
specific written notice of the assessment containing:



      (1)   The amount of the assessment;



      (2)   The legal description of and the tax parcel number of
the subject property;



      (3)   The name of the property owner; and



      (4)   The conditions that require payment of the assessment.



   (D)   Upon recording of the order and resolution and notice of
assessment, the amount so assessed shall be a lien upon the property assessed
until the earlier to occur of:



      (1)   The date such assessments are paid; or



      (2)   The date that is ten years after the date of such
assessments, and such recording shall be notice to all persons interested in
the contents of the record.



   (E)   Assessments levied against property containing multiple
leaseholds may be subdivided by the City Engineer to apply against each
leasehold based on the amount of the leasehold interest compared to the total
interest.



(Prior Code, § 19-13.1-3)  (Ord. O08-07-13, passed 7-10-2008)



§ 152.173  RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   When sufficient right-of-way is not available to perform the
improvements ordered pursuant to this subchapter, the City Manager is hereby
authorized to obtain the right-of-way upon terms just to the city.  If the
right-of-way is not dedicated in time before construction commences, the cost
to the city to acquire the right-of-way shall be considered an expense
attributable to the completion of the improvements.



(Prior Code, § 19-13.1-4)  (Ord. O08-07-13, passed 7-10-2008)



§ 152.174  LIMITATIONS ON ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   The assessment of property, if adjacent arterial streets are
involved, shall not exceed the cost of improving more than one-half of the
width and more than 1,000 lineal feet of such adjacent arterial street,
except that if any parcel of land is presently being used for single-family
residential use and the width of such residential use does not exceed 200
lineal feet, such property shall not be assessed greater than one-half the
cost of the average residential property within the city.



   (B)   The assessment of property shall not exceed the actual expense
incurred by the city at the time of construction.



   (C)   Any assessment under this chapter shall abate if the property
has not been developed within ten years of the assessment.



(Prior Code, § 19-13.1-5)  (Ord. O08-07-13, passed 7-10-2008)



§ 152.175  COLLECTION; PAYMENT AND SATISFACTION.



   (A)   The City Manager or designee shall collect any unpaid
assessments:



      (1)   Prior to issuing a building permit for development of
any assessed property; and



      (2)   Prior to permitting access to the street from the
assessed property.



   (B)   The City Manager or designee shall collect any unpaid
assessments prior to the City Council or Planning and Zoning Commission
approving any request for rezoning or site plan for development of any
assessed property.



   (C)   Assessments levied under this chapter against real property
having multiple leasehold interests may be payable in part by each leasehold
interest at the time of application for a building permit, conditional permit
or special use permit.



   (D)   The City Manager or designee shall collect any unpaid
assessment prior to the City Council's approval of any final subdivision plat
which plat will result in a subdivision of property assessed under this
subchapter.



   (E)   The City Manager or designee shall collect any unpaid
assessment prior to issuance of any grading permit required for any assessed
property.



   (F)   Upon payment of the assessment in full or in part, a full or
partial satisfaction evidencing payment shall be recorded in the office of
the Maricopa County Recorder.



(Prior Code, § 19-13.1-6)  (Ord. O08-07-13, passed 7-10-2008)



§ 152.176  APPEALS; SEVERABILITY.



   The determination of necessity by the City Council resulting in the
levying of assessments upon any property under this subchapter may be
appealed by the aggrieved party to the Superior Court of Arizona, Maricopa
County. In the event any part or portion of this subchapter is declared
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, all other portions of
this subchapter not declared unenforceable shall be deemed separate and apart
and shall continue to be in full force and effect.



(Prior Code, § 19-13.1-7)  (Ord. O08-07-13, passed 7-10-2008)



ACCELERATED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS



§ 152.190  POLICY.



   The purpose of this subchapter shall be to provide a mechanism by which
the city or developers may be repaid the reimbursement amount of the cost of
accelerated public improvements by each benefitted party who has received a
special benefit from the accelerated pubic improvements, but who has not
contributed a pro rata share of the cost of constructing the accelerated
public benefit.



(Prior Code, § 19-13.2-1)  (Ord. O08-07-13, passed 7-10-2008)



§ 152.191  CONSTRUCTION OF ACCELERATED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   Prior to a permit being issued for construction of accelerated public
improvements for which repayment of reimbursement amount is being requested,
the following requirements shall be met:



   (A)   A diagram describing all property which will be benefitted by
any accelerated public improvements to be installed shall be provided to the
City Engineer or designee.



   (B)   The field engineering plans and specifications required for
the accelerated public improvement may be prepared by the owner or the city.
If prepared by the owner they must be approved by the City Engineer or
designee prior to construction. The engineering costs for preparation of
plans and staking of the accelerated public improvements only, which are
incurred by the person, may be included as determined by the City Engineer or
designee in the agreed construction costs as provided in this section.



   (C)   For any accelerated public improvements that are constructed,
the owner shall furnish and install to city specifications all facilities
within the boundary of the designated area of the development.



   (D)   Detailed plans and specifications for accelerated public
improvements that are extensions to existing public facilities must be
approved by the City Engineer prior to construction. The costs for the
preparation of plans and specifications, diagrams and other information
required by the owner to comply with §§ 152.190 through 152.195 shall be
assumed by the property owner.



   (E)   The project shall be bid in accordance with the provisions
pertaining to public works projects contained in A.R.S. Title 34. The city
shall open the bids on a pre-determined date agreeable to the property owner
and the city. The city and the property owner reserve the right to reject any
or all bids. The construction costs shall be determined prior to the
commencement of construction and shall be approved by the city. In the event
that the agreed upon construction costs increase, the repayment agreement may
be amended upon approval of the additional construction costs by the city.



   (F)   The city will perform the inspection during construction and
shall charge the owner for the inspection of the accelerated public
improvements. The costs of such inspections may be included in any repayment
agreement.



   (G)   The ownership of all accelerated public improvements upon
inspection and acceptance as meeting city standards shall be vested in the
city.



(Prior Code, § 19-13.2-2)  (Ord. O08-07-13, passed 7-10-2008)



§ 152.192  AUTHORIZATION OF REPAYMENT AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   Upon development of any property within or outside of the city
limits for which a accelerated public improvements project will be
constructed, the developer or owner paying the cost of the accelerated public
improvements may request that the City Manager or designee, on behalf of the
city, enter into a reimbursement agreement to collect reimbursement amounts
from the developers and owners of parcels specially benefitted by the project
located within or outside the city.



   (B)   The City Manager shall be authorized to enter into repayment
agreements under this subchapter without further authorization from the City
Council. The agreements shall be recorded in the office of the Maricopa
County Recorder.



   (C)   Any improvements constructed pursuant to §§ 152.170 through
152.176 of this chapter shall not be subject to repayment agreements under
this chapter in addition to assessments levied pursuant to §§ 152.170
through 152.176.



(Prior Code, § 19-13.2-3)  (Ord. O08-07-13, passed 7-10-2008)



§ 152.193  REPAYMENT AGREEMENTS; TERMS; COLLECTIONS; AND COSTS.



   (A)   The repayment agreement shall designate the parcels and
persons who are entitled to reimbursement amounts and shall include a diagram
of the properties and respective amounts from which reimbursement amounts may
be collected.



   (B)   The repayment agreement shall set forth the total of the
reimbursement amount to be paid to the city, which agrees to repay  the
reimbursement amounts to the property owner when the amounts are paid to the
city. The total of the reimbursement amounts shall not exceed that portion of
the agreed construction costs of the accelerated public improvement allotted
to property other than that held by the property owner receiving the
reimbursements. The repayment agreement shall terminate in ten years or when
the total amount provided for by this chapter is repaid, whichever is
earlier.  The city will not be liable to the property owner for any amounts
not collected by the city prior to termination of the repayment agreement.



   (C)   The approved construction costs as described above will be
used for calculation of all reimbursement amounts.



   (D)   In consideration for their entry into a repayment agreement
with the city, the property owner shall have the right to connect into the
accelerated public improvement.



   (E)   The field engineering plans and specifications required for an
accelerated public improvement shall be prepared by the developer and
approved by the city prior to construction. The engineering costs for
preparation of plans and staking of the accelerated public improvements on
the property which are incurred by the property owner may be included as
determined by the city in the agreed construction costs as provided in this
section. The city will perform the inspections during construction.



   (F)   The city shall have sole and exclusive control of connections
to the accelerated public improvement. Connections to the accelerated public
improvement may only be made upon issuance of a written permit from the city.
It shall be unlawful to make a connection to an accelerated public
improvement without a permit. The unlawful connections may be removed by the
city and the costs of removal assessed to the party making the connection.



   (G)   Prior to the inspection and acceptance of the accelerated
public improvement by the city, all reimbursement amounts due by an owner for
repayment of the benefit which their property received from the accelerated
public improvement shall be paid to the city.



   (H)   An annual charge will be assessed by the city for the
administration of each repayment agreement. The annual charge shall be
calculated based on actual cost incurred by the city for the administration
of the agreement; however, the annual charge shall not be less than $500 per
year.



   (I)   Any property owner may assign the benefits arising out of any
reimbursement agreement with the city. The assignments shall not relieve the
property owner from its duties and obligations under the agreement. The
assignment shall require prior, written approval of the city, which may be
withheld for any reason.



(Prior Code, § 19-13.2-4)  (Ord. O08-07-13, passed 7-10-2008)



§ 152.194  REIMBURSEMENT AMOUNTS PAYABLE TO CITY.



   (A)   When an accelerated public improvement is constructed by the
city or its contractors to provide service or benefit to a parcel of a
property owner, which owner or their predecessors in interest did not pay for
any of the costs of the accelerated public improvement, the city may impose
and collect a reimbursement amount. The reimbursement amount shall be based
on the benefitted parcel's share of the special benefit received as compared
to the total cost of the accelerated public improvement. The reimbursement
amount shall be paid to the city prior to the issuance of a building permit
or the issuance of an encroachment permit to access city right-of-way for the
purpose of connecting to the accelerated public improvement.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to extend service from an
accelerated public improvement to property for which a reimbursement amount
has been imposed without first paying the reimbursement amount and obtaining
a permit issued by the City Engineer or designee.



   (C)   The repayment obligation under this section shall terminate in
ten years or when the total amount provided for by this subchapter is repaid,
whichever is sooner.



(Prior Code, § 19-13.2-5)  (Ord. O08-07-13, passed 7-10-2008)



§ 152.195  NOTICE OF INTENTION TO APPROVE ACCELERATED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Upon the determination of the City Engineer or designee that
the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience requires the construction
of accelerated public improvements prior to the development of the adjacent
property, but for which the adjacent property will be specially benefitted, a
map establishing the boundaries of the zone and indicating the amount of
charges for accelerated public improvements on each parcel shall be prepared
by the City Engineer and filed in the office of the City Clerk. The map for
the accelerated public improvement shall contain:



      (1)   A description of the accelerated public improvement;



      (2)   A general description of the estimated total cost and
cost per frontage foot or cost per acre of the proposed accelerated public
improvement;



      (3)   A description of the accelerated public improvement
project area and a map and list of all property owners who will be receiving
a special benefit from the construction of the accelerated public improvement;



   (B)   Those property owners within the area subject to repayment for
accelerated public improvements shall receive notice in writing of the
proposed charges for accelerated public improvements by personal delivery or
by certified U.S. Mail.



   (C)   Upon completion of any accelerated public improvements as
permitted in this subchapter, the city may record with the Maricopa County
Recorder's Office a notice of the reimbursement amount owed by a benefitted
party together with a notice of the provisions of this subchapter relating to
repayment of the reimbursement amount prior to any development on the
property owned by the benefitted party.



(Prior Code, § 19-13.2-6)  (Ord. O08-07-13, passed 7-10-2008)



PRIVATE STREETS



§ 152.205  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   Private streets are subject to all requirements of public streets
except for street and right-of-way width. They shall be reviewed, approved,
inspected, and tested in the same manner as public streets and shall include
drainage facilities, curbs, sidewalks, and streetlights built to city
standards. The minimum allowable width of the private streets will be
determined by the Public Works Director based on projected traffic volume and
availability of off-street parking.



(Prior Code, Art. 19-14)



§ 152.206  PERMITS AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   Any person constructing or installing private streets or any
other privately-owned off-site improvement must comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter including but not limited to complete inspection
and testing for private streets for paving, curb, gutter, and drainage
facilities. Parking lots and their associated access ways shall receive
limited inspection to ensure plan requirements for drainage and thickness of
asphalt and base course have been satisfied. Plan review fees and inspection
fees for limited inspection will be issued at 25% of the normal paving fee.
Other construction such as sidewalks, streetlights, and signs will not
require plan review but will be visually checked by the off-site inspector
for minimum requirements of approved plans; and these requirements must be
satisfied prior to project acceptance. The distinction between private
streets and parking lot access ways will be determined by the Public Works
Director.



   (B)   Street name signs and traffic-control devices shall be
furnished and installed by the developer in accordance with approved plans
prior to project acceptance.



(Prior Code, § 19-14-1)



TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND STREETLIGHTS



§ 152.215  TRAFFIC SIGNAL SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT FEE.



   In accordance with apportioned cost of future traffic signal
installations to new development, there is hereby established a traffic
signal system development fee.



(Prior Code, § 19-15-1)



§ 152.216  FEES.



 


Type of Development
Traffic Signal System Development

 

Fee ($)



Single-family, per unit
 

$15



Multi-family, per unit
 

$9



Commercial, per 1,000 square feet
 

$87



Office, per 1,000 square feet
 

$21



Industrial, per 1,000 square feet
 

$12




 



   (A)   The traffic signal system development fee shall be paid prior
to issuance of a building permit.



   (B)   Developers of property which has been assessed for traffic
signal installation through the improvement district process shall be exempt
from the traffic signal system development fee. Payment by a developer of a
traffic signal system development fee may be credited against subsequent
improvement district assessments for traffic signals on the properties for
which payment of the traffic signal fee was made should initial installation
of a signal be made by the improvement district process.



   (C)   Monies received from the traffic signal system development fee
shall be deposited in a special account to offset costs to the city for
capital expansion and enlargement of the city traffic signal system and/or
retirement of debt service, both principal and interest, associated with
providing necessary traffic-control services.



(Prior Code, § 19-15-2)



§ 152.217  TRAFFIC SIGNAL AND STREETLIGHT REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   When a developer is required to install a traffic signal as
part of the development plan, the developer shall be entitled to enter into a
reimbursement agreement with the city to provide for recovery of costs from
owners of other corners of the intersection which are undeveloped at the time
the plans are approved. The reimbursement costs shall be computed by the
Public Works Director based on actual construction cost of the signal plus
engineering and construction inspection costs. The determination shall be
made a part of the reimbursement agreement. The total of the reimbursement to
the developer shall not exceed the total costs as determined by the Public
Works Director less the proportion of the costs applicable to the
developer’s project. The developer shall furnish the Public Works Director
a certified copy of the actual costs when he or she requests the
reimbursement agreement. No reimbursement shall be received from others on
corners already developed or with valid engineering plans approved for
development. The Public Works Director shall determine the applicability and
the amount of buy-ins due when development occurs on the other corners of the
intersection. As a general rule, one-fourth of the total cost will be
assessed to each corner. Exceptions may apply when the size of a parcel or
the amount of traffic generated warrants a different assessment.



   (B)   When streetlights are installed by a developer on local or
collector streets, he or she shall be entitled to enter into a reimbursement
agreement with the city to provide for recovery of cost from others who
develop later on land adjacent to the streetlights installed by the
developer. The Public Works Director shall determine the amount of street
frontage eligible for reimbursement, and the determination shall be made a
part of the agreement. Reimbursement shall be made on the basis of street
frontage at rates established by the Public Works Director. The rates shall
include current costs for engineering, construction and inspection and shall
be reevaluated annually in July.



   (C)   All reimbursement agreements must be requested by the
developer and shall run for a period not to exceed 15 years from the date of
execution by the Public Works Director, who is hereby authorized to execute
the agreements in accordance with the provisions of this section. The
agreements shall automatically terminate at the end of the 15-year period. No
agreement shall be approved and executed more than one year after date of
acceptance of the improvements, and no reimbursement shall be received from
projects by others which have engineering plans approved prior to receipt of
the developer’s request to enter into such an agreement.



   (D)   Reimbursement shall be made by the city upon receipt of
payment from adjacent property owners, less the fee established by Council
resolution per reimbursement transaction which shall be retained by the city
to cover administrative costs. All agreements shall include the name and
address of the recipient of reimbursement payments, and it shall be the
developer’s responsibility to keep the information current. Agreements may
be assigned by the developer upon written notification to the Public Works
Director and subsequent written acknowledgment.



   (E)   Buy-ins for traffic signals and streetlights shall be
collected by the city only when a valid reimbursement agreement is in force.
They shall be paid before the final plat or site development plan is approved.



(Prior Code, § 19-15-3)



DISPOSITION OF UNNECESSARY RIGHTS-OF-WAY



§ 152.230  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   The City Council may dispose of unnecessary public roadway either by
sale, vacation, or exchange of the roadway in accordance with the
requirements of state law and pursuant to the adoption of an ordinance
authorizing the disposition. The City Council may extinguish unneeded
easements by resolution.



(Prior Code, Art. 19-16)



§ 152.231  RESERVATION OF EASEMENTS.



   In the event there are existing utility lines, pipes, canals, ditches,
or appurtenances in any unneeded public roadway being sold, vacated, or
exchanged, or if in the sole discretion of the city it is probable that there
will be a need for a public utility easement in the roadway, the city shall
reserve an easement or easements for such purposes and of such size as the
city may determine.



(Prior Code, § 19-16-1)



§ 152.232  APPLICATION FOR DISPOSITION OF ROADWAY OR EASEMENT.



   An applicant for disposition of unnecessary public roadway or for
extinguishment of an easement shall submit an application in such form and
with such information as may be required by administrative regulation and
shall pay such fees as are established by resolution approved by the City
Council.



(Prior Code, § 19-16-2)



§ 152.233  DECISION TO DISPOSE OF ROADWAY OR EASEMENT.



   (A)   The decision to dispose of an unnecessary public roadway or to
extinguish an unneeded public easement lies solely with the City Council and
shall be made upon receipt of staff’s recommendation.



   (B)   The vesting of title to roadway vacated by the city shall be
subject to consideration from the owner of the abutting property to the city
deemed by the City Council, in its sole discretion, to be commensurate with
the value of the abandoned roadway, giving due consideration to its degree of
fragmentation and marketability and any other public benefit received by the
city in return for the abandoned roadway.



(Prior Code, § 19-16-3)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 152.245  CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.



   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
code, the Public Works Director or his or her designee may order the
unauthorized work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged
in the doing or causing the unauthorized work to be done, and any such person
shall forthwith stop the unauthorized work.



(Prior Code, § 19-17-1)



§ 152.246  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   Any developer who has been aggrieved by a decision of the Public Works
Director or the Public Works Department, pursuant to action taken in the
enforcement of this chapter, to include benefit study standards, criteria,
limits, cost assignments and the like, may appeal the decision for
consideration by the City Council. Appeals shall be presented in writing to
the Public Works Director, who shall prepare a report and recommendation to
the Council and notify the appellant in writing of the time and place of the
Council hearing. The Council may modify these provisions in such a manner and
to such extent as it may deem appropriate to the public interest. The
decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive.



(Prior Code, § 19-17-3)



§ 152.999  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
severely, for each and every such violation and non-compliance, be punished
as provided in § 10.99(A) of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 19-17-2)



CHAPTER 153:  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



Section



Floodplain Responsibilities, Management and Administration



   153.001   Floodplain Manager



   153.002   Flood insurance



   153.003   Floodplain management regulations for Maricopa County



   153.004   Repeal of conflicting ordinances



   153.005   Severability



   153.006   Providing for penalties



FLOODPLAIN RESPONSIBILITIES, MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION



§ 153.001  FLOODPLAIN MANAGER.



   The City of El Mirage Deputy City Manager/City Engineer is
appointed/designated as the Floodplain Manager for the city and will serve as
the community point of contact on National Flood Insurance Program issues for
local, county, state and federal officials, responsible to coordinate with
the district's staff for floodplain management, and to verify that the
community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program is
maintained and remains in good standing through adoption and enforcement of
the Floodplain Management Regulations for Maricopa County.



(Ord. O13-07-12, passed 7-9-2013; Res. R13-07-23, passed 7-9-2013)



§ 153.002  FLOOD INSURANCE.



   Those public records entitled "Flood Insurance Study for Maricopa
County, Arizona, and Incorporated Areas dated September 30, 2005" and "Flood
Insurance Rate Maps dated September 30, 2005" and all subsequent amendments
and/or revisions, three copies of which shall be kept on file in the office
of the City Clerk, are hereby adopted by reference, as the basis for
establishing the special flood hazard areas for floodplain management in the
city. The special flood hazard areas documented in the Flood Insurance Study
and Flood Insurance Rate Maps are the minimum area of applicability of the
floodplain management regulations and may be supplemented by studies for
other areas as allowed in the regulations.



(Ord. O13-07-12, passed 7-9-2013; Res. R13-07-23, passed 7-9-2013)



§ 153.003  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS FOR MARICOPA COUNTY.



   That public record in the Floodplain Management Regulations for
Maricopa County (2011 Revision) and all subsequent amendments and/or
revisions, three copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk, is hereby adopted as the legal basis for implementing floodplain
management in this community.



(Ord. O13-07-12, passed 7-9-2013; Res. R13-07-23, passed 7-9-2013)



§ 153.004  REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.



   Repeal of conflicting ordinances. All ordinances and parts of
ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed.



(Ord. O13-07-12, passed 7-9-2013; Res. R13-07-23, passed 7-9-2013)



§ 153.005  SEVERABILITY.



   Severability.  If any portion of this chapter is determined by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, all remaining portions of this
chapter shall remain in full force and effect.



(Ord. O13-07-12, passed 7-9-2013; Res. R13-07-23, passed 7-9-2013)



§ 153.006  PROVIDING FOR PENALITES.



   Providing for penalties. Any person found guilty of violating any
provision of the Floodplain Management Regulations of the Flood Control
District of Maricopa County adopted herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $1,000 or by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as herein above described.



(Ord. O13-07-12, passed 7-9-2013; Res. R13-07-23, passed 7-9-2013)



CHAPTER 154:  ZONING CODE



Section



General Provisions



   154.001   Citation of chapter



   154.002   Adoption



   154.003   Purpose and nature of regulations



   154.004   Relation to El Mirage general plan



   154.005   Severability



   154.006   Conflict with other regulations



   154.007   Private agreements



Definitions



   154.020   Definition of terms



Administration



   154.035   Administrative agencies



   154.036   Planning and Zoning Commission



   154.037   Board of Adjustment



   154.038   Zoning Administrator



   154.039   Method of documenting amendments



Establishment of Zones



   154.050   Zone classifications



   154.051   Interpretation of zone boundaries



   154.052   Permitted uses by zone



   154.053   Zoning standards



Zone District Regulations



   154.065   Planned area development (P.A.D.)



   154.066   Floodway overlay zone (F-1)



   154.067   Floodplain overlay zone (F-2)



   154.068   Airfield impact overlay zone (A-1)



Thunderbird Road Overlay District



   154.081   Thunderbird Road overlay district (TROD)



Adult or Sexually Oriented Businesses



   154.085   Definitions



   154.086   Location regulations



   154.087   Application



   154.088   Existing nonconforming uses



   154.089   Restricted use locations



Cargo Containers



   154.090   Location, placement and use of cargo containers



General Building and Development Standards



   154.095   Purpose



   154.096   Use of lands, buildings, and structures



   154.097   Dwelling unit restrictions



   154.098   Accessory buildings, uses, and equipment



   154.099   Setback encroachments, limitations, and exceptions



   154.100   Height encroachments, limitations, and exceptions



   154.101   Fences and walls



   154.102   Required screenings



   154.103   Landscaping requirements



   154.104   Property access standards



   154.105   Off-street parking requirements



   154.106   Off-street loading berth requirements



   154.107   Miscellaneous requirements



   154.108   Home occupations



   154.109   Non-conforming uses and structures



   154.110   Wireless communication facilities



Sign Regulations



   154.125   Purpose



   154.126   Definitions



   154.127   General provisions



   154.128   Location, design, and construction specifications



   154.129   Regulations by zone



   154.130   Temporary signs



   154.131   Flags and flagpoles



   154.132   Master sign program



   154.133   Kiosk signs



   154.134   Non-conforming signs



   154.135   Permits, administration, and enforcement



   154.136   Conflict



Administrative Procedures



   154.150   Procedure for amendments to this chapter



   154.151   Procedure for rezonings



   154.152   Citizen review process



   154.153   Procedure for variances from this chapter



   154.154   Procedure for site plan approval



   154.155   Procedure for conditional use permit



   154.156   Procedure for operating a home occupation



   154.157   Procedure for special temporary use permit



   154.158   Procedure for planned area development (P.A.D.) approval



   154.159   Procedure for appeals to Board of Adjustment



   154.160   Fees



   154.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.001  CITATION OF CHAPTER.



   This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “El Mirage
Zoning Ordinance”, except that when cited herein, it shall be referred to
as “this chapter.”



(Prior Code, § 21-1-1)



§ 154.002  ADOPTION.



   This chapter is adopted as the city’s Zoning Ordinances relating to
Comprehensive Planning and Zoning, pursuant to provisions of Arizona law,
including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, A.R.S. §§
9-462 and 9-462.01 to 9-462.07, inclusive, as amended.



(Prior Code, § 21-1-2)



§ 154.003  PURPOSE AND NATURE OF REGULATIONS.



   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to protect the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the community and the people of the
city through the establishment of minimum regulations governing development
and use of land. This chapter shall divide the city into districts and
establish regulations in regard to location, erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, and use of structures and land. The regulations
are established to promote orderly development and redevelopment; to provide
adequate light, air, and access to property; to prevent congestion in the
public rights-of-way; to prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration
of structures by regulating land, buildings, yards, and density of
population; to provide for compatibility of different land uses; to provide
for administration of this chapter; to provide for amendments; to prescribe
penalties for violation of the regulations; and to define powers and duties
of the city staff, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Board of
Adjustment, and the City Council in relation to this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 21-1-3)



§ 154.004  RELATION TO EL MIRAGE GENERAL PLAN.



   All zoning and rezoning ordinances or regulations adopted under this
chapter shall be consistent with and conform to the adopted general plan per
A.R.S. § 9-462.01(F).



(Ord. 11-09-17, passed 9-22-2011)



§ 154.005  SEVERABILITY.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city that the
provisions of this chapter are separable in accordance with the following:



   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any
provision of this chapter to be invalid, that judgment shall not affect any
other provisions of this chapter not specifically included in the judgment;
and/or



   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid
the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property,
building, or other structure, that judgment shall not affect the application
of the provision to any other property, building, or structure not
specifically included in the judgment.



(Prior Code, § 21-1-5)



§ 154.006  CONFLICT WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.



   In the case of a conflict between this chapter and/or any part thereof,
or any other ordinance of the city, the more restrictive provision in all
cases shall apply.



(Prior Code, § 21-1-6)



§ 154.007  PRIVATE AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to interfere
with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements
between private parties when the easements, covenants, or other agreements
are more restrictive or otherwise not in conflict with this chapter.



   (B)   When the easements, covenants, or other agreements are less
restrictive or otherwise in conflict with this chapter, this chapter shall
prevail.



(Prior Code, § 21-1-7)



DEFINITIONS



§ 154.020  DEFINITION OF TERMS.



   (A)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense;
words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural
include the singular; the word “shall” is always mandatory, the word
“person” includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
corporation, or company, as well as an individual; the word “lot”
includes the words “plot” or “parcel”; the word “building”
includes the word “structure”; the words “used” or “occupied,” as
applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words
“intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied”; the words
“map” or “zoning map” mean the Zoning Map(s) of the city that
delineate the area to be governed by these regulations.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      100-YEAR FLOOD. The highest level of flooding that, on the
average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a 1% chance
of occurring in any given year).



      ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. A subordinate building, or portion of
the principal building, located on the same lot as the principal building, or
a subordinate use of land, either of which is customarily incidental to the
principal building or to the principal use of land. Where part of an
accessory building is connected to part of the principal building in a
substantial manner as by a roof, the accessory building shall be counted as
part of the principal building. Individual public utility installations above
ground are considered ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.



      ADULT USE. A retail establishment selling or leasing publications
and other material of a sexual nature, including adult bookstores and
theaters.



      AGRICULTURAL/RANCHING. The cultivation of the soil or the raising
of livestock and all activities incidental thereto. The terms FARMING and
RANCHING shall be interchangeable for purposes of this chapter.



      ALLEY. A permanent public thoroughfare providing a secondary
means of access to abutting lands.



      APARTMENT BUILDING. A building other than a hotel or motel
containing five or more dwelling units which have primary entrances from
common hallways.



      AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three
feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.



      AUTO REDUCTION YARD. A lot or yard where three or more unlicensed
motor vehicles, or the remains thereof, are kept for the purpose of
dismantling, sale of parts, sale as scrap, storage, or abandonment.



      AUTO SALVAGE YARD. A junk yard primarily containing inoperable
vehicles. (See JUNK YARD).



      AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. An establishment with the primary
business function of the retail sale of gasoline for passenger car use with
or without minor service and repair work incidental to the operation of
passenger automobiles.



      AUTOMOBILE WASHING ESTABLISHMENT. A building which has its
primary purpose as washing automobiles. The facilities shall be considered
incidental to automobile service stations if not more than one auto may be
washed at one time and if the service station is clearly the principal use.



      BASE FLOOD, 100-YEAR. The flood having a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.



      BASEMENT. A portion of a building located partly underground but
having not less than half its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade
of the adjoining ground.



      BLOCK FRONTAGE. All of the property of a given lot or any portion
thereof lying adjacent to a public street or highway.



      BOARD. The Board of Adjustment of the City of El Mirage, Arizona.



      BUILDING. Any structure having enclosed space and a roof for the
housing and/or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels, except mobile
homes, recreational vehicles, and mobile offices.



      BUILDING AREA. The maximum horizontal projected area of the
principal and accessory building, excluding open steps, terraces, unenclosed
porches of one story, and architectural appurtenances projecting not more
than two feet. BUILDING AREA, as that portion of a lot upon which
construction is permitted, is as follows: That area of a lot that lies within
the boundaries of the front, side, and rear yard setback requirements
measured from the actual lot line.



      BUILDING ENVELOPE. The area of a lot lying between the front,
rear, and side yard setback lines and between ground level and the maximum
allowable building height, amounting to the three-dimensional area available
for potential building construction.



      BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF. The line of the face of a building
nearest the front lot line.



      BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance of a building as
measured from the average elevation of the finished grade within 20 feet of
the structure to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the
deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and
ridges for gable and hip or gambel roofs.



      BUILDING LINE, FRONT. The line nearest to the front and across a
lot establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the front line
of a building and the front lot line.



      BUILDING LINE, REAR. The line nearest to the rear and across a
lot establishing the minimum open space to be provided between the rear line
of a building and the rear lot line.



      BUILDING,  NON-CONFORMING. A legally existing building which
fails to comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter applicable to
the zone in which the building is located.



      BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the main,
or principal, use of the lot on which the building is situated.



      BUILDING, PUBLIC. A building, supported by government funds, to
be used in an official capacity on behalf of the entire community.



      BUSINESS. The engaging in of the purchase, sale, barter, or
exchange of goods, wares, merchandise, or service; the maintenance or
operation of offices or recreational or amusement enterprises.



      CAMP GROUND. Any area of land used to temporarily accommodate two
or more camping parties, including cabins, tents, recreational vehicles, or
other camping outfits.



      CARPORT. A structure, open on at least two sides, consisting of a
roof and either walls or columns for the purpose of housing automotive
vehicles and other chattels. The structure shall be considered as an
accessory building when detached from the principal building and as a part of
the principal building when attached to the principal building along one or
more sides of the carport or principal building.



      CEMETERY. Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for
cemetery purposes, including crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries when
operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of the cemetery.



      CHURCH. A building together with its accessory buildings and
uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which
building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and
controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.  The
term CHURCH shall be interchangeable with the term(s) RELIGIOUS
ASSEMBLYORINSTITUTION as may be defined or determinable with state law (see
A.R.S. § 41-1493).



      CITY. The City of El Mirage.



      CLINIC or MEDICAL CENTER. An establishment where patients are
admitted for special study and treatment by one or more licensed physicians
and/or dentists and their professional associates, as distinguished from a
“professional office” for general consultation purposes.



      CLUB, PRIVATE (NON-PROFIT). A non-profit association of persons
who are bona fide members paying annual dues which owns, hires, or leases a
building, or a portion thereof; the use of the premises being restricted to
members and their guests.



      COMMISSION. The City of El Mirage Planning and Zoning Commission.



      CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS. Legal authorization to undertake a
conditional use as defined by this chapter.



      CONVENIENCE-FOOD RESTAURANT. An establishment whose principal
business is the sale of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages to the consumer
in a ready-to-eat state for consumption either within the premises or tor
carry-out with consumption either on or off the premises and whose design or
principal method of operation includes both of the following characteristics:



         (a)   Foods, frozen desserts, or beverages are usually
served inedible containers or in paper, plastic, or other disposable
containers.



         (b)   The customer is not served food at his or her
table by an employee but receives it at a counter, window, or similar
facility for carrying to another location for consumption either on or off
the premises.



      CORPORATE COUNSEL. The Attorney of the city or any assistant or
special counsel of the city.



      COUNCIL. The City Council of the city.



      DAY-CARE CENTER. A use where care is provided for pay for five or
more unrelated children subject to the requirements of the State of Arizona.



      DENSITY, GROSS. The number of residential dwelling units per unit
of land.



      DENSITY, NET RESIDENTIAL. The number of residential dwelling
units per unit of land, excluding any land used or to be used as arterial
street rights-of-way or private non-residential uses except parks, open space
and recreational areas. For calculating NET RESIDENTIAL DENSITY, the
following formula shall apply:



 




 

    du   




D =

 
A- (c+i+s+a)



 



Where:



   D   = Residential density



   du   = Total number of dwelling units in project



   A   = Total site area (acres)



   c   = Total commercial land area (acres)



   i   = Total industrial land area (acres)



   s   = Reserved but undedicated school sites (acres)



   a   = Arterial rights-of-way (acres)



      DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improve or alter real
estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.



      DRIVE ACCESS. The area between the curb of a street, or edge of
the traveled portion of a street when no curb exists, and the
right-of-way/property line over which the city will permit vehicular travel
from the traveled portion of a street to an individual property or off-street
parking space(s).



      DRIVE-IN BUSINESS. Any business in which people are provided a
service or a product, where a sale is made without the customer being
required to leave the vehicle. These businesses include, but are not limited
to, the following: drive-in theater, drive-in bank, drive-in laundry or
dry-cleaning pickup station, drive-in restaurant, and any business offering
“take-home” food services.



      DUPLEX. See DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.



      DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, used primarily for
residential occupancy, including single-family, two-family, multiple-family
dwellings, and group homes, but not including hotels, motels, or tourist
homes.



      DWELLING, ATTACHED. A dwelling that has a wall, roof, and/or
floor in common with any other dwelling.



      DWELLING, DETACHED. A city dwelling that does not have a wall,
roof, and/or floor in common with any other dwelling.



      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building used for residential
occupancy by one family.



      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building, or portion thereof, used for
occupancy by two families living independently of each other with the units
completely separated by a common wall, floor, and/or ceiling, Also referred
to as DUPLEX.



      DWELLING, MULTIPLE (MULTI-FAMILY). A building, or portion
thereof, used for occupancy by three or more families living independently of
each other, with the units completely separated by a common wall, floor
and/or ceiling.



      DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling, or portion of a dwelling, used by one
household for residential purposes.



      FAMILY. Any number of individuals customarily living together as
a single housekeeping unit and using common cooking facilities as
distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, motel, club, fraternity,
sorority, lodging house, or nursing home.



      FENCE. A barrier constructed of materials erected for the purpose
of protection, confinement, enclosure, or privacy.



      FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and risk premium zones applicable to the community.



      FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report in which the Federal
Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles as well as the Flood
Boundary-Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.



      FLOOD PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures which reduce
or eliminate flood damage or potential flood damage to lands, water and
sanitary facilities, structures, and contents of buildings.



      FLOODPLAIN. The area encompassing the floodway area and the
floodway fringe.



      FLOODWAY, 100-YEAR. The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas which must be kept free of encroachment in order
to carry and discharge a flood of 100-year magnitude without substantial
increases in flood height.



      FLOODWAY FRINGE, 100-YEAR. The area between the floodway and the
100-year flood boundary.



      GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building, or portion of a
main building, used for the storage of self-propelled vehicles where the
capacity does not exceed three vehicles per family housed in the building to
which the garage is accessory and not more than one-third of the total number
of vehicles stored in the garage shall be commercial vehicles.



      GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any building or premises, except those defined
herein as a private garage, used for the storage or care of motor vehicles;
or where the vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, or kept for
rental, hire, or sale.



      GENERAL PLAN. The City of El Mirage General Plan.



      GRADE. The average level of the finished ground surfaces
surrounding a building.



      GROUND FLOOR AREA. The square foot area of a building within its
largest outside dimension computed on a horizontal plane at the ground floor
level, exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, garages, exterior
stairways, and secondary stairways.



      GROUP HOME. A single, residential structure having common kitchen
facilities occupied by persons having physical, mental, emotional, or social
problems and living together for the purpose of training, observation, and/or
common support.



      HABITABLE FLOOR. Any floor usable for living purposes, which
includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking, or recreation, or a combination
thereof.



      HOME OCCUPATION OR PROFESSION. Any use conducted entirely within
a dwelling and carried on solely by the occupants thereof, which use is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential
purposes and which meets the requirements of this chapter.



      HOSPITAL. An institution for the diagnosis, treatment, or other
cure of human ailments, and includes sanitarium or clinic, provided the
institution is operated by, or treatment is given under direct supervision
of, a physician licensed to practice by the State of Arizona.



      HOTEL or MOTEL. A building or portion thereof, or a group of
buildings, in which lodging is provided and offered to transient guests for
compensation; shall not include a lodging house.



      INDUSTRY, HEAVY. Those industries whose processing of products
results in the emission of any atmospheric pollutant, light flashes, or
glare, odor, noise, or vibration which may be heard and/or felt off the
premises and those industries which constitute a fire or explosion hazard.



      INDUSTRY, LIGHT. Those industries whose processing of products
results in none of the conditions described for heavy industry.



      JUNK YARD. Any place of which personal property is or may be
salvaged for reuse, resale, or reduction or similar disposition and is owned,
possessed, collected, accumulated, dismantled, or sorted including, but not
limited to: use of salvaged base metal or metals, their compounds or
combinations; used or salvaged rope, bags, rags, glass, rubber, lumber,
millwork, brick, automobiles, and similar property which are used, owned, or
possessed for the purpose of wrecking or salvaging parts therefrom.



      KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, cats, or
small animals over the age of eight weeks are kept. A non-commercial KENNEL
at, in, or adjoining a private residence where hunting or other dogs are kept
for the hobby of the householder (i.e., hunting, tracking, or exhibiting) or
for guarding or protecting the householder’s property is permitted in
residential zoning districts, provided the number of dogs, cats, or small
animals over the age of eight weeks does not exceed four.



      LANDFILL SANITARY. A site for solid waste disposal in which the
solid waste is spread in thin layers, compacted to the smallest practical
volume and covered with soil. Disposal of liquid waste or chemicals or other
potentially toxic substances is not permitted.



      LOADING and UNLOADING BAYS. The off-street area required for the
receipt of or distribution, by vehicles, of material or merchandise.



      LODGING HOUSE. A building with more than two but not more than
ten guest rooms where lodging with or without meals is provided for
compensation.



      LOT. A piece, parcel, plot, tract, or area of land occupied or
capable of being occupied by one or more principal buildings, and the
accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to them, and including the
open spaces required under this chapter, and having its principal lot
frontage on a street.



      LOT AREA. The total horizontal area within the boundary lines of
a lot.



      LOT, CORNER. A lot at a junction of and fronting on two or more
intersecting streets.



      LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of the lot area covered by buildings.



      LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance of a line measured at a right
angle to the front lot line and running between the front lot line and rear
lot line of a lot.



      LOT GROUND LEVEL. For buildings having walls fronting on only one
street, the elevation at the front lot line at the center of a wall fronting
on the street; for buildings having walls fronting on more than one street,
the average of the elevation of the lot lines at the center of all walls
fronting on the streets; for buildings having no walls fronting on the
street, the average level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the
building.



      LOT INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner or through lot.



      LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot, a line
separating the lot from the street; in the case of a corner lot, a line
separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street; and in
the case of a through lot, a line separating the lot from the street from
which a drive access may be permitted by the city.



      LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line which is opposite and most distant
from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular or triangular shaped
lot, a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum
distance from the front lot line.



      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a
rear lot line.



      LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets.



      LOT WIDTH. The distance as measured in a straight line, between
side lot lines at the points of intersection with the front building line.



      MANUFACTURED HOME. See MOBILE HOME.



      MANUFACTURING. The creation of products either with machinery or
by hand according to an organized plan and with the division of labor.



      MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. Fabrication and/or assembly of goods from
previously prepared materials.



      MEDICAL MARIJUANA. All parts of the genus cannabis whether
growing or not, and the seed of such plants that may be administered to treat
or alleviate a qualifying patients debilitating medical condition or symptoms
associated with the patient's debilitating medical condition.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION. The process by which a person grows a
marijuana plant. A facility shall mean a building, structure or premises used
for the cultivation or storage of medical marijuana that is physically
separate and off-site from a medical marijuana dispensary.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A non-profit entity defined in A.R.S. §
36-2801(11) that sells, distributes, transmits, gives, dispenses, or
otherwise provides medical marijuana to qualifying patients.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA MANUFACTURING FACILITY. A facility that incorporates
medical marijuana (cannabis) by the means of cooking, blending, or
incorporation into consumable/edible goods.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA QUALIFYING PATIENT. A person who has been diagnosed
by a physician as having a debilitating medical condition as defined in
A.R.S. § 36-2801.13.



      MINING. The extraction of sand, gravel, or other material from
the land in the amount of 400 cubic yards or more and the removal thereof
from the site without processing.



      MOBILE HOME PARK. Any plot of ground upon which two or more
mobile homes, occupied or intended to be occupied for dwelling or sleeping
purposes, are located.



      MOBILE HOME SPACE. A plot of ground within a mobile home park
designed for the accommodation of one mobile home.



      MOBILE HOME STAND. The portion of an individual mobile home space
which has been reserved for the placement of a mobile home and structures or
additions appurtenant to the mobile home.



      MOBILE HOMES (also MANUFACTURED HOME). A factory-assembled
structure or structures exceeding eight feet in width, originally equipped
with the necessary service connections and originally made so as to be
readily movable as a unit or units on its (their) own running gear and
designed to be used as a dwelling unit(s) without a permanent foundation,
whether or not the running gear has been removed.



      MOBILE OFFICE. A factory-assembled structure or structures
exceeding eight feet in width, originally equipped with the necessary service
connections, and originally made so as to be readily movable as a unit or
units on its (their) own running gear and designed to be used as an office
without a permanent foundation, whether or not the running gear has been
removed.



      MODULAR or SECTIONAL HOME. A dwelling unit mass-produced in a
factory, designed and constructed for transportation to a site for occupancy
when connected to the required utilities and when permanently anchored to a
permanent foundation, and whether intended for use as an independent,
individual unit or in combination with other units to form a larger building.



      NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.



      NON-CHARTERED FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.  A business other than a
state or federally chartered bank, credit union, mortgage lender, or savings
and loan association that offers check cashing services and loans for payment
of a percentage fee. Specifically included are check-cashing businesses that
charge a percentage fee for cashing a check or negotiable instrument, payday
loan businesses that make loans upon assignments of wages to be received,
businesses that provide loans secured by title of a vehicle unless the loan
is made for the purpose of purchasing the vehicle, and businesses that
function as deferred presentment business.  A DEFERRED PRESENTMENT BUSINESS
is a business that makes transactions pursuant to a written agreement in
which the licensee accepts a check and agrees to hold the check for at least
three days before presentment for payment or deposit.



      NON-CONFORMING USE. See USE, NON-CONFORMING.



      NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION. An organization that is tax-exempt under
section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and uses its surplus revenues
to further achieve its purpose or mission, rather than distributing its
surplus income to the organization’s directors (or equivalents) as profit
or dividends.



      NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIAL. Material capable of causing injury to
living organisms by chemical reaction or capable of causing detrimental
effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals.



      NURSING HOME. See GROUP, HOME.



      OFFICES. Structures, or portions of structures, in which
commercial activities take place but where goods are not produced, sold, or
repaired. These include: banks; general and professional offices;
governmental offices; insurance offices; real estate offices; taxicab
offices, but not taxi stands; travel agency or transportation ticket offices;
telephone exchange; utility offices; radio broadcasting; and similar uses.



      OPEN SALES (OR RENTAL) LOT. Any land used or occupied for the
purpose of buying, selling, or renting for use away from the premises, any
goods, materials, or merchandise, and for the exterior storing of the same
prior to sale or rental.



      OVERLAY ZONE. A zone superimposed upon an underlying zone which
establishes special requirements in addition to, or in lieu of, those of the
underlying zone. Development or use of land or structures must conform to the
requirements of both zones or the more restrictive of the two, if in conflict.



      PARKING AREA, PUBLIC. An open area, other than a street or alley
designated for use, or used, as temporary parking of four or more vehicles
when available for public use, whether free or for compensation or as an
accommodation for clients or customers.



      PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. A space designated for the temporary
parking of a motor vehicle not on the right-of-way or alley but accessible
from a street or alley.



      PARTY WALL. Any wall of a building or structure which is common
to two or more buildings.



      PAVED PARKING SPACE OR SURFACE. An area covered by an impervious,
dust-free surface of asphalt or concrete designed to specifications of the
City Engineer.



      PAWNSHOP.  Any establishment in which is carried on the business
of pawn brokerage, or the business of loaning money for himself or herself or
for another person, receiving as security for payment thereof pawns or
pledges of property, or the business of purchasing personal property and
reselling or agreeing to resell, trade, or exchange such articles to vendors,
their personal representatives, or their assignees at a price agreed upon at
or before the time of the purchase, whether the business be the principal or
sole business so carried on or be merely incidental to, in connection with,
or a branch or a department of some other business.



      PERSONAL and CONVENIENCE SERVICES. Businesses offering services
such as barber shops, beauty shops, laundromats, laundry and dry cleaning
pickup and delivery stations, and similar uses.



      PERSONS. Includes a human being and, as the context requires, an
enterprise, a public or private corporation, an unincorporated association, a
partnership, a firm, a society, a government, a governmental authority or an
individual or entity capable of holding a legal or beneficial interest in a
property.



      PROPERTY, PERSONAL. Property, other than real property,
consisting of things temporal and movable.



      PROPERTY, REAL. Property consisting of buildings and/or land.



      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicular type portable structure without
permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled, or driven primarily
designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping, and
travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck campers,
camping trailers, and self-propelled motor homes.



      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A plot of ground upon which two or
more sites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by the
general public as temporary living quarters for recreation, education, or
vacation purposes.



      RESEARCH LABORATORY. An establishment or facility for carrying on
investigation in the natural, physical, or social sciences, or engineering
and development as an extension of investigation with the objective of
creating end products.



      RESTAURANT. Any restaurant (except a drive-in restaurant or a
convenience food restaurant as defined in this section), coffee shop,
cafeteria, short-order café, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand,
drugstore, and soda fountain serving food, and all other eating or drinking
establishments provided that a least one-half of the total sales are derived
from the sale of food.



      SCHOOL. Any pre-primary, primary, or grammar, public, parochial,
or private school, high school, preparatory school, or academy, public or
founded, or owned or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a religious or
charitable organization; private preparatory school, or academy furnishing
courses of instruction substantially equivalent to the courses offered by
public high schools for preparation of admission to college or universities
which award B.A. or B.S. degrees; junior college or university, public or
founded or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a religious or charitable
organization; or private school when not conducted as a commercial enterprise
for the profit of individual owners or stockholders.



      SCREENING. A solid or nearly solid barrier (i.e., wall, fence,
plantings) constructed or installed for the purpose of visual separation.



      SETBACK. The horizontal distance between the front line of
building and the street right-of-way line or lot line.



      SETBACK LINE. That line that is the required minimum distance
from the street right-of-way line or any other lot line that establishes the
area within which the principal structure must be placed.



      SEWER, PUBLIC. Any sanitary sewer line owned and maintained by
the city, whether or not installed by the city.



      SEWER SYSTEM, COMMUNITY. Any sanitary sewer system, whether
treatment plant, septic tank, or lagoon, designed with a sewer collection
system to be used by a legally-constituted association of property owners.
The system may or may not be a public system.



      SHOPPING CENTER. Any grouping of two or more principal retail
uses, whether on a single lot or on abutting lots under multiple or single
ownership and whether contained in one building or multiple buildings.



      SIGN. Any device providing identification, advertising, or
directional information for a specific business, service, product, person,
organization, place, or building. Included in this definition are graphic
devices such as logos, attention attracting media such as banners or logo
sculpture, and obtrusive colored fascia or architectural elements.



      SIGN, FREE-STANDING. Any non-movable sign not affixed to a
building.



      SIGN, NON-ACCESSORY. A sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at
a location other than the premises on which the sign is located.



      SIGN, WALL. A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a
building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting
structure for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and which does
not project more than 12 inches from the building or structure.



      SITE PLAN. A drawing to a scale not less than one inch equals 100
feet showing the accurate location of all structures, streets, alleys, and
parking areas existing and proposed on subject property or any other
information as may be required by this chapter.



      STABLE, PRIVATE. Any building located on a lot which is designed,
arranged, used, or intended to be used for not more than four horses for the
private use of the owner of the lot, but shall not exceed 6,000 square feet
in area.



      STABLE, PUBLIC. A stable where horses are kept for remuneration,
hire, or sale.



      START OF CONSTRUCTION. The first placement of permanent
construction of a structure (other than a mobile home) on a site, such as the
pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of excavation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure.



         (a)   For a structure (other than a mobile home) without
a basement or poured footings, the START OF CONSTRUCTION includes the first
permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its
piling or foundation.



         (b)   For mobile homes not within a mobile home park or
mobile home subdivision, START OF CONSTRUCTION means the affixing of the
mobile home to its permanent site. For mobile homes within mobile home parks
or mobile home subdivisions, START OF CONSTRUCTION is the date on which the
construction of facilities, for servicing the site on which the mobile home
is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the construction of streets,
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and installation
of utilities) is completed.



      STREET. A right-of-way, other than an alley, dedicated or
otherwise legally established for public use, usually affording the principal
means of access to abutting property.



      STREET ARTERIAL. A street with access control, signals at
important intersections, and stop signs on the side streets and restricted
parking designed to primarily distribute traffic.



      STREET, COLLECTOR. A street which carries (collects) traffic from
local streets and connects with minor or major arterial streets.



      STREET, LOCAL. A street designed to provide vehicular access to
abutting properties and to discourage through traffic.



      STREET FRONTAGE. Any property line separating a lot from a
street; the front lot line.



      STREET, PUBLIC. Any street which has been dedicated or is
otherwise publicly owned by the city.



      STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or
any change in the exterior walls or the roof.



      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires
location on the ground.



      SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.



         (a)   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure either:



            1.   Before the improvement or repair is started;
or



            2.   If the structure has been damaged and is
being restored, before the damage occurred.



         (b)   For the purpose of this definition SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either:



            1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



            2.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places.



      TOURIST HOME (BED AND BREAKFAST). A building in which more than
one, but not more than five, guest rooms are used to provide or offer
overnight accommodations for transient guests for compensation.



      TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling constructed as part of a
series of dwellings, all of which are either attached to the adjacent
building and/or buildings by party walls, or are located immediately adjacent
thereto without any visible separation between walls or roof; all of which
dwellings may be located on individual and separate lots, if individually
owned, or upon a single lot, if under common ownership.



      TOWNHOUSE CLUSTER. A building consisting of three or more
non-communicating, attached one-family units placed side by side and/or back
to back having a common wall between each two adjacent dwelling units.



      USE. The employment or occupation of a building, structure, or
land for a person’s service, benefit, or enjoyment.



      USE, ACCESSORY. See ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE.



      USE, CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED. Either a public or private use as
listed herein which, because of its unique characteristics, cannot be
properly classified as an otherwise permitted use in a particular district.
After consideration, in each case, of the impact of the use upon neighboring
land and of the public need for the particular use at the particular
location, a permit for the conditional use may or may not be granted, subject
to all conditions specifically listed in this chapter for any particular
conditional use and any other reasonable condition or conditions established
by the Planning and Zoning Commission, including time limits, pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter. A CONDITIONAL USE may be a principal use or an
accessory use.



      USE,  NON-CONFORMING. An existing use of land or building which
was legal prior to the effective date of this chapter but which fails to
comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter applicable to the zone
in which the use is located.



      USE, PERMITTED. A use which is lawfully established in a
particular district or districts and which conforms with all requirements,
regulations, and performance standards of the district. A PERMITTED USE may
be a principal use or an accessory use.



      USE, PRINCIPAL. A use or structure which determines the
predominant or major use of the lot on which it is located. A PRINCIPAL USE
may be either a permitted or a conditional use.



      USE, TEMPORARY. A use established for a fixed period of time with
the intent to discontinue the use upon the expiration of the time period.



      VARIANCE. A modification or variation of the provisions of this
chapter as applied to a specific piece of property. Dimensional variances
only may be allowed; no variance regarding use of property shall be
permitted; no variance decreasing lot area requirements shall be allowed.
VARIANCE may be permitted only by the Board of Adjustment.



      VARIANCE, DIMENSIONAL. Departure from the terms of the zoning
regulations pertaining to height or width of structures and size of yard and
open spaces where the departure will not be contrary to the public interest
and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property because of its size,
shape, or topography, and not as a result of the action of the applicant, the
literal enforcement of the zoning regulations would result in unnecessary and
undue hardship.



      WAREHOUSE. An enclosed building designed and used primarily for
the storage of goods and materials.



      WAREHOUSE, RESIDENTIAL STORAGE (MINI-WAREHOUSE). A building or
group of buildings in a controlled-access and fenced or screened compound
that contains relatively small storage spaces of varying sizes and/or spaces
for recreational vehicles or boats, having individual, compartmentalized, and
controlled access for the dead storage of excess personal property of an
individual or family generally stored in residential accessory structures,
when the building or group of buildings are not located on the lot of the
residence.



      WRECKING YARD. A place, lot, or area where the primary function
is that of dismantling, storage, abandonment, or sale of goods and materials
as parts or scraps.



      YARD. A space on the same lot with a principal building, which is
open and unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp
posts, and similar structures, and unobstructed by structures, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.



      YARD, CORNER SIDE. A yard on a corner lot the area of which is
bounded by a line extending from the front of the principal building (the
front building line) to a point intersecting the side street right-of-way
line (side lot line), then along the side lot line to a point intersecting
the rear lot line, then along the rear lot line to a point intersecting the
line formed by extending the wall of the nearest principal building
paralleling the side lot line.



      YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot
between two side lot lines the depth of which is the least distance between
the street right-of-way and the front building line.



      YARD,  REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot
between the two side lot lines and between the rear line and a parallel line
tangent to the rear of the principal building and the depth of which is the
least distance between the rear lot line and the parallel line.



      YARD, SIDE. A yard extending between the front building line and
the rear building line, the width of which is the least distance between the
side lot line and the nearest part of the principal building.



(Prior Code, § 21-3-1)  (Ord. O08-07-11, passed 7-10-2008; Ord. O11-04-06,
passed 4-14-2011; Ord. O12-11-10, passed 11-8-2012; Ord. O15-10-08, passed
10-6-2015; Ord. O16-03-03, passed 3-1-2016)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 154.035  ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIES.



   The following will have primary responsibility of administering this
chapter as established and prescribed in this subchapter:



   (A)   Planning and Zoning Commission;



   (B)   Board of Adjustment; and



   (C)   Zoning Administrator.



(Prior Code, § 21-2-1)



§ 154.036  PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Establishment of the Planning and Zoning Commission. There is
hereby created a Planning and Zoning Commission of the city, which shall
promote the health, safety, order, beauty, prosperity, and general welfare of
the city, and shall secure efficiency, economy, and concerted effort in its
growth and development.



   (B)   Membership.



      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of five
members, who shall be residents of the city, representing, insofar as
possible, different professions or occupations. Members shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of a majority vote of the City Council. Insofar
as possible, appointment of members shall be made so as to constitute equal
representation for all areas within the city. Members of the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall serve without pay or compensation of any kind except
actual expenses and shall hold no other municipal or county office, except
that one member may serve on the Board of Adjustment.



      (2)   When a position becomes available on the Planning and
Zoning commission, a classified ad for “Volunteer Planning and Zoning
Commissioner” shall appear in a local newspaper for one day of two
consecutive weeks. This position shall also be posted at all four city
posting locations; the city Water Utility Department, the city Public Works
Department, the CAP Office and the Maricopa County Library – El Mirage.
Each applicant will be required to fill out a Planning and Zoning
Commissioner Application and return it to the City Clerk. At the end of a
two- to three-week period, the applications will be turned over to the
Commissioner Review Board who will interview qualified candidates. After the
interview process, a recommendation will be made to the Council for approval
of appointment.



      (3)   The Commission Review Board shall be made up of three
Council members appointed by Council.



   (C)   Term of office. The term of office of members of the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall be two years, providing that the appointments
first made under this chapter shall be two for one year and three for two
years, with the effective date of appointment being January 1, 1987. Members
may be reappointed. All members shall hold office until their successors are
appointed and qualified. Any member of the Planning and Zoning Commission may
be removed by the Mayor with the consent of a majority vote of the City
Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance in office, or other
good and sufficient cause. Failure to attend three regular meetings in a
calendar year and/or three special meetings or any combination thereof
resulting in the absence of three consecutive meetings in a calendar year
will be considered cause for removal. Vacancies occurring other than through
the expiration of the term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the
Mayor with the approval of a majority vote of the City Council.



   (D)   Organization. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect a
Chairperson from the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall
create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The
Chairperson shall be eligible for reelection. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall schedule at least one regular meeting in each month at such
time and place as may be fixed by the Planning and Zoning Commission. If
there is no business to conduct, the meeting may be cancelled by posting the
cancellation 24 hours prior to the scheduled meeting. The Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for posting the cancellation. Special
meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be called by the
Chairperson, by any three members of the Planning and Zoning Commission, or
the City Manager. A majority of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall adopt such other rules and regulations governing its
organization and procedures as it may deem necessary, which rules and
regulations shall be subject to the approval of the governing body of the
city and shall not be inconsistent with the ordinances of the city and the
laws of Arizona. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall keep a record of
its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record
shall be a public record. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make each
year, and at such other times as directed by the Mayor, a report to the Mayor
and City Council of its proceedings with a full statement of its receipts,
disbursements, and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.



   (E)   Duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission. It shall be the
duty of the Planning and Zoning Commission to:



      (1)   Submit and recommend to the City Council a zoning map
dividing the city into districts of such number, shape, and area as may be
determined best suited to carry out the purposes of this chapter and with the
provisions of Arizona Revised Statutes and, within such districts, it shall
recommend such regulations and restrictions concerning the erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, or use of buildings,
structures, or land as it shall deem to be in the best interests of the city
and its inhabitants;



      (2)   Determine and recommend to the City Council decisions
regarding the classification of parcels of land from one zoning district to
another;



      (3)   Recommend to the City Council changes in any of the
regulations of this chapter as to the use of land in any district, or as to
the restrictions upon buildings or structures therein by amendment to this
chapter;



      (4)   Review or delegate review of site plans for
multiple-dwelling residential structures and developments, commercial
development, and industrial development and to determine the appropriate
action and requirements for each site plan of the development, as called for
in this chapter;



      (5)   Determine and make decisions regarding conditional uses
as provided for under this chapter;



      (6)   Determine and make decisions regarding special temporary
uses as provided under this chapter;



      (7)   Make and recommend to the City Council for adoption a
general plan to guide the physical development of the city;



      (8)   Provide recommendations to the City Council concerning
purchase of sites for city buildings, parks, and other city improvements, the
widening, opening, vacation, or other changes to city streets or other public
ways, the ornamentation of city sites, streets, grounds of premises, and
other issues that may tend to promote the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, utility, and welfare in connection with the City’s General
Plan; and



      (9)   Make recommendations to the City Council on matters
regarding the interpretation, enforcement, and administration of the El
Mirage Subdivision Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 21-2-2)



§ 154.037  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Board of Adjustment. The City Council shall serve as the Board
of Adjustment unless a Board of Adjustment is hereby established consisting
of five members to be appointed by the Mayor and with the consent of the City
Council. The members shall be residents of the city.



   (B)   Membership. Each member of the Board of Adjustment shall be
appointed for a term of two years, provided that the appointments first made
under this chapter shall be two for one year and three for two years, with
the effective date of appointment being January 1, 1987, and thereafter, each
appointment shall be made for the full term of two years; vacancies shall be
filled by appointment for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes
vacant. Members shall not serve more than two consecutive three-year terms.
Before entering upon the duties of his or her appointed position, each member
shall take and subscribe an oath to support the Constitution and laws of the
United States and the State of Arizona, and the ordinances of the city.



   (C)   Adoption of rules. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt by-laws
and rules governing its organization and meetings, and the by-laws and rules
shall be subject to the approval of the governing body of the city and shall
not be inconsistent with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the State
of Arizona. It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to call a meeting of the
Board to pass upon and determine all variances and appeals and all other
matters upon which it is the duty of the Board to act. The Board shall meet
at any other times as it may prescribe in its rules. The Chairperson of the
Board, or in his or her absence, the acting Chairperson, may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be
open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of all its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent, or failing
to vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep records of its examination of
other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the
offices of the Board and shall be of public record.



   (D)   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment. Appeals to the Board of
Adjustment may be taken by any person or by any officer, department, board,
or commission of the city, aggrieved or affected by the decision of any
administrative officer. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the
aggrievement by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and
with the Board of Adjustment, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds. The
officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transfer to the Board
all of the papers constituting the record upon which the appealed action is
taken.



   (E)   Duties of the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment
shall be, and it is hereby, endowed with the following enumerated duties:



      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that an
error exists in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter or of any
ordinance adopted pursuant to this chapter;



      (2)   To vary or adjust the strict application of the
requirements of this chapter in the case of an irregular, narrow, shallow, or
steep lot or other physical condition applying to a lot or building as a
result of which strict application would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of the reasonable use of
the land or building involved. Any such variance granted shall be granted
according to the requirements and procedures established by this chapter.
Variances may be granted only for hardships related to the physical
characteristics of land. Variances to this chapter related to permitted,
accessory, and/or conditional uses in any use district shall not be allowed.
No variance or adjustment in the strict application of any provision of an
ordinance may be granted unless:



         (a)   Special circumstances or conditions, fully
described in the Board’s findings, are peculiar to the land or building for
which the adjustment is sought and do not apply generally to land or
buildings in the neighborhood and have not resulted from any act of the
applicant subsequent to the adoption of this chapter;



         (b)   For reasons fully set forth in the Board’s
finding, the circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application
of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the
reasonable use of the land or building, the granting of the adjustment is
necessary for the reasonable use thereof and the adjustment as granted is the
minimum adjustment that will accomplish this purpose; and



         (c)   The granting of the adjustment is in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to
the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.



      (3)   To grant exceptions and variances upon request where,
after a showing that an illegal construction or a non-conforming building or
use existed for a period of at least five years in violation of zoning
ordinances and the city, with knowledge of the existence of the condition,
has not taken any steps toward elimination of the violations.



(Prior Code, § 21-2-3)



§ 154.038  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Establishment of Zoning Administrator. The staff position of
Zoning Administrator shall be and is hereby established for the general and
specific administration of this chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall be
appointed by the City Manager and shall perform such duties as set forth in
this chapter.



   (B)   Duties of the Zoning Administrator. It shall be the
responsibility of the Zoning Administrator to perform the following duties:



      (1)   Receive, process, record, and administer all requests
for approvals and permits, as governed by this chapter;



      (2)   Advise and recommend to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the Board of Adjustment, and the City Council regarding requests
for approvals and permits as required by this chapter;



      (3)   Direct such inspections, observations, and analyses of
any and all erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, or
use of buildings, structures, or land within the city relating to the
regulations and restrictions as set forth by this chapter;



      (4)   To take such action as is necessary for the enforcement
of this chapter relating to violations of the regulations and restrictions;



      (5)   To pass upon all building permits to determine if the
proposed construction, remodeling, or alterations are in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter; and



      (6)   To ensure compliance with state statutes, following city
notification procedures for proposed residential developments impacted by
high noise and accident potential generated by Luke Air Force Base will be
adhered to effective February 27, 1998. Upon submission by individual(s) on
land use and zoning applications, staff will review applications for
completeness and proceed with the following:



         (a)   A notice by first class mail shall be sent to the
Arizona Military Airport Preservation Committee, Chair and/or Co-Chairs
informing them of a proposed residential development that is the vicinity of
a military airport and on which the day-night average sound level is 65
decibels or greater.



         (b)   A notice by first class mail shall be sent to the
property owner(s) at the address shown on the record of the county assessor
30 days before final approval of the change in the land use plan or zoning
regulation.



         (c)   A notice by first class mail shall be sent to the
same property owner(s) immediately following the final approval of such a
change in the plan or regulation.



(Prior Code, § 21-2-4)



§ 154.039  METHOD OF DOCUMENTING AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Any official amendments to this chapter of the city shall be
incorporated in a timely manner. The amendments shall be added to or deleted
from the appropriate place. Where additional pages are required due to any
amendment, the necessary pages shall be paginated using the proceeding page
number followed by the appropriate alphabetical designation (5a, 5b, and the
like).



   (B)   Amendments will be followed by the ordinance number and date
of adoption which shall appear in parentheses.



   (C)   The table of contents shall be amended as necessary to reflect
the amendments.



(Prior Code, § 21-2-5)



ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES



§ 154.050  ZONE CLASSIFICATIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the city shall be divided
into the following zones:



      (1)   NR Natural Reserve Zone.



      (2)   RA Rural Area Zone.



      (3)   SN Suburban Neighborhood Zone.



      (4)   MP Mobile Park Zone.



      (5)   MU Mixed Urban Zone.



      (6)   UC Urban Corridor Zone.



      (7)   TD Transit Development Zone.



      (8)   CP Commerce Park Zone.



      (9)   EI Employment/Industry Zone.



      (10)   [Left blank intentionally.]



      (11)   FW Floodway Zone.



      (12)   FP Floodplain Zone.



      (13)   65LDN 65-70DB Noise Zone.



      (14)   70LDN 70-75DB Noise Zone.



      (15)   75LDN 75-80DB Noise Zone.



      (16)   80LDN 80+DB Noise Zone.



      (17)   APZ1 Accident Potential Zone 1.



      (18)   APZ2 Accident Potential Zone 2.



   (B)   The boundaries of the above zones are hereby established as
shown on a map entitled “City of El Mirage Zoning Map,” which has been
approved by the City Council and is hereby made a part of this chapter.







 



(Prior Code, § 21-4-1)  (Ord. 11-09-17, passed 9-22-2011; Ord. O14-05-02,
passed 5-6-2014; Ord. O17-12-13, passed 12-5-2017)



§ 154.051  INTERPRETATION OF ZONE BOUNDARIES.



   Where uncertainty exists with respect to any of the boundaries of the
zones as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:



   (A)   Where zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the center lines of street, highway, or railroad rights-of-way or the lines
extended, the center lines or the lines extended shall be construed to be
such boundaries.



   (B)   Where zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the corporate limit line of the city, the corporate limit line shall be
construed to be the boundaries.



   (C)   Where zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following
property lines or the lines extended, the property lines or the lines
extended shall be construed to be the boundaries.



   (D)   Where zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following
the center line or stream beds or river beds, the center lines or the lines
extended shall be construed to be the boundaries.



   (E)   No zone boundary line shall hereinafter be established to
divide one lot into two or more zones unless the size of the lot in question
is such that division is determined to be essential by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 21-4-2)



§ 154.052  PERMITTED USES BY ZONE.



Key to symbols:   P = Permitted      C = Conditional



 




PERMITTED USES BY ZONE1 3






 

NR

 

RA

 

SN

 

MP

 

MU

 

UC

 

TD

 

CP

 

EI



AGRICULTURE


Animal clinic/kennel
 

C

 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P



Grain storage
 

C

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P



Greenhouse
 

C

 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P



Livestock pen
 

C

 

P

 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P



Stable
 

C

 

P

 

C

 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P





 



 




PERMITTED USES BY ZONE1 3



 
 

NR

 

RA

 

SN

 

MP

 

MU

 

UC

 

TD

 

CP

 

EI



BUSINESS


Arts gallery/studio
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Home occupation
 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Kiosk
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Medical marijuana (dispensaries per A.R.S. § 36-2801)
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Medical marijuana (cultivation operation per A.R.S. § 36-2801) 4
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C



Mixed use
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Non profit organization
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Open air market
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Push Cart
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Restaurant
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Restricted 2
 

C

 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Retail and service 2
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



CIVIC


Airport/heliport
 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C



Broadcast/recording
 

C

 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Bus Shelter
 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Community Center
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Golf Course
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Indoor amusement
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Library
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Museum
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

C



Outdoor recreation
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Parking structure
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Passenger terminal
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

C





 



 




PERMITTED USES BY ZONE1 3



 
 

NR

 

RA

 

SN

 

MP

 

MU

 

UC

 

TD

 

CP

 

EI



Playground
 

C

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Private club
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Public Art
 

C

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Religious assembly
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Surface Parking Lot
 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Theater/auditorium
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



DWELLINGS1


Accessory dwelling
 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 





Duplex
 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 



 



 





Live/work unit
 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 



 





Multi-family
 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

P

 



 





Mobile home/RV
 



 



 



 

P

 



 



 



 



 





Single unit attached
 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 



 



 



 





Single unit detached
 



 

P

 

P

 

C

 

P

 



 



 



 





Watchman’s quarters
 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



EDUCATION


College/university
 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 





Daycare center (5+)
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C



Elementary school
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 





High school
 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 



 





Trade school
 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P



AUTOMOTIVE


Auto/RV sales/service
 

C

 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

P

 

C



Billboard
 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

C





 



 




PERMITTED USES BY ZONE1 3




 

NR

 

RA

 

SN

 

MP

 

MU

 

UC

 

TD

 

CP

 

EI



Drive-thru facility
 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Fuel service station
 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

C



Rest stop
 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C



Roadside stand
 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C



Shopping center
 

C

 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 





Shopping mall
 

C

 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 





Truck maintenance
 

C

 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P



CIVIL SUPPORT


Cemetery
 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Fire station
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Funeral home
 

C

 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Hospital
 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Medical/Dental clinic
 

C

 



 



 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C



Police station
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



LODGING


Bed and Breakfast (<6)
 

C

 

C

 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 





Group quarters (>6)
 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 





Inn (6-12)
 

C

 

C

 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 





Hotel/Motel (13+)
 

C

 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 





Residential facilities
 



 

P

 

P

 

C

 

P

 



 



 



 





Industrial


Cremation facility
 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P



Exterior storage yard
 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P



Hazardous materials
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C





 



 




PERMITTED USES BY ZONE1 3




 

NR

 

RA

 

SN

 

MP

 

MU

 

UC

 

TD

 

CP

 

EI



Laboratory facility
 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

P



Manufacturing (light)
 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P



Mining/material mix
 

C

 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C



Mini-storage
 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P



Oil and gas refinery
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C



Recycling facility
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C



Sewer/waste facility
 

C

 



 



 

C

 



 



 



 

C

 

P



Truck depot/terminal
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

C

 

P



Utility substation
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P



Warehouse
 

C

 



 



 



 



 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P



Water supply facility
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P



Wireless transmitter
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C





 



1   All uses are subject to Military Airport Overlay Zones per A.R.S. §
28-8481.



2   Restricted uses include adult sexually oriented businesses, cargo
containers, payday loans, pawnshops, tattoo parlors, and piercing salons.



3   City facilities are permitted in any district and exempt from the site
plan approval process.



4   One thousand five hundred feet restricted distance from residential
zones, public facilities, parks, freestanding/permanent churches, and schools.



(Prior Code, § 21-4-3) (Ord. O10-01-02, passed 1-14-2010; Ord. O10-04-03,
passed 4-8-2010; Ord. O11-09-17, passed 9-22-2011; Ord. O12-11-10, passed
11-8-2012; Ord. O14-07-06, passed 7-1-2014; Ord. O15-02-03, passed 2-17-2015;
Ord. O15-10-08, passed 10-6-2015; Ord. O15-12-12, passed 12-1- 2015; Ord.
O17-08-08, passed 8-15-2017; Ord. 018-12-15, passed 12-4-2018)



§ 154.053  ZONING STANDARDS.



   The standards for each zone are set forth in the table below:



 


NR

 
Natural Reserve


RA
 
Rural Area


SN
 
Suburban Neighborhood


MP
 
Mobile Park


MU
 
Mixed Urban



 



 


UC

 
Urban Corridor


TD
 
Transit Development


CP/EI
 
Commerce Park and Employment/Industry



 



 




   TABLE OF ZONE STANDARDS




Standard

 

NR

 

RA

 

SN

 

MP

 

MU

 

UC

 

TD

 

CP/EI



LOT OCCUPATION


Lot Area (sq. ft.)
 
per site plan
 
43,560
 
5,000
 
2,000
 
4,000
 
2,000
 
1,000
 
2,000


Lot Width  (minimum)
 
per site plan
 
120 ft.
 
45 ft.
 
40 ft.
 
40 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
50 ft.


Lot Cover (maximum)
 
per site plan
 
25%
 
55%
 
80%
 
90%
 
90%
 
90%
 
90%


MINIMUM SETBACKS - PRINCIPAL BUILDING


Front (minimum)
 
per site plan
 
30 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
5 ft. *
 
5 ft. *
 
20 ft.


Side St. (minimum)
 
per site plan
 
20 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
5 ft. *
 
5 ft.*
 
10 ft.


Int. Side (minimum)
 
per site plan
 
20 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
5 ft.*
 
5 ft. *
 
5 ft. *
 
5 ft.*
 
5 ft. *


Rear (minimum)
 
per site plan
 
30 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
5 ft. *
 
5 ft. *
 
5 ft. *


Rear (minimum)
 
developments over 30 acres
 
15 ft.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Frontage (minimum)
 
per site plan
 
no
 
50%
 
50%
 
50%
 
50%
 
50%
 
no


MINIMUM SETBACKS-ACCESSARY BUILDING


Front (minimum)
 
per site plan
 
30 ft.
 
20 ft.
 
5 ft.
 
10 ft.
 
5 ft.*
 
5 ft. *
 
10 ft.


Side (minimum)
 
per site plan
 
5 ft.*
 
5 ft. *
 
5 ft.*
 
5 ft.*
 
5 ft. *
 
5 ft. *
 
5 ft.*


Rear (minimum)
 
per site plan
 
5 ft. *
 
5 ft.*
 
5 ft. *
 
5 ft.*
 
5 ft.*
 
5 ft.*
 
5 ft.*


MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT


Principal (stories)
 
per site plan**
 
2**
 
2**
 
2**
 
2**
 
3**
 
5**
 
2**


Accessory (principal)
 
below
 
below
 
below
 
below
 
below
 
below
 
below
 
below


BUILDING FUNCTION [See Table of Land Uses]




 



*No setback is required if structure is fire resistant per International
Building Code and Fire Code (IBC and IFC).



**Any building above 30 feet in height shall be subject to additional fire
protection precautions per IBC and IFC.



(Ord. O11-09-17, passed 9-22-2011; Ord. O17-08-09, passed 8-15-2017)



ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 154.065  PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT (P.A.D.).



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   As an alternative to conventional zoning and development
approaches and processes, the Planned Area Development (P.A.D.) procedures
and regulations are set forth to enhance the city in order that the public
health, safety, and general welfare be as the city increasingly urbanizes: to
encourage innovations in residential, commercial, and industrial development
so that greater opportunities for better housing, recreation, shopping, and
employment may extend to all citizens and residents of the city; to reflect
changes in the technology of land development; to encourage a more creative
approach in the utilization of land in order to accomplish a more efficient,
aesthetic, and desirable development which may be characterized by special
features of the geography, topography, size, or shape of a particular
property; and to provide a compatible and stable, developed, environment in
harmony with that of the surrounding area.



      (2)   The P.A.D. may include any development having one or
more principal use or structures on a single parcel of ground or contiguous
parcels. The P.A.D. shall consist of a harmonious selection of uses and
groupings of buildings, parking areas, circulation, and open spaces, and
shall be designated as an integrated unit, in such manner as to constitute a
safe, efficient, and convenient urban area development.



   (B)   General requirements and standards.



      (1)   Ownership. The tract shall be a development of land
under unified control at the time of application and planned and scheduled to
be developed as a whole.



      (2)   Conformance with general plan. The land uses and design
of the proposed P.A.D. shall be consistent with the city’s General Plan.



      (3)   P.A.D. regulations. The minimum total P.A.D. shall be no
less than three acres unless the applicant can show that the minimum P.A.D.
requirements should be waived because the waiver would be in the public
interest and that one or both of the following conditions exist.



         (a)   Unusual physical features of the property itself
or of the surrounding area are such that development under the standard
provisions of this zoning ordinance would not be appropriate in order to
conserve a physical or terrain feature of importance to the neighborhood or
community.



         (b)   The property is adjacent to or across the street
from property which has been developed under the provisions of this section
and will contribute to the amenities of the area.



      (4)   Uses in a P.A.D. Any use may be allowed in a P.A.D.
provided it is consistent with the general plan.



      (5)   Residential density in P.A.D.s.



         (a)   Residential development in a P.A.D. may provide
for a variety of housing types allowed in any one of the basic residential
zoning districts. In addition, the number of dwelling units allowed may be
flexible relative to the number of dwelling units allowed may be flexible
relative to the number of dwelling units per acre that would be permitted by
the zoning regulations otherwise applicable to the site. However, the total
number of dwelling units and the resulting density allowed in a P.A.D. shall
be consistent with the land use plan of the city’s general plan.



         (b)   In determining the reasonableness of the densities
in a P.A.D., the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall
consider increased efficiency in the provision of public facilities and
services based, in part, upon:



            1.   The location, amount, and proposed use of
common open space;



            2.   The location, design, and type of dwelling
units;



            3.   The physical characteristics of the site; and



            4.   Particular distinctiveness and excellence in
siting, design, and landscaping.



      (6)   Front, rear, and side yard building setback regulations.
Residential building setbacks from all property lines which form the
perimeter of the P.A.D. or from all interior and exterior dedicated street
right-of-way lines or from the paving of any private interior circulation
streets shall be no less than 20 feet; commercial building setbacks shall be
no less than 20 feet or the height of the building, whichever is greater.



      (7)   More than one building per lot. More than one building
may be placed on one platted or recorded lot in any P.A.D. Areas for
single-family detached dwellings or other housing types providing privately
owned lots must comply with the city’s subdivision ordinance in all
respects not specifically noted in this section as appropriate variances or
waivers.



      (8)   One housing type not inconsistent with intent. A P.A.D.
which only involves one housing type such as all detached or all attached
units shall not be considered inconsistent with the stated purposes and
objectives or this section and shall not be the sole basis for denial or
approval.



      (9)   Architectural style, appearance. Architectural style of
buildings shall not solely be a basis for denial or approval of a plan.
However, the overall appearance and compatibility of individual buildings to
other site elements or to surrounding development will be primary
considerations during P.A.D. review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
Council.



      (10)   Phasing of development.



         (a)   Any P.A.D. plan proposed to be constructed in
phases shall include full details relating thereto, and the City Council may
approve or modify, where necessary, any such proposals.



         (b)   The phasing shall include the time for beginning
and completion of each phase. The timing may be modified by the city on the
showing of good cause by the developer.



         (c)   The land owner or developer shall make such
easements, covenants, and other arrangements and shall furnish such financial
guarantees as may be determined by the city to be reasonably required to
assure performance in accordance with the plan and to protect the public.



      (11)   Street utilities, services, and public facilities. The
uniqueness of each proposal for a P.A.D. may allow specifications and
standards for streets, utilities, and specifications and standards for
streets, utilities, and services to be subject to minor modifications of the
specifications and standards established in this and other city ordinances
governing their construction. The city may, therefore, waive or modify the
specifications or standards where it is found that they are not required in
the interests of the residents of the P.A.D. or the city. The plans and
profiles of all streets, utilities, and services shall be reviewed, modified
if necessary, and approved by the city prior to the final approval of the
P.A.D. All P.A.D.s shall be served by public or community water and sewer
systems.



      (12)   Open space provision. At least 7% of the total P.A.D.
area shall be set aside for public and/or private open space and recreational
use. The city shall determine what portion of the 7% shall be private and
what shall be public.



      (13)   Operating and maintenance requirements for planned area
development common facilities. In the event that certain land areas or
structures are provided within the P.A.D. for private recreational use or as
service facilities, the owner of the land and buildings shall establish an
arrangement to assure the city of a continued standard of maintenance. These
common areas may be placed under the ownership of one of the following,
depending upon which is more appropriate:



         (a)   Dedicated to public where a community-wide use
would be anticipated;



         (b)   Landlord control; and/or



         (c)   Landowners association, provided all of the
following conditions are met:



            1.   The landowners association must be
established prior to any sale;



            2.   Membership may be mandatory for each owner
and any successive buyer;



            3.   The open space restrictions must be permanent
or tied to a long-term agreement (e.g., 99 years);



            4.   The association must be responsible for
liability insurance and the maintenance of recreational, service, and other
facilities as deemed necessary by the city;



            5.   Landowners must pay their pro rata share of
the cost and the assessment levied by the association that can become a lien
on the property in accordance with Arizona Statutes;



            6.   The association must be required to adjust
its assessment to meet changing needs; and



            7.   The association must be required to, at
minimum, adjust its assessment on an annual basis by a percentage not less
than the previous year’s increase in the Consumer Price Index.



      (14)   Building height and setbacks. In general, a
building’s setback from property adjacent to the P.A.D. site shall
approximate its height.



      (15)   Landscaping. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be
provided according to a plan approved by the city and shall include a
detailed planting list with sizes indicated.



      (16)   Utilities. All utilities, including electricity and
telephone, shall be installed underground.



      (17)   Additional standards. Development within a P.A.D. shall
conform to all conditions and standards agreed upon by the applicant and the
city at time of P.A.D. approval.



   (C)   Property in floodplains or airfield impact areas. Any property
located in a P.A.D. zone and any F-1, F-2, or A-1 Overlay Zone must comply
with the regulations of the applicable overlay zone.



(Prior Code, § 21-5-12)  (Ord. O11-09-17, passed 9-22-2011; Ord. O14-05-02,
passed 5-6-2014)



§ 154.066  FLOODWAY OVERLAY ZONE (F-1).



   (A)   Purpose. The F-1 Floodway Zone is intended to allow unimpeded
passage of water during a flood through those areas of the city identified as
the floodway by the Federal Insurance Administration of the National Flood
Insurance Program of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and
shown as such on the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood
Insurance Rate Map for the city. The purpose of these regulations is to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize
public and private losses because of flood conditions. Since the floodway is
an extremely hazardous area because of the velocity of flood waters, which
carry debris and erosion potential, development is closely regulated.



   (B)   Principally permitted uses. Those principally permitted uses
which are allowed in the underlying zoning district only if a technical
evaluation demonstrates that encroachments, fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.



   (C)   Conditionally permitted uses. Those conditionally permitted
uses which are allowed in the underlying zoning district only if a technical
evaluation demonstrates that encroachments, fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.



   (D)   Non-conforming uses. Non-conforming uses in the floodway
overlay zone shall not be expanded but may be modified, altered, or repaired
to incorporate flood-proofing measures providing the measures do not raise
the level of a 100-year flood.



(Prior Code, § 21-5-13)  (Ord. O11-09-17, passed 9-22-2011)



§ 154.067  FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONE (F-2).



   (A)   Purpose. The F-2 Floodplain Overlay Zone is intended to
regulate the nature of permitted development in the 100-year floodplain as
identified by the Federal Insurance Administration of the National Flood
Insurance Program of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and
shown as “A” Zones on the city’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps, so as to
lessen property damage and hazards resulting from such events.



   (B)   Principally permitted uses. Those principally permitted uses
of the underlying zoning district, which may be any of the residential,
commercial, or industrial zones defined in this chapter, provided, however,
that the uses comply with the restrictions of divisions (E) and (F) of this
section, below.



   (C)   Conditionally permitted uses. Those conditionally permitted
uses of the underlying zoning district, which may be any of the residential,
commercial, or industrial zones defined in this chapter, provided, however,
that such uses comply with the restrictions of divisions (E) and (F) of this
section, below.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses. Those permitted accessory uses of
the underlying zoning district, which may be any of the residential,
commercial, or industrial zones defined in this chapter, provided, however,
that such uses comply with the restrictions of divisions (E) and (F) of this
section, below.



   (E)   General standards for flood hazard reduction. In all floodway
and floodplain areas, the following standards are required.



      (1)   Anchoring.



         (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements
shall be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.



         (b)   All existing mobile homes shall be anchored to
resist floatation, collapse, or lateral movement by providing over-the-top
and frame ties to ground anchors. Special requirements shall be that:



            1.   Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the
four corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at
intermediate locations; mobile homes less than 50 feet long require only one
additional tie per side;



            2.   Frame ties be provided at each corner of the
mobile home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points with
mobile homes less than 50 feet requiring only four additional ties per side;



            3.   All components of the anchoring system are
capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and



            4.   Any additions to the mobile home be similarly
anchored.



      (2)   Utilities.



         (a)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system;



         (b)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and



         (c)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



   (F)   Specific standards for flood hazard reduction. The following
standards shall apply in all areas where base flood elevation data has been
established by the Federal Insurance Administrator of the National Flood
insurance Program of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.



      (1)   Residential construction.



         (a)   New construction and substantial improvement of
any residential structure shall have the lowest finished flood elevation,
including basement, at least one foot above the base flood elevation.



         (b)   New construction and substantial improvement of
any residential structure located in an AO zone as specified on the
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated above the crown of the nearest street or to the
depth number specified in the community’s FIRM.



      (2)   Non-residential construction.



         (a)   New construction and substantial improvement of
any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure shall either
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the
base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:



            1.   Be flood proofed so that below one foot above
the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;



            2.   Have structural components capable of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and



            3.   Be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied.
The certifications shall be provided to the Building Department and the
Maricopa County Flood Control District.



         (b)   New construction and substantial improvement of
any non-residential structure located in an AO zone as specified on the
community’s FIRM shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the crown of the nearest street or to the depth number specified on the
community’s FIRM or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities
shall:



            1.   Be flood proofed so that below the base flood
level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;



            2.   Have structural components capable of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and



            3.   Be certified by a registered professional
engineer that the standards of this division are satisfied. The
certifications shall be provided to the Building Department and the Maricopa
County Flood Control District.



      (3)   Mobile homes.



         (a)   Existing mobile homes shall be anchored in
accordance with division (E)(1) of this section, above.



         (b)   No mobile homes shall be placed in any floodway or
floodplain after the effective date of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 21-5-14)  (Ord. O11-09-17, passed 9-22-2011)



§ 154.068  AIRFIELD IMPACT OVERLAY ZONE (A-1).



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The principal purpose of the Airfield Impact Overlay
zone is to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
in the vicinity of Luke Air Force Base by minimizing exposure to high noise
levels and accident hazards generated by airport operations and to encourage
future development which is compatible with the continued operation of the
airports.



      (2)   In addition, it is the purpose of the Airfield Impact
Overlay Zone to minimize future conflicts between land uses and excessive
noise generated by aircraft.



      (3)   It is the intent of this overlay zone to regulate land
uses within designed existing or projected airfield noise impact areas by
requiring acoustical performance standards. Nothing herein shall be construed
as altering building materials or construction methods from those which are
specified in the Uniform Building Code.



      (4)   It is also the intent of this overlay zone to prohibit
uses in the accident potential zone that, if otherwise permitted, would
endanger lives or invite destruction of property.



   (B)   Zone and area boundaries. All zoning and rezoning ordinances
or regulations shall be subject to provisions of A.R.S. § 28-8481 et seq.



   (C)   Establishment of zones and areas.



      (1)   Airfield Impact Overlay Zone. The Airfield Impact
Overlay Zone shall be established in like manner as any other zone permitted
by this chapter. The boundaries of this zone and its areas may be subject to
periodic updating and may be amended in accordance with the provision of §
154.150 and § 154.151 of this chapter.



      (2)   Airfield overlay areas. For purposes of administering
these regulations there shall be three airfield noise overlay areas.



         (a)   Airfield noise overlay area one (AI-I). The area
between the 60 Ldn and 70 Ldn noise contour lines developed by the
application of day-night average sound level methodology of sound measurement
(Ldn).



         (b)   Airfield noise overlay area two (AI-II). The area
between the 70 Ldn and the 75 Ldn noise contour lines developed by the
application of day-night average sound level methodology of sound measurement
(Ldn).



         (c)   Airfield noise overlay area three (AI-III). The
Area within the 75Ldn noise contour lines developed by the application of
day-night average sound level methodology of sound measurement (Ldn).



      (3)   Purpose of airfield overlay areas. The boundaries of the
areas shall be established in accordance with the provision of division
(C)(1) above. The purpose of the establishment of three airfield overlay
areas is to distinguish between the severity of the levels of noise impact so
that appropriate uses and acoustical performance standards can be established
to mitigate the adverse impacts of aircraft noise and hazards to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare.



      (4)   Lots divided by airfield zone boundaries. Whenever a lot
of record is divided by an airfield zone boundary, the development shall
conform to the land use and design criteria of the more restrictive district
in accordance with all city codes and regulations.



   (D)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Noise attenuation matrix. Within the Airfield Impact
Overlay Zone, there shall be three overlay areas (AI-I, AI-II, and AI-III).
The uses permitted in the overlay areas shall be those uses permitted in the
underlying zoning district, and shall be subject to all conditions and
procedures of the underlying  district. The uses shall also comply with the
restrictions of the following noise attenuation matrix, unless a land use
category is specifically not permitted in the matrix, in which case such uses
classified in the designated land use category shall not be permitted.



ATTENUATION MATRIX



 


Code

 

Restrictions






NR

 

No restrictions as a result of noise




1

 

The land use or activity is permitted; however, the level of noise within the
principally permitted structures must be reduced by the developer of this
land use activity, in accordance with Chapter 35 Sound Transmission Control
of the most recent edition of the UBC.




2

 

The land use or activity is permitted; however, the level of noise within
principally permitted structures shall not exceed 55 Ldn.




3

 

The land use or activity is permitted; however, the level of noise within
principally permitted structures shall not exceed 60 Ldn.




4

 

The land use or activity is permitted when the level of noise does not exceed
70 Ldn within the principally permitted structure, unless 70 Ldn is exceeded
by self generated noise.




5

 

Uses which produce air pollutants that may obscure vision in any way, or
which pose a potential explosive hazard are not permitted.




6

 

Above ground transmission lines are not permitted.




-

 

Uses within this category are not permitted.





 



 




 

AI-I

 

AI-II

 

AI-III






Single-family, duplex, multi-family

 

1,2

 

1,2

 

-




Mobile homes, parks, or courts

 

1,2

 

1,2

 

-




Other residential uses

 

1,2

 

1,2

 

-




Educational facilities

 

2

 

-

 

-




Religious facilities, libraries, museums, galleries, clubs, and lodges

 

2

 

2

 

-




Outdoor sport events, entertainment, and public assembly, except amphitheaters

 

2

 

2

 

-




Indoor recreation, amusements, athletic clubs, gyms, and spectator events

 

3

 

3

 

-




Neighborhood parks

 

NR

 

NR

 

-




Community and regional parks

 

NR

 

NR

 

-




Outdoor recreation: tennis, golf courses, riding trails, and the like

 

NR

 

NR

 

-




Cemeteries

 

NR

 

NR

 

-




Hotels/Motels

 

2

 

2

 

-




Hospitals and other health care services

 

2

 

2

 

-




Services: finance, real estate, insurance, professional, and government
offices

 

2

 

2

 

-




Retail sales: building materials, farm equipment, automotive, marine, mobile
homes, recreational vehicles, and accessories

 

NR

 

4

 

4




Restaurants, eating and drinking establishments

 

3

 

3

 

3




Retail sales: general merchandise, food, drugs, apparel, and the like

 

3

 

3

 

3




Personal services: barber and beauty shops, laundry and dry cleaning, and the
like

 

3

 

3

 

3




Automobile service stations

 

NR

 

4

 

4




Repair services

 

NR

 

4

 

4




Processing of food, wood and paper products; printing and publishing,
warehouses, wholesale and storage activities

 

NR

 

4

 

4




Refining, manufacturing, and storage of chemicals, petroleum and related
products, manufacturing and assembly of electronic components, and the like

 

NR

 

4

 

4




Manufacturing of stone, clay, glass, leather, gravel, and metal products;
construction and salvage yards; natural resource extraction and processing,
agricultural, mills and gins

 

NR

 

5

 

5





 



 




 

AI-I

 

AI-II

 

AI-III




Animal husbandry: livestock, farming, breeding, and feeding

 

NR

 

NR

 

-




Plant nurseries (excluding retail sales)

 

NR

 

NR

 

NR




Farming (except livestock)

 

NR

 

NR

 

NR




Transportation terminals, utility and communication facilities

 

NR

 

NR

 

NR




Vehicle parking

 

NR

 

NR

 

NR




Signs

 

NR

 

NR

 

NR




 



      (2)   Non-conforming uses. Nothing herein shall require any
change or alteration in a lawfully constructed or established building,
structure, or use in existence at the time of the adoption of any airfield
overlay areas, as established in § 154.109 of this chapter.



   (E)   Certification of noise attenuation.



      (1)   Certification. Prior to issuance of a building permit in
any AI-I, AI-II, or AI-III area, a certification by a registered acoustical
engineer or registered architect that the construction practices and/or
materials of the structure will achieve the interior noise level required in
the noise attenuation matrix shall be submitted. The engineer or architect
shall submit relevant information to permit the Zoning Administrator to
verify that the proposed measures will achieve the interior noise level
standard.



      (2)   Inaccurate data. False or inaccurate data shall be cause
for rendering null and void any building permit and may result in
non-issuance of an occupancy permit.



      (3)   City liability. The city, its employees, and officers
shall not be held liable for any permit issued on the basis of false
information.



   (F)   Avigational easement and release. Prior to issuance of any
building or development permit for property within the Airfield Impact
Overlay Zone, the owner of the property shall provide the city with an
avigational easement over the subject property and release the city from all
liability for any and all claims for damages originating from dust, noise,
vibration, fumes, fuel, and lubricant particles, and the like. The
avigational easement and release form shall be available from the city.



   (G)   Additional height and safety regulations.



      (1)   Hazard marking and lighting. Luke Air Force Base
personnel will determine whether the construction and/or existence of any
structure, pole, tower, tank, or plant material constitutes a hazard to an
aircraft operation in the vicinity of the airfield. When such a determination
is made, the owner of the structure, pole, tower, tank, or plant material
shall, at his or her own expense, reduce in height or install, operate, and
maintain such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to aircraft
operators the presence of an airfield hazard.



      (2)   Communications facilities. Any activity within this
district which may create any electrical interference with communications
between Luke Air Force Base and aircraft is prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 21-5-15)  (Ord. O11-09-17, passed 9-22-2011)



THUNDERBIRD ROAD OVERLAY DISTRICT (TROD)



§ 154.081  THUNDERBIRD ROAD OVERLAY DISTRICT (TROD).



   In order to more fully implement the recently adopted General Plan and
form-based zoning and create a walkable urban environment, all properties
adjacent to Thunderbird Road from 127th Avenue to Grand Avenue as identified
on the map attached to Ord. O12-09-06, passed 9-18-2012, are subject to the
following design standards:



   (A)   All new principal buildings shall be built along the front
property line for at least 50% of the ground floor facade.  All areas in
front of facades shall be paved or landscaped to form a part of the
pedestrian corridor.



   (B)   On-site parking shall be provided in the side and/or rear of
the property.



   (C)   Awnings may be built to front property lines or projecting
over rights-of-way to provide shade to building facades and adjacent
pedestrian walkways.



   (D)   Ground floor facades shall be reserved for retail and/or
service uses with office and/or residential uses either above or to the rear
of the property.



   (E)   At least 50% of the ground flood facade and at least 25% of
all upper stories shall be provided with doors and/or window openings to
allow natural surveillance between the street and businesses.



   (F)   Notwithstanding the requirements as set forth above, any other
building configurations may be considered and approved by conditional use
permit.



   (G)   These provisions shall not hinder the continued use of any
existing buildings but any additions or new structures shall comply with
these regulations.



   (H)   Any residential use within the 65+ DB LDN noise zone is
subject to review by Luke Air Force Base per A.R.S. § 28-8481(J).



(Ord. O12-09-06, passed 9-18-2012)



For a PDF file of the map below, click here.



 







ADULT OR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



§ 154.085  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT or SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  Any adult arcade, adult
bookstore or novelty store, adult cabaret, adult theater, adult use, nude
model studio, semi-nude business, or topless bar.



   ADULT ARCADE.  Any place to which the public is permitted wherein
money-operated, token-operated or credit-operated, or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time in any viewing room of 150
square feet or less, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE or NOVELTY STORE.  Any commercial establishment:



      (1)   Which as one of its principal business uses offers for
sale or rental, for any consideration, any of the following:



         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
materials, which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or



         (b)   Films, video cassettes or other video
reproductions depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or



         (c)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are
designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, excluding
condoms and other birth control and disease prevention products; and



      (2)   Which regularly excludes all minors from the premises
because of the sexually explicit nature of the items sold, rented or
displayed therein.



      (3)   For purposes of this definition, 25% or more of the
establishment's merchandise constitutes a principal business use.



   ADULT CABARET.  Any nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other commercial
establishment which features live performances or activities on the business
premises that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas
or by specified sexual activities; provided that a nude model studio is not
an adult cabaret, the term ADULT CABARET is intended to apply to businesses
which emphasize and seek, through the conduct of any employee or performer,
to arouse or excite any patron's sexual desires. Nothing in this definition
shall be construed to apply to the presentation or performance of any play,
drama, or ballet in any theater, concert hall, fine arts academy, school,
institution of higher education or similar establishment as a form of
expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as
differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose
of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise.



   ADULT THEATER.  Any business establishment, other than an adult arcade
or adult motel, used regularly for the business of exhibiting films, video
cassettes or other video reproductions depicting specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, and from which all minors are regularly
excluded because of the sexually explicit nature of such films, cassettes or
reproductions.



   NUDE, NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY.  The appearance of the cleft of the
buttocks, anus, genitals or areola of the female breast; or a state of dress
which fails to opaquely cover the cleft of the buttocks, anus, genitals or
areola of the female breast.



   NUDE MODEL STUDIO   Any place where a person appears nude or
semi-nude, and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons for any
consideration, the term NUDE MODEL STUDIO does not include a proprietary
school that is licensed by this state; a college, community college, or
university that is supported entirely or in part by taxation; a private
college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in
which credits are transferable to a college, community college, or university
that is supported entirely or in part by taxation; or a structure to which
all of the following apply:



      (1)   A sign is not visible from the exterior of the structure
and no other advertising appears on the premises indicating that a nude or
semi-nude person is available for viewing;



      (2)   The business does not otherwise advertise itself as an
adult business;



      (3)   Where in order to participate in a class, a student must
enroll at least three  days in advance of the class; and



      (4)   Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the
premises at any one time.



   SEMI-NUDE or SEMI-NUDITY.  A state of dress which shows the female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest
point, or which shows the male or female buttocks. This definition shall not
include any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a
dress, blouse, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided that
the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.



   SEMI-NUDE BUSINESS.  Any commercial establishment, other than an adult
cabaret, nude model studio, or topless bar, which features employees who
appear semi-nude before customers on the business premises. The term
SEMI-NUDE BUSINESS is intended to apply to businesses which emphasize and
seek, through the conduct of any employee or performer, to arouse or excite
any patron's sexual desires. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to
apply to the presentation or performance of any play, drama, or ballet in any
theater, concert hall, fine arts academy, school, institution of higher
education or similar establishment as a form of expression of opinion or
communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion
of exploitation of semi-nudity for the purpose of advancing the economic
welfare of a commercial or business enterprise.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Human genitals in a state of sexual
arousal; the appearance of the cleft of the buttocks, anus, genitals, or
areola of the female breast; or a state of dress which fails to opaquely
cover the cleft of the buttocks, anus, genitals, or areola of the female
breast.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Activities that depict, describe, or
relate to any of the following activities:



      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;



      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;



      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or



      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
activities set forth in divisions (1) through (3) above.



   TOPLESS BAR.  Any establishment which is required to hold a liquor
license under Arizona law and which offers semi-nude performers as
entertainment.



(Ord. O08-07-12, passed 7-10-2008)



§ 154.086  LOCATION REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Findings, purpose and intent.



      (1)   The Council makes the following findings and provides
the following guidelines for the construction, interpretation, and
administration of this section:



      (2)   The City Council hereby finds:



         (a)    Adult and sexually oriented businesses cause
secondary effects on the community which are detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare, including unlawful and unhealthy activities;
unlawful sexual activities, including public sexual indecency and
prostitution; sexual encounters of a casual nature; and risk of spread of
sexually transmitted and possibly fatal diseases.



         (b)   Areas of the community surrounding adult
businesses are beset by higher incidences of sexually related crimes, street
crime, and property crimes; greater demand on police resources; lower
property values; litter from sexual devices, materials and packaging; and
other problems.



         (c)    Incidents are reported of lack of strict age
verification procedures and of admission of under-aged juveniles as patrons
into an adult entertainment establishment.



         (d)   Adult businesses require reasonable location
restrictions and spacing requirements to protect residential areas and other
uses which are frequented by children from the negative secondary effects
which occur with these businesses and to protect and preserve the public
health, safety and welfare.



         (e)   Preventing concentration of adult businesses in
proximity to each other and on the same site or in the same building is a
reasonable means to prevent intensification of negative secondary effects
from these businesses in the immediately surrounding area and on the
community generally.



         (f)   Establishing regulations on the location of adult
businesses will disperse any secondary effects; allow more effective
utilization of police resources; allow more effective law enforcement
monitoring of the adult businesses and prevention of illegal negative
secondary effects of adult businesses; and will facilitate enforcement of the
provisions of this zoning ordinance and other state and local laws, thereby
furthering the substantial governmental interest in protecting the public
health, safety and welfare.



      (b)   It is the intent of this section to regulate the
location of adult business establishments so as to protect and promote the
health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city and its
visitors, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
concentration of adult businesses and their secondary effects.



      (c)   This section has neither the purpose, nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communications or
communicative materials, including sexually oriented business.



      (d)   It is not the purpose or intent of this section either
to restrict or deny lawful access by adults to adult and sexually oriented
materials or to deny accesses by the distributors of adult or sexually
oriented materials to their intended market.



      (e)   It is not the purpose or intent of this section to
impose judgment on the content or merits of any constitutionally protected
form of speech or expression.



   (B)   Prohibited locations of any type of adult or sexually oriented
business:



      (1)   An operator of an adult or sexually oriented business is
in violation of this subchapter if the business is operated in a zoning
district which does not expressly permit that type of use in the district.



      (2)   In addition to being located in a proper zoning
district, an operator commits a violation if the adult or sexually oriented
business is operated within 5,280 feet of an existing adult or sexually
oriented business or 1,320 feet of an existing:



         (a)   Church (including synagogue or other house of
worship);



         (b)   School (public, private or charter);



         (c)   Public park;



         (d)   Residential use or residentially zoned property;



         (e)   Child care center; or



         (f)   Designated historic district.



      (3)   The measurement of the distance, for the purposes of
division (B)(2) above, shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the property
line of an existing church, school, child care center, or adult business, or
from the boundary line of a public park, residential use or residentially
zoned property or designated historic district, to the nearest property line
of the property used or sought to be used as an adult or sexually oriented
business.



      (4)   The measurement of the distance for the purposes of
division (B)(2) above shall also include churches, schools, child care
centers, residential use or residentially zoned properties, public parks, or
other adult or sexually oriented business uses which are located outside the
city.



      (5)   A person commits a violation by causing or permitting
the establishment or operation of more than one adult or sexually oriented
business use in the same building or structure, or on any portion of the site
on which an adult or sexually oriented business currently operates.



(Ord. O08-07-12, passed 7-10-2008; Ord. O13-02-03, passed 2-5-2013)



§ 154.087  APPLICATION.



   Submittal or application for adult or sexually oriented business use:



   (A)   Application for an adult or sexually oriented business use
shall be submitted to the Planning Department for review. The application
shall include a narrative statement describing the nature of the business for
determination of conformity with a listed adult or sexually oriented business
use. The application shall also include a site plan and Maricopa County
assessor parcel map clearly identifying surrounding properties with depiction
of the required distances from the uses detailed in § 154.086 above. This
application shall state the distance from each of the uses identified in §
154.086 above.



   (B)   Review of a site application for completeness of information
shall be completed within ten business days of the submission of the
application. The applicant will be notified by first class mail if the
application is complete or requires additional information.



(Ord. O08-07-12, passed 7-10-2008)



§ 154.088  EXISTING NONCONFORMING USES.



   The following are provisions for existing nonconforming uses:  An
adult or sexually oriented business otherwise lawfully operating prior to the
adoption of this subchapter that was lawfully established and maintained
under prior zoning ordinance provisions shall be deemed a legal nonconforming
use. The nonconforming use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or
altered except the use may be voluntarily changed by the operator to a
conforming use within the property's zoning district which meets all other
applicable requirements of city.



(Ord. O08-07-12, passed 7-10-2008)



§ 154.089  RESTRICTED USE LOCATIONS.



   In order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the city
and its citizens and prevent the concentration and proliferation of
businesses that tend to lower property values, in addition to being located
in a proper zoning district and obtaining a conditional use permit,
non-chartered financial institutions, pawnshops, tattoo parlors, and/or
piercing salons shall be located no closer than 5,280 feet [property line to
property line] to another similar use and no closer than 1,320 feet [property
line to property line] to any residential use or district, school, church, or
city-owned park.



(Ord. O13-02-03, passed 2-5-2013)



CARGO CONTAINERS



§ 154.090  LOCATION, PLACEMENT AND USE OF CARGO CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Definitions.  As used in this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:



      CARGO CONTAINER.  An article of transport equipment which falls
into any of the following categories:



         (1)   Designed or constructed for or used to facilitate
the packing, shipping, movement, or transportation of freight, articles,
goods or commodities by one or more modes of transport; and/or



         (2)   Designed to be or capable of being mounted or
moved on a rail car, or mounted on a chassis or bogie for movement by a
tractor trailer, or loaded on to a ship; and/or



         (3)   A prefabricated metal structure designed for use
as an individual shipping container in accordance with international
standards or a metal structure designed and built for use as an enclosed
truck trailer in accordance with U.S. Department of Transportation standards.



      PERMANENT.  A period of time limit that exceeds four months on
site without being utilized for transportation purposes.



      STACK/STACKING.  A method of storing cargo containers or a
chassis in a vertical manner where the floor of the container or bed of the
chassis remains parallel to the ground.



      TEMPORARY.  A period of time that does not exceed four months on
site while being used for storage purposes.



   (B)   Permitted locations.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section,
cargo containers may not be placed, stored or used on property zoned for
residential use.



      (2)   Cargo containers may be placed, stored or used for
temporary storage on property zoned for neighborhood or general business,
provided the business has obtained a temporary storage permit from the Zoning
Administrator.  Cargo containers may not be placed, stored or used on a
permanent basis on any property zoned for neighborhood or general business.



      (3)   Cargo containers may be placed, stored or used on
property zoned for general service or industrial for permanent storage,
provided the placement, condition and use of the cargo container complies
with the provisions of division (C) of this section.



   (C)   Standards and regulations.



      (1)   Cargo containers shall not be stacked on one another.



      (2)   Cargo containers shall not be used for living quarters
and shall not be provided with refrigeration, heating, electricity, or
plumbing.



      (3)   Cargo containers used for permanent storage must be
placed on an asphalt or concrete surface and secured thereto.



      (4)   Cargo containers used for temporary storage must be
placed to the rear of the business and may not be placed within any
designated landscape or flood retention or detention areas.



      (5)   No cargo containers may be placed, stored or used on
property or any area that is within the flood plain or flood way.



   (D)   Exemptions.



      (1)   Contractors licensed by the Arizona Registrar of
Contractors may use cargo containers in any zoning district for the storage
of equipment and materials during the period of construction at the
construction site subject to the following:



         (a)   The construction must be properly permitted by the
city;



         (b)   The container shall be removed from the property
no later than seven calendar days after the final inspection and approval of
the construction by the city; or



         (c)   If construction ceases for a period of 30 days or
is abandoned, the cargo container shall be removed not later than seven days
after notice to remove issued by the city.



      (2)   Containers used during moving may be placed on
residential zoned property for a maximum of 14 days.



   (E)   Removal by city.  Any cargo container(s) placed, stored or
used in violation of this section may be removed by the city if the property
owner on which the cargo container(s) is located fails to remove the cargo
container(s) within 14 calendar days of notice by the city of violation and
order to remove.  A notice of violation and order to remove shall be deemed
received by the property owner if the notice and order are mailed to the
address of the owner as listed in the records of the county assessor and a
copy of the notice and order are posted on the main entrance door or gate of
the property.  The city's cost to remove and dispose of the cargo container
shall be recorded as a lien against the property.



   (F)   Existing nonconforming uses.  A cargo container otherwise
lawfully existing on property prior to the adoption of this section that was
lawfully placed and maintained under prior zoning ordinance provisions shall
be deemed a legal nonconforming use.  Such nonconforming use shall not be
increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except the use may be voluntarily
changed by the operator to a conforming use within the property's zoning
district which meets all other applicable requirements of the City Code.



(Ord. O09-10-12, passed 10-8-2009)



GENERAL BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



§ 154.095  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter of the Zoning Ordinance is to establish
general development standards. These standards are intended and designed to
assure compatibility of uses, to prevent urban blight, deterioration, and
decay, and to enhance the health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the community.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-1)



§ 154.096  USE OF LANDS, BUILDINGS, AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Only permitted uses to be constructed. No building or
structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered, or enlarged for a use,
nor shall any existing building, structure, or part thereof, or land, be used
for a purpose or in a manner that is not in conformity with the uses listed
as principal, accessory or conditionally permitted uses for the zone in which
the buildings, structure, or land is situated subject to the provisions of
this chapter.



   (B)   Height requirements enforced. No building, or part thereof, or
structure shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed
in height the limit herein designated for the district in which the building
is located, except as is specified in § 154.153.



   (C)   Yard requirements enforced. No building or part thereof or
structure shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be altered,
enlarged, or rebuilt or moved into any zone, nor shall any open space be
encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard
and setback regulations designed for the zone in which the building or open
space is located except as is specified in § 154.153.



   (D)   Yard  areas “non-transferable”. No yard provided around
any building for the purpose of complying with provisions of this chapter
shall be considered as providing a yard for any other building, and no yard
for one building site shall be considered as providing a yard for a building
on any other building site.



   (E)   Use of mobile home or recreational vehicle outside of approved
park. No person shall park or occupy any recreational vehicle or mobile home
on the premises of any occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of
the premises of any occupied dwelling, either of which is situated outside of
any approved mobile home park or mobile home subdivision except that the
parking of only one unoccupied recreational vehicle in any accessory private
garage, or in a rear yard in any district, is permitted, providing no living
quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced in the recreational
vehicle while the recreational vehicle is so parked or stored; and except
granted for occupying the recreational vehicle or mobile home, under
procedures established in § 154.157.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-2)



§ 154.097  DWELLING UNIT RESTRICTIONS.



   No cellar, garage, tent, basement with unfinished structure above, or
accessory building or any mobile home or recreational vehicle outside of an
approved mobile home or recreational vehicle development shall at any time be
used as a dwelling unit. The basement portion of a finished home may be used
for normal living, eating, and sleeping purposes, provided it is properly
damp-proofed and has suitable fire protection and exits.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-3)



§ 154.098  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, USES, AND EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   An accessory building shall be considered an integral part of
the principal building if it is connected to the principal building by a
covered passageway.



   (B)   Accessory buildings, uses, or equipment shall not be stored or
constructed between the front lot line and front building setback line except
for porches, steps, eaves, and the like, as allowed in division (K) below.



   (C)   Accessory buildings and garages in residential districts shall
not exceed the height of the principal structure and shall not be located
within a utility easement.



   (D)   No accessory building or garage for single-family homes shall
occupy more than 25% of a rear yard. For lots less than one acre, the maximum
floor area for accessory buildings or garages shall not exceed 600 square
feet of floor area without a conditional use permit. For lots one acre or
larger, the maximum floor area for accessory buildings or garages shall not
exceed 1,200 square feet without a conditional use permit.



   (E)   No permit shall be issued for the construction of more than
one accessory, detached, private garage structure for each dwelling.



   (F)   No accessory building or use shall be constructed or developed
on a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which
it is accessory, except by conditional use permit.



   (G)   No accessory building in any business or industrial district
shall exceed the height of the principal building except by conditional use
permit.



   (H)   Canopies, or roofs attached to the main building or connecting
the main building with a detached accessory building, may extend into a
required rear or side yard provided that portions of the structures extending
into the yard:



      (1)   Shall not exceed 12 feet in height or project closer
than five feet to a side or rear lot line; and



      (2)   Shall be entirely open on at least three sides except
for necessary supporting columns; except that a roof connecting a main
building and an accessory building shall be open on two sides.



   (I)   Detached structures.



      (1)   A detached structure shall meet the setback requirements
of the main building for the front yard area.



      (2)   A detached accessory structure may be located within a
side yard or rear yard; provided, that when the structure is located closer
than five feet to a side lot line, one-hour fire walls shall be required.



      (3)   A detached structure shall maintain a minimum of five
feet separation from the main structure.



   (J)   Swimming pools; private or semi-private. All private or
semi-private swimming pools shall meet the following standards.



      (1)   The pool and all structures housing appurtenances
thereto shall be not less than five feet from the nearest property line
except, however, that the pool or structure shall not be located between the
front property line and the front building setback line.



      (2)   Pool barriers shall be installed in accordance with
state statutes. All wall or fence must be set back from the edge of the
swimming pool a minimum of five feet.



      (3)   The pool or mechanical equipment shall be located so as
to minimize the noise and lessen the nuisance to nearby occupants of
apartments and houses.



      (4)   All swimming pool plans and safety devices proposed to
be built or erected in conjunction with swimming pools shall be first
presented to the Zoning Administrator for approval.



   (K)   Other structures. Porches, steps, architectural features such
as eaves, awnings, and chimneys, and balconies or stairways, wing walls, or
bay windows, may not project within five feet of the property line without
compliance with the adopted building codes.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-4)  (Ord. O11-09-17, passed 9-22-2011)



§ 154.099  SETBACK ENCROACHMENTS, LIMITATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   In any yards. Posts; off-street, open-parking spaces; sills;
pilasters; lintels, cornices; eaves; gutter; awnings; open terraces;
service-station pump islands; open canopies; steps; flag poles; ornamental
features; open fire escapes; sidewalks; and fences, except as hereinafter
amended. Also, terraces, steps, exposed ramps (wheelchair), uncovered
porches, stoops, or similar features provided they do not extend above the
height of the ground-floor level of the principal structure or to a distance
of less than three feet from any lot line nor less than one foot from any
existing or proposed access drive. Also, yard lights and nameplate signs in
residential districts; trees; shrubs; plants; floodlights or other sources of
light-illumination, authorized lights or light standards for illuminating
parking areas, loading areas, or yards for safety and security reasons,
provided the direct source of light is not visible from the public
right-of-way or adjacent, residential property.



   (B)   In side and rear yards. Balconies eight feet above grade may
extend into the yards to within five feet of a lot line provided said
balconies do not extend over non-residential driveways. Recreational
equipment, picnic tables, and apparatus needed for the operation of active
and passive solar-energy systems.



   (C)   In rear yards. Laundry, drying equipment; covered but not
enclosed porches, breezeways, and detached outdoor living rooms may extend 20
feet into the rear yard but not closer than ten feet from the rear lot line.
Apparatus needed for the operation of active and passive solar-energy systems.



   (D)   Front setbacks averaging. When more than 25% of the frontage
on the side of a street between intersections is occupied by structures
having setbacks from the street rights-of-way of greater or lesser amounts
than hereinafter required, the average setback of all existing buildings
between the intersections shall be maintained by all new or relocated
structures. In the event a building is to be built where there is an
established average setback different from that required hereinafter and
there are existing buildings on one side only, the front setback of the new
building needs to be no greater than that of the next adjoining existing
building. In a case where a building is to be built where there is such an
established average setback and there are existing buildings on both sides of
the new building, the front setback shall not be required to be greater than
that which would be established by connecting a straight line between the
furthest extension of the first adjacent building on each side.



   (E)   Side and rear setbacks; zero lot line provision. Subject to
regulations contained in the Adopted Building Code and other applicable
regulations, buildings may be excluded from side and rear setback
requirements provided party walls are used and if the adjacent buildings are
constructed as an integral unit. This primarily pertains to town homes and
condominium structures.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-5)  (Ord. O11-09-17, passed 9-22-2011)



§ 154.100  HEIGHT ENCROACHMENTS, LIMITATIONS, AND EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Exempt appurtenances. Height limitations shall not apply to
church spires, belfries, cupolas, and domes; monuments; chimneys and
smokestacks; flag poles; public and private utility facilities; transmission
towers of commercial and private radio broadcasting stations; television
antennae; parapet walls extending no more than four feet above the limiting
height of the building except as hereinafter provided; and solar-energy
collectors and equipment used for the mounting or operation of the collectors.



   (B)   Public building exceptions. Places of public assembly in
churches, schools, and other permitted public and semi-public buildings may
exceed height limitations otherwise established by this chapter; provided
that these are located on the ground floor of the buildings and provided
that, for each one foot by which the height of the building exceeds the
maximum height otherwise permitted in the zone, its side and rear yards shall
be increased in width or depth by an additional foot over the side and rear
yards required for the highest building otherwise permitted in the zone.



   (C)   Towers and monument exceptions. Towers and monuments, cooling
towers, gas holders, or other structures, where the manufacturing process
requires a greater height and grain elevators and silos are exempt from this
chapter; provided that any structure above the height otherwise permitted in
the zone shall occupy no more than 25% of the area of the lot and shall be at
least 25 feet from every lot line.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-6)



§ 154.101  FENCES AND WALLS.



   (A)   Permit required. No persons, firm, or corporation, except on a
farm and related to farming, shall hereafter construct, or cause to be
constructed or erected within the city any fence without first making an
application for and securing a building permit.



   (B)   Locations. All fences shall be located entirely upon the
private property of the persons, firms, or corporation constructing, or
causing the construction, of the fence unless the owner of the property
adjoining agrees, in writing, that the fence may be erected on the division
line of the respective properties.



   (C)   Construction, maintenance, and height measurement.



      (1)   Fences.



         (a)    Every fence shall be constructed in a
substantial, workmanlike manner and of substantial material reasonably suited
for the purpose for which the fence is proposed to be used. Every fence shall
be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to
become and remain in a condition of disrepair, damage, or unsightliness, or
constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any such fence which is, or has
become, dangerous to the public safety, health, or welfare, for any other
building, and no yard for one building site shall be considered as providing
a yard for a building on any other building site.



         (b)   Link or wire fences, wherever permitted, shall be
constructed in such a manner that no barbed ends shall be at the top, except
in industrial districts and shall be constructed of at least 11-gauge wire or
its comparable.



         (c)   Electrical or security wire fences shall be
prohibited, except for industrial yards and shall be screened.



      (2)   Masonry Walls. The following shall apply regardless of
zoning district.



         (a)   Up to three feet high:  restrictions.



         (b)   Three feet to six feet high:  2,000 lbs. concrete
footings, 18 inches below bearing grade, six inches wider and longer than the
bearing wall or column it is intended to support. Any non-structural sections
(four inches or less) eight inches under bearing grade six inches wider than
the wall it is intended to support.



         (c)   Six feet and higher:  see Adopted Building Code.



      (3)   Measuring fence and wall height. The height of any fence
shall be calculated to the uppermost points as follows.



         (a)   In required yards abutting a street, the height of
the fence shall be the total effective height measured from the finished
grade on the side nearest the street but allowing up to two feet of
additional height for retaining walls.



         (b)   In other required yards, the height of the fence
shall be the total effective height above the finished grade measured on the
side nearest the abutting property.



         (c)   On property lines, the height may be measured from
the finished grade of either side when the abutting property owners are in
joint agreements, with the agreement submitted in writing.



   (D)   Residential fences and walls.



      (1)   In all parts of the city zoned residential, no fence or
wall shall be erected or maintained more than six feet in height and also:



         (a)   No chain link or wire fence shall be allowed
within the front yard setbacks; except in RA Rural Area Zone, properties with
existing chain link fence, or properties where chain link fence has been
removed for less than six months;



         (b)   No fence or wall over four feet in height shall be
allowed in any residential front yard setback or in any side yard closer to
the front lot line than the adjacent front line of the principal building,
except in the RA Rural Area Zone, open fences (chain link, wrought iron, pole
fences, wooden rail, and the like) may exceed four feet in front yard
setbacks;



         (c)   On corner lots in all zoning districts, no fence
or planting in excess of 30 inches above the street center line grade shall
be permitted within a triangular area defined as follows: beginning at the
intersection of the projected curbing lines of two intersecting streets,
thence 40 feet along one back of curb line, thence diagonally to a point 40
feet from the point of beginning on the other curb lines, then to the point
of beginning, and at the intersection of each driveway or alley with a
street, a clear site triangle as defined by the City Engineer where corners
are defined by two points on the right-of-way line, 15 feet on each side of
the centerline of the driveway or alley and a point on the centerline ten
feet outside right-of-way;



         (d)   In those instances where a fence is erected as an
enclosure which restricts access from the front to the rear yard, a gate,
identifiable collapsible section of fence, or other such means of
recognizable ingress shall be installed, shall remain unobstructed and shall
be a minimum of three feet in width. The location of the ingress points shall
be positioned at any point paralleling the front lot line between the side
lot property line and the principal structure;



         (e)   In corner lot side yards, fences up to six feet in
height may be permitted provided that no fence may be built in a corner side
yard that is adjacent to a neighboring front yard; and



         (f)   Notwithstanding the provisions set forth above,
architectural embellishments such as figurines, capstones, or light fixtures
may project up to two feet above the maximum height of any residential fence.



   (E)   Business and industrial fences. Fences and walls on all
business and industrial properties shall not exceed ten feet in height.



   (F)   Special purpose fences. Fences for special purposes and fences
differing in construction, height, or length may be permitted in any district
by issuance of conditional use permit approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Findings shall be made that the fence is necessary to protect,
buffer, or improve the premises for which the fence is intended and will not
detrimentally effect adjacent property.



   (G)   Finished side toward adjacent property. Any fence constructed
so as to have only one elevation “finished,” which shall be defined as
not having its supporting members significantly visible, shall be erected
such that the finished elevation of the fence is exposed to the adjacent
property.



   (H)   Outdoor storage area.



      (1)   All utility substations, wells, storage facilities, or
other utilities shall be screened from view by a wall or landscape screen.



      (2)   All outdoor storage for commercial operations shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building or within an area completely
enclosed, except for access points, by a wall at least six feet in height.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-7)  (Ord. O11-09-17, passed 9-22-2011; Ord. O14-06-04,
passed 6-3-2014)



§ 154.102  REQUIRED SCREENINGS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish general
development standards for screening between uses of differing character,
density, or intensity. The screening standards are intended to assure
compatibility of uses, minimize deterioration of properties and property
values, and to enhance to health and safety of the residents of the city.



   (B)   Use of screening. Unless otherwise determined by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, a masonry screen wall of six feet in height above
grade shall be constructed and maintained between uses of differing intensity
or character. This may include between existing and/or future:



      (1)   Large lot and small lot single-family developments;



      (2)   Single-family and multi-family developments;



      (3)   Multi-family and multi-family developments;



      (4)   Residential and non-residential uses;



      (5)   Differing non-residential uses;



      (6)   Parking areas subject to general public view; and/or



      (7)   Rear and/or side lot areas and public rights-of-way.



   (C)   Responsible party. The Commission shall determine the party
responsible for construction and maintenance of screening. Generally, it will
be either by the most intense use or the initial use.



   (D)   Location of screen walls. Screening shall be located adjacent
to perimeter property lines, but on the constructing party’s property,
unless otherwise approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, which may
include public rights-of-way.



   (E)   Exceptions.



      (1)   In lieu of screen walls of six feet in height, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may require alternative methods for screening
uses of differing character, density, or intensity. Alternative methods may
include:



         (a)   Open space with landscaping;



         (b)   Arterial or collector streets with landscaping;



         (c)   Landscaped earth berms (particularly with parking
lots);



         (d)   Lower screen walls with landscaping (particularly
with parking lots); and/or



         (e)   Other screening approved by the Commission.



      (2)   Alternative methods of screening shall be implemented
when it is in the best interest of the affected properties and deemed by the
Commission to provide more acceptable screening than provided by a screen
wall.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-8)



§ 154.103  LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DETENTION BASIN. An area requiring landscaping to maintain the
purpose and requirements of controlling the flow of water.



      LANDSCAPE MATERIALS. Any materials used for the purpose of
landscape improvement which may include, but shall not be limited to, the
following: trees, shrubs, groundcover materials, boulders, sculptures,
foundations, irrigation equipment, street furniture, outdoor lighting,
fences, and walls.



      LANDSCAPING. An exterior improvement of property in accordance
with an approved landscape plan and utilizing approved landscape materials.



      LANDSCAPING PLAN. A graphic representation of the development
site indicating the location of all existing and proposed landscape
improvements to be present on the site at the completion of the construction
of the project. The LANDSCAPING PLAN shall consist of preliminary and final
plans as set forth herein.



      SCREENING WALL. A solid wall designed and constructed so as to
conceal areas used for refuse, mechanical equipment, parking, and service and
loading bays from street and public view, and to separate potential
incompatible land uses.



      TURF FACILITY. A land area of five acres or more of continuous
turf or grass that is not agricultural use.



   (B)   Purpose and intent. Landscape requirements as set forth in
this chapter have been established to:



      (1)   Encourage quality development within the city;



      (2)   Provide compatibility and harmony between adjoining
properties and land use;



      (3)   Screen service yards, parking lots, equipment, and
limited access areas;



      (4)   Reduce heat transfer from pavements;



      (5)   Provide open space and recreational area to serve the
needs of city residents;



      (6)   Soften development impact;



      (7)   Reduce erosion and storm-water runoff control;



      (8)   Reduce the particulate matter in the air;



      (9)   Aid in the enhancement of property values;



      (10)   Create an attractive appearance along city streets and
assist as traffic calming device;



      (11)   Aid in the conservation of water by encouraging the use
of varieties of plans, trees, and shrubs indigenous to this arid region;



      (12)   Promote protection or control of intense activities; and



      (13)   Promote community aesthetics as well as provide for the
health, safety, and general welfare of city residents.



   (C)   Extended regulation authorized. The standards and regulations
of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements necessary for
the promotion of the foregoing objectives of this chapter in those instances
where the minimum standards and requirements are not sufficient to achieve
the purpose and objectives of this chapter, the City Manager or his or her
designee may impose such other reasonable requirements as may be deemed
appropriate. Examples might be: where, in the opinion of the City Manager or
his or her designee, there exists extraordinary conditions of topography,
land ownership, site boundaries and dimensions, adjacent development
characteristics, or other circumstances not provided for in this chapter, the
City Manager or his or her designee may modify or vary an extent as is deemed
appropriate to the public interest, provided that the purpose and intent of
this chapter is maintained with the modification or variance.



   (D)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all
development or construction, all building remodeling, alternations,
additions, or expansions, and to all changes of occupancy in the use or
development of land which requires the approval of a development site plan or
subdivision plat by the city. Agricultural uses and single-family and
two-family residences and their accessories shall be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter.



   (E)   Enforcement and notice of violations. This chapter shall be
enforced by the City Manager or his or her designee. The City Manager or his
or her designee shall have the authority to enter upon the premises, or any
part thereof, at any and all reasonable times for the purposes of performing
his or her official duties. It is unlawful to refuse the City Manager or
designee entry upon the premises. When any condition which could constitute a
violation of the provisions of this chapter comes to the attention of the
City Manager, he or she shall cause a notice thereof to be served upon the
owner, lessee, or other person in control of the premises. The notice shall
specify the nature of the violation and shall order the responsible party to
correct the violation within 30 days.



   (F)   Landscape inspections.



      (1)   All projects required by this chapter to be landscaped
shall pass a landscape inspection prior to a certificate of occupancy being
issued by the city.



      (2)   The city shall have the right to refuse to pass any
project not meeting the provisions of this chapter. The city shall also have
the right to reject landscape materials as being substandard as to size,
condition, or appearance including a pre-inspection of materials at the
supplier if deemed necessary.



   (G)   Required landscape maintenance.



      (1)   With respect to every lot, parcel, or tract of land
within the city containing a use for which the provisions of this chapter
apply, every owner, lessee, or any other person having the lawful right to
possession and control of this premise shall:



         (a)   Maintain all landscape materials and landscaped
areas in accordance with the approved landscape plan, including the frontage
street right-of-way landscaping required in this chapter. The landscaped
areas shall be kept free of trash, debris, weeds, dead plant material, and
shall in all respects be maintained in a neat and clean fashion; and



         (b)   Replace all dead or removed plants with plants of
the same variety, and in the size and quantity as those removed.



      (2)   The city shall accept responsibility for the maintenance
and operation of all landscaping and appurtenances installed in accordance
with the provisions of this section for reverse street frontage landscaping
or any landscaping and appurtenances installed within other street
rights-of-way. Rights-of-way is described by one of the following categories:



         (a)   Arterial and/or secondary street rights-of-way
adjacent to single-family residential areas that back onto the arterial
and/or secondary street and have a screening wall constructed on the rear
property line;



         (b)   Arterial street rights-of-way adjacent to
single-family residential areas that side onto the arterial street, and which
have a screening wall constructed on the side property line;



         (c)   Bridle trails, bicycle paths, and multi-use
recreational facilities within city limits;



         (d)   Median islands on arterial and secondary public
streets within the city;



         (e)   All alleys within city limits;



         (f)   Street rights-of-way abutting municipal public
facilities;



         (g)   Street landscaping within districts specially
approved or created by City Council; and



         (i)   Flood control facilities which have been accepted
for operation and maintenance by the city.



      (3)   Prior to the city accepting for maintenance any reverse
street frontage landscaping or other street rights-of-way landscaping
described in the division (G)(2) above, the following conditions shall have
to be satisfied:



         (a)   The landscaping shall be inspected and approved by
the city for compliance with the approved landscape plan.



         (b)   The subsequent completion of a 60-day maintenance
period wherein the developer shall be responsible for all watering, weeding,
and replacement of all dead or dying plant materials.



         (c)   A final inspection called by the developer or his
or her representative at the completion of a 120-day maintenance period
resulting in final approval and acceptance by the city, except for the
subdivision which shall be determined when final plans are approved.



         (d)   As-built drawings of the landscape and irrigation
system are required prior to acceptance by the city and for projects within
the city right-of-way or city-owned property. The as-built drawings shall be
four mil., non-wash off photo mylar or digitized record in accordance with
city CAD guidelines showing the locations of all plantings and irrigation
equipment.



   (H)   Landscape plan description.



      (1)   A landscape plan consisting of a preliminary plan and a
final plan shall be prepared, submitted, and approved for all applicable
development projects in accordance with the procedures and requirements set
forth in this subchapter.



      (2)   All changes in landscape plans before, during, or after
preliminary or final landscape plan approval shall be approved by the City
Manager or his or her designee prior to the installation of any such
landscape change.



      (3)   All changes in the landscaping of a site before, during,
or after final landscape plan approval and landscape installation shall be
approved by the City Manager or his or her designee as set forth in this
subchapter.



   (I)   Preliminary landscape plan.



      (1)   Two copies of a preliminary landscape plan shall be
submitted along with the required development site plan for review by the
City Manager or designee. The preliminary landscape plan may be shown on the
development site plan drawings. The preliminary landscape plan shall be a
conceptual plan and shall include the following information in generalized
form:



         (a)   The location and identification of all proposed
landscape areas (on-site, street rights-of-way, parking area, landscape
buffers, and others);



         (b)   Preliminary data pertaining to the amount of net
site area, the ground floor areas of all proposed commercial and industrial
buildings, the number of required and proposed parking spaces, and the amount
of all landscaped areas required and provided;



         (c)   The approximate location of all proposed trees,
and generally other landscape materials and improvements;



         (d)   The location of all sight visibility triangles;



         (e)   Notes or graphical representations adequately
showing intent of the proposed plans and materials and indicating how those
plans will comply with this chapter;



         (f)   The location, height, type, and general design and
finish of all proposed screening walls;



         (g)   The location of all proposed stormwater retention
areas; and



         (h)   A plant list indicating the botanical name, common
name, and size of plant materials proposed.



      (2)   The preliminary landscape plan shall be reviewed and
approved by the City Manager or designee as part of the development site plan
review and may be approved with stipulated changes or additions.



   (J)   Final landscape plan.



      (1)   Two copies of a final landscape plan shall be submitted
along with all other required site improvement and building plans prior to or
concurrent with the application for a building permit. The final landscape
plan shall contain the final calculations, data, and specific details and
information all proposed landscape areas, landscape materials, screening
walls, irrigation system, and other items that were required and identified
in conceptual form on the preliminary landscape plan. The final landscape
plan shall contain a specific schedule of all trees and shrubs identified by
common and botanical name and shall clearly indicate quantity and size of
each tree, shrub, and ground cover to be installed.



      (2)   The final landscape plan shall be in conformance with
the approved preliminary plan and any stipulated changes or additions and
shall be approved by the City Manager or designee prior to the issuance of a
building permit.



      (3)   All changes in landscape plans before, during, or after
preliminary or final landscape plan approval and/or landscape installation
shall be approved by the City Manager or his or her designee.



   (K)   Installation of landscape improvements prerequisite to
certificate of occupancy; bond to secure installation.



      (1)   All landscape improvements (landscape materials,
irrigation system, screening walls, and the like) shall be installed by the
developer on the site in accordance with the approved final landscape plan
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building or use.
When considered advisable, upon presentation of a cash bond, cash deposit, or
assured letter of credit in the amount sufficient to guarantee installation
of the landscaping and irrigation system, the City Manager or his or her
designee may approve a delay in the immediate installation of the required
landscape improvements for a period of time not to exceed 12 months. In those
instances where the City Manager or his or her designee approves a delay in
the installation of the required landscape improvements, a temporary
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the building or use conditioned
upon the satisfactory installation of the required landscape improvements
within the time period approved by the City Manager or his or her designee.
All plant material shall be selected from the Arizona Department of Water
Resources current plant list for low water use plants in the Phoenix Active
Management Area (AMA).



      (2)   All plant material and specifications shall conform to
the Arizona Nursery Association (ANA) standards.



   (L)   Minimum size of trees, shrubs and the like, and substitution
of ground cover for shrubs.



      (1)   Unless otherwise specified herein, all required trees
shall be a minimum of 15 gallons in size and at least 50% of those trees must
be 24-inch box or larger size. All shrubs shall be a minimum of five gallons
in size. All 15 gallon trees must be a minimum of eight feet in height, four
feet in spread, and one and one-quarter inches trunk caliper at the ground
level. All 24-inch box and larger trees shall be a minimum of ten feet in
height, four feet in spread and two and a half inches trunk caliper at the
ground level. For individual specifications see AMA standards upon approval
of the City Manager or his or her designee, the installation of 20 square
feet of vegetative ground cover in any landscaped area shall substitute for
one required shrub up to a maximum of 20% of the required shrubs in any
particular landscaped area.



      (2)   All Mexican Fan Palms (Washington Robusta), California
Fan Palms (Washingtonia Filifera), and Queen Palms (Syagrus remonzoffianum)
shall have a minimum five foot trunk height measured from the base of the
trunk to the base of the fronds when located within the public right-of-way
or within 20 feet of the street property line.



   (M)   Natural topping of landscaped areas. All landscaped areas
shall be finished with natural topping material which may include, but not
limited to the following: turf, groundcover, planting, decomposed granite
(two inches minimum depth), river run rock, expanded shale, or bark. A
pre-emergent herbicide shall be applied to the ground prior to the placement
of natural surface materials (decomposed granite, river run rock, and the
like) in any landscaped area to prevent weed growth and again after the rock
has been installed. Turf shall not be planted in a dedicated right-of-way.
All turf is to be limited to 50% of the landscape areas unless defined as a
turf facility.



   (N)   Landscaped areas along street/frontage.



      (1)   Landscaped areas along street frontages shall be
contoured or bermed to provide variations in grade, visual relief, parking
lot screening, and a more pleasing aesthetic value. All on-site parking areas
shall be screened from street view by a landscaped berm or decorative wall
not less than three feet in height. The required height of berm or wall shall
be measured from the highest finished grade of the adjacent on-site parking
area or adjacent finished grade of the street, whichever is greater.



      (2)   Trees along R.O.W. shall maintain seven foot canopy
height.



      (3)   The installation of street trees, shrubs, and vegetative
groundcover shall be required for all applicable projects in an amount equal
to our greater than one tree and six shrubs for each 30 feet of street
frontage, and vegetative groundcover occupying a minimum of 60% of the total
street frontage landscaped areas. This minimum quantity of trees, shrubs, and
vegetative groundcover shall be located in the street right-of-way landscaped
area required hereof, or within the front 25 feet more or less of the on-site
landscaped areas required hereof, and shall be designed and located to
enhance the proposed development project and the streetscape.



   (O)   Sight visibility triangle. All landscaping and landscaped
materials established in close proximity to a driveway or street intersection
shall be installed and maintained in strict compliance with the sight
visibility triangle requirements set forth as follows:



      (1)   Maximum plant material height of 24 inches; ten feet by
20 feet at drives onto streets, 15 feet by 33 feet at minor and major
streets, and 33 feet by 33 feet at major intersections. Measurement is from
behind the property line.



      (2)   Berming or boulders are not to be located in the sight
visibility triangle.



   (P)   Power lines. All overhead power lines are to be shown if they
exist or note that there are none. All trees under power lines or within 15
feet of power lines shall have a maximum height of 20 feet at maturity.



   (Q)   Retention basins. Slopes are to be no steeper than a four to
one ratio and minimum of 50% live plant material and groundcover shall be
planted within the retention area.



   (R)   Irrigation standards. All landscaped areas shall be supported
by an automatic irrigation system. A pressure type vacuum breaker shall be
required for any new, improved, or renovated irrigation system and enclosed
with a two-inch steel pipe and screen and lock enclosure screened with a
three foot wall or plant material four foot on center. All irrigation systems
and landscaped areas shall be designed, constructed, and maintained so as to
promote water conservation and prevent water overflow or seepage into the
street, sidewalk, or parking areas.



   (S)   Screening walls.



      (1)   A screening wall constructed to a minimum height of six
feet from the finished grade of the site and designated and constructed in
accordance with the provisions of this section shall be required along all
property lines of a site developed for multiple-family residential,
commercial, or industrial uses when the property lines are contiguous with or
separated only by an alley from a residential development or a residential
zoning district; except that no such screening wall shall be required for
multiple-family residential contiguous with other multiple-family development
or a multiple-family residential zoning district.



      (2)   All outdoor storage areas for materials, refuse
containers, mechanical equipment, or vehicles, and all loading/unloading
areas or service bays shall be screened from street view by a screening wall
constructed to a minimum height of six feet and designed in accordance with
the provisions of this section.



      (3)   All screening walls located along streets in accordance
with this chapter shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
provisions of this section.



      (4)   All screening walls required by the provisions of this
subchapter shall be designed and constructed using the following information:



         (a)   Use brick, slump block, or masonry with a stucco
finish of a suitable color and design as approved by the City Manager or his
or her designee;



         (b)   Break up the lineal expanse of the walls with a
centerline, pilasters, three-wall enclosures, varying heights, the
installation of extra plant materials, or varying the landscaped area
contours to improve the visual impact of the wall; and



         (c)   Adhere to the height, location, and sight
visibility triangle at street intersection requirements set forth in this
chapter.



   (T)   Use of landscape areas for other purposes. No part of any
landscape area shall be used for any other use such as parking, signs, or
display; except for required on-site retention areas or when the use is shown
on the approved final landscape plan.



   (U)   Single-family residential subdivisions.  Landscaping shall be
required along the rear of reverse-frontage, single-family lots along
collector or arterial streets in accordance with the standards specified
below.



      (1)   Trees with a minimum size of 15 gallons shall be planted
at the rate of one tree per 30 feet of linear street frontage. At least 50%
of the trees shall be 24-inch box size.



      (2)   Shrubs with a minimum size of five gallons shall be
planted at the rate of five shrubs per tree and in no case shall be less than
three shrubs per 20 feet of linear street frontage.



      (3)   Clustering of trees and shrubs shall be encouraged to
accent focal points or landmarks and to provide variety to the streetscape.
Contouring of the ground and placement of mounds and earth berms along
streets shall be required.



      (4)   A minimum of 35% of all frontage landscaped areas shall
be covered with vegetative or organic groundcover consisting of grass (except
in right-of-way) or other living plant materials characterized by horizontal
growth which generally does not exceed two feet in height.



      (5)   Inorganic groundcover consisting of decomposed granite
(minimum one-half minus) crushed rock, gravel, river run rock, and/or
boulders, shall be sufficiently variety in terms of color, texture, and
materials to provide a pleasant and diverse appearance of streetscape.
Mounding and contouring of landscaped areas is required.



      (6)   Vegetative groundcover shall be located to accentuate
landmarks or focal points on a site and to create a “lush” appearance to
the landscaped area from public streets and areas.



      (7)   A landscaped area not less than an average width of 20
feet throughout a particular street frontage shall be established.



   (V)   Multi-family residential developments.  The following
landscape standards shall apply to multi-family development.



      (1)   A minimum 20-foot wide landscaped area shall be required
along all interior property lines separating individual development sites.
Trees with a minimum size of 15 gallons shall be planted every 20 feet on
center with the area.



      (2)   Along public street frontages, minimum 15-gallon sized
trees shall be planted at a ratio of one tree per 30 feet of frontage. A
minimum of 50% of the required trees shall be 24-inch box size.



      (3)   Within common open space areas, minimum 15-gallon sized
trees and five-gallon shrubs shall be planted at a ratio of four trees and 20
shrubs per dwelling unit.



      (4)   Open space areas along public street frontages shall
receive special landscaping treatment to provide a lush setting for both the
residents of the project and the general public. The following standards
shall apply to landscaping of public street frontages.



         (a)   Special entry features shall be provided at major
entrances into a project to provide a sense of identification and uniqueness.



         (b)   Walls, planters, and earth berms shall be provided
in the front yard to add variety to the landscape and to increase privacy for
residents.



         (c)   No more than 50% of the required front yard
landscaped area may be used for stormwater retention purposes.



         (d)   Foundation plantings should be utilized to
complement building elevations, provide shade, and increase privacy. A
minimum of 50% of the building frontage facing public streets shall have
foundation plantings.



         (e)   Landscaped islands within parking areas shall be
installed at least every ten  consecutive parking spaces. The islands shall
be a minimum of ten feet wide and contain at least one fifteen-gallon sized
tree and five shrubs or comparable groundcover.



   (W)   Commercial and industrial development. General requirements:



      (1)   A minimum of 10% of new land area of any site used for
commercial or industrial development shall be landscaped.



      (2)   Landscaping shall be provided along the street frontage
between the street or sidewalk and any building, parking, areas, loading, or
storage areas in accordance with the following standards.



         (a)   The intersection of arterial streets are a
dominant feature of the urban landscape, serving as major focal points of
activity in the community. Because of the importance of these intersections,
additional landscaped setbacks and design features beyond the required
minimum standards may be imposed on property at these intersections by the
city at the time of rezoning and/or site plan approval. The additional
features may include wider setbacks, unique building orientation and design,
and special landscaped features such as wall and screening devices.



         (b)   Required yards fronting on a public street in the
commercial districts shall be entirely landscaped excluding driveways and
walkways in industrial districts the following landscape setbacks shall apply
to any building site.



            1.   Along arterial streets required yards shall
be entirely landscaped.



            2.   Along all other streets a ten-foot minimum
landscape frontage shall be required (parking and maneuvering areas shall not
be permitted in the landscaped areas cited above except driveways and
walkways).



            3.   Where existing buildings or nearby parcels
are built to the street property line, landscaping may be modified or located
elsewhere on approval of the City Manager or his or her designee.



            4.   Any part of a site not used for buildings,
parking, driveways, sidewalks and the like, shall be landscaped.



            5.   All landscaped areas adjacent to vehicular
parking and access areas shall be protected by a six-inch vertical concrete
curbing in order to control stormwater flows and minimum damage by vehicular
traffic.



            6.   All portions of the development site not
occupied by buildings, structures, vehicle access and parking areas,
loading/unloading areas, and approved storage areas shall be landscaped in
accordance with the provisions hereof. Future building pads within a phased
development shall be improved with temporary landscaping, or otherwise
maintained weed-free in such a manner as may be approved by the city.



   (X)   Streetscape standards. The following landscaping shall be
required along all streets.



      (1)   Trees with a minimum size as specified herein shall be
planted at the rate of one tree per 30 feet of linear street frontage. A
minimum of 50% of the required trees shall be 24-inch box trees.



      (2)   Shrubs with a minimum size of five gallons shall be
planted in appropriate numbers to complement the placement of trees, but in
no case shall be less than three shrubs per 20 feet of linear street frontage.



      (3)   Clustering of trees and shrubs shall be encouraged to
accent focal points or landmarks and to provide variety to the streetscape.
Contouring of the ground and placement of mounds and earth berms along the
street shall be required.



   (Y)   Parking lot landscaping.



      (1)   A minimum of 10% of the parking lot area shall be
landscaped, exclusive of front yard or perimeter landscaping and street
trees. The landscaping shall consist of parking islands located within the
perimeter of the parking lot.



      (2)   A minimum of one tree shall be provided for every five
parking spaces, exclusive of perimeter landscaping and street trees. Trees
must be planted within the parking lot.



      (3)   Parking islands or landscaped areas shall be installed
at least every ten consecutive parking spaces. The islands shall be a minimum
of ten feet wide and contain a minimum of 180 square feet in area.



      (4)   All parking lots shall be separated from adjacent
residential uses or districts by a ten-foot landscaped strip planted with a
minimum of one tree every 25 linear feet and a minimum six-foot high masonry
wall.



      (5)   Pedestrian walking lanes and related landscaping may be
required at the discretion of the City Manager or his or her designee to
control traffic and provide safety of pedestrians.



      (6)   All parking lots shall be screened from public streets
by walls or earth berms or combination thereof constructed at least three
feet above the grade of the parking lot or adjacent street, whichever is
higher in elevation. Variety to the alignment and style of the walls is
required. The walls shall be decoratively designed to match the facade of any
buildings and shall be constructed of slump block, brick, or masonry with a
mortar wash or stucco finish.



      (7)   Any landscaped area used for vehicular overhang shall
not be counted towards the required landscaping.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-9)  (Ord. O11-09-17, passed 9-22-2011; Ord. O18-10-12,
passed 10-16-2018)



§ 154.104  PROPERTY ACCESS STANDARDS.



   (A)   Shared drive access.



      (1)   The city encourages sharing access drives between
separate parcels. Some of the following standards may be relaxed if shown
during the site design review process that more efficient design can be
accomplished without jeopardizing the public’s health, safety, and welfare.
All changes are subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
All drive accesses shall be approved by the City Engineer for width and
location.



      (2)   Commercial developments which may not be able to meet
the requirements of divisions (B) through (E) below, and are requesting
deviations from the standards, shall submit to the City Engineer a report
certified by a professional engineer addressing the following site
conditions, both present and future.



         (a)   Traffic volumes;



         (b)   Turning movements;



         (c)   Traffic controls;



         (d)   Site design;



         (e)   Site distances; and



         (f)   Location and alignment of other access points.



      (3)   Based upon the above data, the City Engineer shall
determine whether a deviation from the requirement standards is justified
and, if so, what alternative requirements will be necessary.



   (B)   Drive access required. All non-residential off-street parking
spaces shall have access from a drive access and not directly from the public
street. Access drives shall not be less than 24 feet in width for two-way
traffic nor less than 12 feet in width for one-way traffic. Residential drive
accesses shall be not less than ten feet in width.



   (C)   Distance from intersection. Driveway access distances from
street intersections shall be subject to the following minimum dimensions
unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer based upon submittal of an
approved traffic impact report as described in division (A) above.



 


 
Distance from Intersection on Collector Streets*
 
Distance from Intersection on Arterial Streets*


Intersecting Street
 
Res. Area
 
Comm./Ind. Area
 
Res. Area
 
Comm./Ind. Area


Arterial
 
100'
 
150'
 
200'
 
300'


Collector
 
100'
 
150'
 
150'
 
150'


Local
 
60'
 
100'
 
100'
 
150'



 



*Minimum distance from nearest curb face of intersecting street.



   (D)   Drive access spacing. Drive accesses to a public street except
for single, two-family, and townhouse dwellings shall be located as measured
from inside of drive to inside of drive according to the following specified
distances, unless granted approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



 


 
Collector Streets
 
Arterial Streets


Res. Area
 
Comm. Area
 
Res. Area
 
Comm. Area


Average Spacing


   Partial Access*
 
60'
 
80'
 
80'
 
150'


   Full Access**
 
200'
 
250'
 
200'
 
300'


Minimum Separation
 
60'
 
80'
 
80'
 
150'



 



* Partial access includes right turn in and out only.



** Full access allows all turn movements, in and out.



   (E)   Number of drive accesses. Each property may be allowed one
drive access for each 100 feet of street frontage. Single-family uses shall
be limited to one drive access per property. These conditions shall apply
unless otherwise granted approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-11)



§ 154.105  OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   General provisions.



      (1)   Floor area. The term “floor area,” for the purpose
of calculating the number of off-street parking spaces required, shall be
determined on the basis of the exterior-area dimensions of the building,
structure, or use multiplied by the number of floors, minus 10%, except as
may hereinafter be provided or modified.



      (2)   Change of use or occupancy of buildings. Any change of
use or occupancy of any building or buildings, including additions thereto
requiring more parking, shall not be permitted until such additional parking
spaces as required by this chapter are furnished.



      (3)   Parking accessory to a residential use. Off-street
parking facilities accessory to residential use shall be utilized solely for
the parking of licensed and operable passenger automobiles; no more than one
truck not to exceed gross capacity of 12,000 pounds; and recreational
vehicles and equipment. Under no circumstances shall required parking
facilities accessory to a residential structure be used for storage of
commercial vehicles or equipment or for the parking of automobiles belonging
to the employees, owners, tenants, or customers of business or manufacturing
establishments.



      (4)   Parking in residential setbacks. No motor home or
recreational vehicle shall be parked in any front or corner side setback. In
rear setbacks, motor or recreational vehicles shall be parked on a paved
parking surface.



   (B)   Stall, aisle, and driveway design.



      (1)   Parking dimensions. The following shall be the minimum
parking space dimensions.



 

Width 1
 
Length
 



Angle
 
Standard
 
Handicapped
 
Compact 4
 
Standard
 
Handicapped
 
Compact 4
 
Aisle Width 2


90 degrees
 
9'
 
13'
 
8'
 
18'
 
18'
 
16'
 
25'


60 degrees
 
9'
 
13'
 
8'
 
18'
 
18'
 
16'
 
20'


45 degrees
 
9'
 
13'
 
8'
 
18'
 
18'
 
16'
 
15'3



 



         (a)   As measured by a line perpendicular to the stall
line at a point on the outside end of the stall, except when the stall is on
the inside edge of a curve, in which case the point of measurement shall be
on the inside end of the stall.



         (b)   For 90-degree parking, aisles are two-way; for 60
degree and 45 degree parking they are one-way only.



         (c)   Except where needed as a fire lane in which case a
20-foot minimum is required.



         (d)   Unless otherwise approved, all parking spaces
shall be of standard width, but in no case shall compact spaces exceed 30% of
the total required spaces.



      (2)   Within structures. The off-street parking requirements
may be furnished by providing spaces so designed within the principal
building or structure attached thereto; however, unless provisions are made,
no building permit shall be used to convert the parking structures into a
dwelling unit or living area or other activity until other adequate
provisions are made to comply with the required off-street parking provisions
of this chapter.



      (3)   Circulation between bays. Except in the case of single,
two-family, townhouse, three-family, and four-family dwellings, parking areas
shall be designed so that circulation between parking bays occurs within the
designated parking lot and does not depend upon a public street or alley.
Except in the case of single, two-family, townhouse, three-family, and
four-family dwellings, parking area design which requires backing into the
public street is prohibited.



      (4)   Preserving off-site parking. When required, accessory
off-street parking facilities are provided elsewhere than on the lot with the
same ownership or control, either by deed or long-term lease, than the
property occupied by the principal use, the owner of the principal use shall
file a recordable document with the city and County Clerk requiring the owner
and his or her heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of
off-street spaces during the existence of the principal use.



      (5)   Parallel parking spaces. Parallel parking spaces shall
be a minimum of 22 feet in length.



      (6)   Grade. The grade elevation of any parking area shall not
exceed 3%.



      (7)   Surfacing. All areas intended to be utilized for parking
space and driveways shall be paved with materials suitable to control dust
and drainage. Plans for paving and drainage of driveways and stalls for five
or more vehicles shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his or her
review, and the final drainage plan shall be subject to his or her written
approval.



      (8)   Striping. Except for townhouses and single-, two-,
three- and four-family dwellings, all parking stalls shall be marked with
painted lines not less than four inches wide.



      (9)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street
parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining
property, abutting residential uses, and public rights-of-way, and be in
compliance with this chapter.



      (10)   Signs. No sign shall be so located as to restrict the
sight lines and orderly operation and traffic movement within any parking
lot. All signs shall conform to the city sign requirements of the Sign Code
for the city.



      (11)   Curbing. Except for townhouses and single-, two-,
three-, and four-family dwellings, all open off-street parking areas and
driveways shall have a six- inch by six-inch perimeter concrete curb and
gutter around the entire parking lot built according to standards provided by
the City Engineer. Furthermore, the curb and gutter shall be no closer than
three feet to property lines. However, the city encourages shared access
between parcels which may eliminate the need for curbing around the entire
perimeter of a parcel. The Planning Director will determine whether more
parcels sharing parking and/or driveway accesses during the design review
process, subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



      (12)   Protruding vehicles. All on-site parking stalls which
abut property lines shall be designed and constructed such that parked
vehicles shall not protrude over property lines.



      (13)   Screening.



         (a)   Generally. Every parking facility containing four
or more spaces abutting a city street shall be separated from the street by a
decorative wall, view obscuring fence, permanently maintained compact hedge,
berm, or a combination of the preceding treatments, no less than 30 inches
and not more than 42 inches in height.



         (b)   Screening in residential areas. Every parking
facility abutting property located in a residential district shall be
separated from the property by a decorative wall, view obscuring fence, or
permanently maintained hedge no less than five nor more than six feet in
height.



   (C)   Maintenance. It shall be the joint and separate responsibility
of the lessee and owner of the principal use, uses, or building to maintain
in a neat and adequate manner, the parking space, accessways, striping,
landscaping, and required fences.



   (D)   Use of required parking areas for parking only. Required
accessory off-street parking spaces in any district shall not be utilized for
open storage, sale, or rental of goods, or storage of inoperable vehicles.



   (E)   Number of spaces required. The following minimum number of
off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained by ownership,
easement, and/or lease for and during the life of the respective uses
hereinafter set forth.



      (1)   Residential uses.



 


 
Off-Street Parking Spaces Required


Dwelling Types
 
With Street Parking
 
Without Street Parking




Single-family
 
2 spaces/unit
 
3 spaces/unit


Mobile homes
 
2 spaces/unit
 
3 spaces/unit


Two-family
 
2 spaces/unit
 
2.25 spaces/unit


Three-family
 
2 spaces/unit
 
2.25 spaces/unit


Four-family
 
2 spaces/unit
 
2.25 spaces/unit


Townhouse
 
2 spaces/unit
 
2.25 spaces/unit


Apartments
 
2.25 spaces/unit
 
2.25 spaces/unit


Boarding houses
 
2.25 spaces/unit
 
2.25 spaces/unit


Group homes
 
1 space per potential guest room
 
1 space per potential guest room




 



      (2)   Non-residential uses.



 

Use Type
 
Off-Street Parking Spaces Required




Automobile sales
 
a.    1 space per 200 square feet of indoor floor area, plus


b.    2 spaces per 20 outdoor vehicle display spaces.


Automobile service station
 
a.    2 spaces per service stall but no less than 4 spaces.


Automobile washing establishment – automatic drive-through
 
a.    3 spaces or one for each employee on maximum shift, in addition to
stacking space.


   • Self-service
 
a.    2 spaces per stall not including washing or drying spaces.


Bowling alley
 
a.    4 spaces per alley, plus


b.    2 spaces per billiard table, plus


c.    1 space per pinball and/or electronic game machine, plus


d.    1 space per each five visitor gallery seats.


Church
 
a.    1 space per four seats based upon design capacity of main assembly
hall.


Community or recreation center
 
a.    1 space per 200 square feet of floor area.


Dance halls, skating rinks, or similar uses
 
a.    1 space per 300 square feet of floor area.


Court clubs, (racquetball, handball, tennis)
 
a.    1 space per 200 square feet of floor area, plus 3 spaces per court.


Day care centers
 
a.    1 space per 200 square feet of floor area.


Elderly (senior citizens) housing
 
a.    1 space per unit.


Furniture stores over 20,000 square feet
 
a.    3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area.


Golf courses
 
a.    1 space per 200 square feet of main building floor area, plus


b.    1 space for every two practice tees in driving range, plus


c.    4 spaces per each green in the playing area.


Hospital
 
a.    1 space per bed.


Manufacturing and industrial uses
 
a.    1 space per 450 square feet of floor area, plus


b.    1 space for each company owned truck if not stored within the
building.


Medical and dental offices
 
a.    4 spaces for each doctor or dentist, plus


b.    1 space for each employee.


Motels, hotels
 
a.    1.1 spaces per each guest room, plus


b.    1 space per employee on maximum shift, plus


c.    Spaces for accessory uses as follows:


   • Restaurants, bars, dining rooms
 
d.    1 space per 60 square feet.


   • Commercial areas
 
e.    1 space per each 400 square feet of floor area.


   • Public assembly areas
 
f.    1 space for each five seats based upon design capacity, except that


g.    Total off-street parking for public assembly may be reduced by one
space for every four guest rooms.


Nursing homes, rest homes, or similar uses
 
a.    4 spaces, plus


b.    1 space for each three beds,


c.    1 space for each employee on maximum shift.


Offices (except medical and dental)
 
a.    Minimum of 4 spaces and


   • Floor Area 0-5,000 square feet
 
b.    4 spaces per 1,000 square feet.


   • Floor Area 5,000 - 20,000 square feet
 
c.    3.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet.


   • Floor Area over 20,000 square feet
 
d. 3    spaces per 1,000 square feet.


Outdoor sales (plant nurseries, building materials, equipment rental, and
similar uses)
 
a.    1 space per 300 square feet of sales and/or display area.


Restaurants, cafes, bars, and similar uses
 
a.    1 space per 50 square feet of indoor public floor area, plus


b.    1 sp. per 200 sq. ft. outdoor serving (patio) area.


Retail store and service establishments
 
a.    1 space per 250 square feet of floor area


Schools
 



   • Elementary and/or Junior High
 
a.    1.5 spaces for each classroom library, lecture hall and cafeteria,
plus


b.    1 space per each three fixed seats in the main area of public
assembly, or


c.    1 space for each 21 square feet of area available for public
assembly if fixed seats are not provided.


   • Senior High
 
a.    1.5 spaces for each classroom or lecture hall, plus


b.    1 space per each five students, plus


c.    1 space for each non-teaching employee, plus


d.    1 space per each three fixed seats in the area of public assembly, or


e.    1 space per 21 square feet of area available for public assembly if
fixed seats are not provided.


   • Business or similar school
 
a.    1 space for each 150 square feet of floor area.


Theater, auditorium, or similar place of public assembly
 
a .    1 space per four seats based or upon design capacity.


Warehousing, storage, or handling of bulk goods
 
a.    1 space per 1,000 square feet of floor area devoted to storage of
goods, plus


b.    1 space for each employee on maximum shift, plus


c.    1 space for each company truck not stored inside of building, plus


d.    Appropriate spaces to support accessory office or retail sales
facilities, subject to the office and/or retail sales parking requirements.




 



   (F)   Joint use of parking facilities.



      (1)   Up to 80% of the parking facilities required by this
subsection for a church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or
parochial school may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities by the
following daytime uses: banks, business offices, retail stores, personal
service shops, household equipment or furniture shops, clothing or shoe
repair or service shops, manufacturing, wholesale, and similar uses.



      (2)   Other joint use of parking by adjacent commercial uses
to reduce total parking spaces may be allowed with approved parking study
submittal by a registered transportation engineer.



      (3)   Conditions required for joint use.



         (a)   The building or use for which application is being
made to utilize the off-street parking facilities provided by another
building or use shall be located within 300 feet of the parking facilities.



         (b)   The applicant shall show that there is no
substantial conflict in the operating hours of the two buildings or uses for
which joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed.



         (c)   A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the
parties concerned for joint use of off-street parking facilities, duly
approved as to form and manner of execution by the City Attorney, shall be
filed with the City Clerk and recorded with the County Recorder.



   (G)   Off-site parking.



      (1)   Any off-site parking which is used to meet the
requirements of this chapter shall be a conditional use as regulated by this
chapter and shall be subject to the conditions listed below.



      (2)   Off-site parking shall be developed and maintained in
compliance with all requirements and standards of this chapter.



      (3)   Reasonable access from off-site parking facilities to
the use being served shall be provided.



      (4)   The site used for meeting the off-site parking
requirements of this chapter shall be under the same ownership as the
principal use being served, under public ownership, or shall have guaranteed
permanent use by virtue of a perpetual lease filed with the City Clerk and
County Clerk.



      (5)   Off-site parking for multiple-family dwellings shall not
be located more than 200 feet from any normally used entrance of the
principal use served.



      (6)   Off-site parking for non-residential uses shall not be
located more than 300 feet from the main entrance of the principal use being
used.



      (7)   Any use which depends upon off-site parking to meet the
requirements of this chapter shall maintain ownership or prove a long-term
irrevocable lease agreement for parking utilization of the off-site location.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-12)



§ 154.106  OFF-STREET LOADING BERTH REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Affected uses.



      (1)   Every hotel, restaurant, department store, freight
terminal or railroad yard, hospital or sanitarium, industrial plant,
manufacturing establishment, retail establishment, storage warehouse or
wholesale establishment, and all other structures devoted to similar
mercantile or industrial pursuits, which has an aggregate gross floor area of
15,000 square feet or more shall provide off-street truck loading or
unloading berths in accordance with the following table.



 

SQUARE FEET OF AGGREGATE GROSS FLOOR AREA DEVOTED TO SUCH USE
 
REQUIRED NO. OF BERTHS




15,000 sq. ft. up to and including 40,000 sq. ft.
 
1


40,001 sq. ft. up to and including 100,000 sq. ft.
 
2


100,001 sq. ft. up to and including 160,000 sq. ft.
 
3


160,001 sq. ft. up to and including 210,000 sq. ft.
 
4


240,001 sq. ft. up to and including 320,000 sq. ft.
 
5


320,001 sq. ft. up to and including 400,000 sq. ft.
 
6


400,001 sq. ft. up to and including 490,000 sq. ft.
 
7


For each additional 90,000 sq. ft.
 
1 additional




 



      (2)   Any office building 100,000 sq. ft. or larger shall have
at lease one off-street loading berth.



   (B)   Standards for off-street loading facilities. All off-street
loading facilities shall conform to the following standards.



      (1)   Unless otherwise specified in these zoning regulations,
the first loading berth shall be at least 70 feet in length and additional
berths required shall be at least 45 feet in length and all loading berths
shall be at least 12 feet in width and 21 feet in height, exclusive of aisle
and maneuvering space.



      (2)   The space may occupy all or any part of any required
yard space, except front and exterior side yards, and shall not be located
closer than 50 feet to any lot in any residential zone unless separated from
the zone, except at the accesses, by a masonry wall not less than eight feet
in height.



      (3)   Sufficient room for turning and maneuvering vehicles
shall be provided on the site so that vehicles shall cross a property line
only by driving forward.



      (4)   Each loading berth shall be accessible from a street or
alley or from an aisle or drive connecting with a street or alley.



      (5)   The loading area, aisles, and access drives shall be
paved so as to provide a durable, dustless surface and shall be so graded and
drained so as to dispose of surface water without damage to private or public
properties, streets, or alleys.



      (6)   Bumper rails shall be provided at locations where needed
for safety or to protect property.



      (7)   If the loading area is illuminated, lighting shall be
deflected away from abutting residential sites so as to cause no annoying
glare.



      (8)   No regular repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be
conducted in a loading area.



      (9)   Off-street loading facilities shall be located on the
same site with the use for which the berths are required.



      (10)   If more than one use is located on a site, the number
of loading berths provided shall be equal to the sum of the requirements
prescribed in this chapter for each use. If more than one use is located on a
site and the gross floor area of each use is less than the minimum for which
loading berths are required but the aggregate gross floor area is greater
than the minimum for which loading berths are required, off-street loading
berths shall be provided as if the aggregate gross floor area were used for
the use requiring the greatest number of loading berths.



      (11)   Off-street loading facilities for a single use shall
not be considered as providing required off-street loading facilities for any
other use.



      (12)   At the time of initial occupancy, major alterations or
enlargement of a site, or of completion of construction of a structure or of
a major alteration or enlargement of a structure, there shall be provided
off-street loading berth requirements. The number of loading berths provided
for a major alteration or enlargement of a site or structure shall be in
addition to the number existing prior to the alteration or enlargement.



      (13)   Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shalt
not be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking
facility.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-13)



§ 154.107  MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Glare and lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an
off-street parking area, sign, or other structure shall be arranged so as to
deflect light away from any adjoining residential zone or from the public
streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from high
temperature processes such as combustion or welding, shall not be directed
into any adjoining property. The source of lights shall be hooded or
controlled in some manner so as not to light adjacent property. Base
incandescent light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property
or public right-of-way. Any light or combination of lights which cause light
on a public street, other than lights specifically intended for that purpose,
shall not exceed one foot candle (meter reading) as measure from the center
line of the street. Any light or combination of lights which cast light on
residential property shall not exceed four foot candles (meter reading) as
measured from the property.



   (B)   Surface-water ponding. Natural ponding areas shall be retained
as much as possible or, if necessary, enlarged or modified as directed by the
City Engineer to restrict the off-site runoff subject to city subdivision
requirements for stormwater runoff control.



   (C)   Storage; exterior displays. All materials, supplies,
merchandise, or other similar matter not on display for direct sale, rental,
or lease to the ultimate consumer or user shall be stored within the confines
of a 100% opaque wall or fence not less than six feet tall. Merchandise which
is offered for sale as described may be displayed beyond the confines of a
building in any general business zone, but the area occupied by the outdoor
display shall not constitute a greater number of square feet than 10% of the
ground floor area of the building housing the principal use, unless the
merchandise is a type customarily displayed outdoors, such as automobiles and
garden supplies. No storage of any type shall be permitted within the
one-half of the required front or side street setback nearest the street nor
within any required interior side or rear setback.



   (D)   Trash and garbage incinerators; storage. No exterior
incineration of trash or garbage is permissible. No exterior storage of trash
or garbage is permissible except in an accessory building enclosed by walls
and roof or in closed containers within a totally screened area.



   (E)   Refuse containers. It shall be the duty of the owner or
developer of all new single-family residential construction and development
within the city, when the development is not subject to the provisions of the
city subdivision ordinance with respect to refuse containers, to supply at
his or her expense refuse containers. The type of the containers shall be
approved by the City Engineer.



   (F)   Public-street frontage. Except as otherwise allowed or
required by this chapter, no lot shall contain any building unless the lot
abuts for at least 50 feet on a public street or private street approved as
part of a city-approved planned development.



   (G)   Smoke, dust, and other particulate matter. The emission of
smoke, dust, and other particulate matter shall be in compliance with the
County Bureau of Air Pollution Standards as regulated by the Maricopa County
Health Services Department.



   (H)   Bulk storage (liquid). All uses associated with bulk storage
of all gasoline, liquid fertilizer, chemicals, flammable, and similar liquids
shall comply with Uniform Building and Fire Code requirements and Maricopa
County regulations, and shall be stored underground, except in I-2 and I-3
districts when approved by the Fire Chief.



   (I)   Water quality, hazardous wastes, and wastewater. Discharge of
hazardous waste, chemicals, and wastewater will be subject to Arizona
Department of Health Services, Division of Environmental Health Standards.



   (J)   Odors. The emission of odors by any use shall be in compliance
with city standards and regulations.



   (K)   Noise. It shall be prohibited to disturb the peace or quiet of
a neighborhood, family or person by making or emitting unreasonable noise.
Noise that exceeds 55 decibels, measured at the property line of the source,
between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. is presumed unreasonable.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-14)  (Ord. O16-03-03, passed 3-1-2016)



§ 154.108  HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   (A)   Generally. A home occupation is an accessory use of a dwelling
unit, conducted entirely within the dwelling unit, carried on by one or more
persons, all of whom reside within the dwelling unit, where no persons are
employed other than residents or domestic help, and where  the use is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residence
purposes and does not change the character thereof or adversely affect the
uses permitted in the residential district of which it is a part. There shall
be no outside storage of any kind; any indoor storage, construction,
alterations, or electrical or mechanical equipment used, shall not change the
fire rating of the structure or the fire district in which the structure is
located. The use may increase vehicular traffic flow and parking by no more
than one additional vehicle at a time. It shall not cause an increase in the
use of one or more utilities (water, sewer, or garbage) so that the combined
total use for dwelling and home occupation purposes of one or more utilities
exceeds the average for residences in the neighborhood. When a use is a home
occupation, it means that the owner, lessee, or other persons who have a
legal right to the use of the dwelling unit also have the vested right to
conduct the home occupation after securing special permission to do so from
the Zoning Administrator. However, the person shall be subject to all
conditions set forth in this chapter, such as off-street parking, and to all
other permits required by the city, such as building permits and business
licenses, and is encouraged to check with city officials before establishing
such home occupation.



   (B)   Purpose. It is the intent of this section to eliminate as home
occupations all uses except those that conform to the standards set forth in
this section. In general, a home occupation is an accessory use so located
and conducted that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would
not be aware of its existence. The standards for home occupations in this
section are intended to ensure compatibility with other permitted uses and
with the residential character of the neighborhood, and a clearly secondary
or incidental status in relation to the residential use of the main building
as the criteria for determining whether a proposed accessory use qualifies as
a home occupation.



   (C)   Necessary conditions. Home occupations are permitted accessory
uses in residential zones only so long as all the following conditions are
observed.



      (1)   The occupation shall be conducted solely by resident
occupants in their residence.



      (2)   No more than one room or 25% of the gross area of one
floor of the residence, whichever is less, shall be used for the purpose. Use
of accessory buildings or garages for these purposes is prohibited.



      (3)   No use shall require internal or external alterations or
involve construction features or the use of electrical or mechanical
equipment that would change the fire rating of the structure or the fire
district in which the structure is located.



      (4)   No home occupation shall cause an increase in the use of
any one or more utilities (water, sewer, garbage, and the like) so that the
combined total use for dwelling and home occupation purposes exceeds the
average for residences in the neighborhood.



      (5)   There shall be no outside storage or any kind related to
the home occupation.



      (6)   The use may increase vehicular traffic flow and parking
by no more than one additional vehicle at a time.



      (7)   No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, smell,
smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard, or any other hazard or
nuisance to any greater or more frequent extent than that usually experienced
in an average residential occupancy in the district in question under normal
circumstances wherein no home occupation exists.



      (8)   Complaints by citizens or residents may be cause for
termination of the home occupation.



   (D)   Examples of the uses that frequently qualify as home
occupations. The following are typical examples of uses which can be
conducted within the limits of the restrictions established in this section
and thereby qualify as home occupations. Uses which may qualify as “home
occupations” are not limited to those named in this division (nor does the
listing of a use in this paragraph automatically qualify as a home
occupation); accountant; architect; artist; attorney-at-law; author;
consultant; dressmaking; individual stringed-instrument instruction;
individual tutoring; insurance; millinery; preserving and home cooking;
realtor.



   (E)   Uses that are prohibited. The following uses by the nature of
the investment of operation have a pronounced tendency, once started, to
rapidly increase beyond the limits permitted for home occupations and thereby
impair the use and value of a residentially zoned area for residential
purposes. Therefore, the following uses shall not be permitted as home
occupations: auto repair, minor or major; barber shop; carpentry work; dance
instruction; dental office; medical office; painting of vehicles, trailers,
or boats; photo developing; photo studios; private schools with organized
classes; radio repair; television repair; upholstering.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-15)



§ 154.109  NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date
of this chapter may be continued at the size and in the manner of operation
existing upon that date except as hereinafter specified and except for any
uses previously approved as special, conditional, or temporary uses, which
shall be lawful only so long as all terms originally approved are met,
including time limitations.



   (B)   The right to operate and maintain a non-conforming use shall
terminate when the structure or structures housing the use are removed,
razed, or remodeled to the extent of 50% of the structure’s fair market
value as determined by the last equalized assessment role of the County of
Maricopa, unless the condition was created as described in division (F) or
(H) below.



   (C)   When any lawful, non-conforming use of any structure or land
in any district has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter
be changed to any non-conforming use.



   (D)   Whenever a lawful non-conforming use of a building or
structure has been damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot,
or act of God, to an extent greater than 50% of its originally appraised
value, it shall not be reconstructed, but the property shall revert to a
conforming use.



   (E)   Whenever a lawful non-conforming use of a building or
structure or land is discontinued for a period of 90 days, any future use of
the building or structure or land shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.



   (F)   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing
or related to a lawful non-conforming use is permitted, including necessary
structural repairs, provided the structural repairs do not enlarge or
intensify the non-conforming use.



   (G)   A lawful non-conforming use shall not be changed except in
conformance with the use requirements of the zone in which it is located.



   (H)   Alterations may be made to a structure or building containing
lawful non-conforming residential units when they will improve the livability
thereof, providing they will not increase the number of dwelling units.



   (I)   Existing lots.



      (1)   At the time of the enactment of this chapter, if any
owner of a plot of land consisting of one or more adjacent lots in a
subdivision of record does not own sufficient contiguous land to enable him
or her to conform to the minimum lot size requirements or does not have
sufficient lot width to conform to the minimum lot width requirements, the
plot of land may nevertheless be used as a building site. The dimensional
requirements of the district in which the piece of land is located may be
reduced by the smallest amount that will permit a structure of acceptable
size to be built upon the lot, the reduction to be determined by the Board of
Adjustment.



      (2)   No lot, even though it may consist of one or more
adjacent lots in the same ownership at the time of passage of this chapter,
shall be reduced in size so that lot width or size of yards or lot area per
family or any other requirement of this chapter is not maintained. This
section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public
purpose.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-16) (Ord. O11-09-17, passed 9-22-2011)



§ 154.110  WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES.



   (A)   Intent. It is the intent of this section to promote the use of
appropriate wireless communication facilities while encouraging co-location
and design techniques that minimize the impacts of the facilities on the
community. The city encourages providers to explore all co-location options,
locations on existing municipal facilities or locations on existing vertical
structures prior to applying for a new facility. The city further encourages
applicants to explore all camouflaging and screening options available to
reduce the visual and environmental impacts of the facilities on the
community.



   (B)   General provisions.



      (1)   Wireless communication facilities, as defined in this
chapter, shall be a conditionally permitted use in all zones, and; small
wireless communication facilities are classified as permitted use by right if
collocated in a right-of-way in any zone.



      (2)   Wireless communication facilities shall be subject to
the limitations contained in this section and as otherwise set forth in city
codes.



      (3)   Definitions of terms specific to this chapter. For the
purpose of this section,  the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The term
“pole” shall be used interchangeably with the term “monopole.”



         ALTERNATIVE DESIGN TOWER. Artificial trees, clock towers,
and similar non-traditional structures that are compatible with the existing
setting or structures and camouflage or partially conceal the presence of
antennas or towers. This includes any antenna or antenna array attached to
the alternative design structure.



         ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE. Ball field light poles, street
lights, electric utility poles, water towers, and similar existing
structures. This includes any antenna or antenna array attached to the
alternative tower structure.



         AMATEUR RADIO TOWER. A free-standing or building-mounted
structure, including any base, tower or pole, antenna, and appurtenances
intended for airway communication purposes by a person holding a valid
amateur radio (HAM) license issued by the Federal Communications Commission.



         ANTENNA. The surface from which wireless radio signals are
sent from and received by a wireless communication facility. ANTENNA includes
whip antenna, panel antenna, and dish antenna. Any ANTENNA not specifically
described herein shall be regulated in conformity with the type of antenna
described herein which most closely resembles the antenna.



            1.   Whip antenna is a long and thin device that
transmits and/or receives radio frequency signals in a 360-degree radial
pattern. Typical size is two to six inches in diameter and one foot to 18
feet in height.



            2.   Panel antenna is a relatively flat rectangle
device that transmits and/or receives radio frequency signals in a
directional pattern of less than 360 degrees. Typical size is four feet to
five feet high, six inches to 12 inches wide, and six inches to eight inches
deep.



            3.   Dish antenna is a bowl-shaped device for the
reception and/or transmission of radio frequency communication signals in a
specific directional pattern. Typical size is four feet to six feet in
diameter, and one foot to three feet deep.



         ANTENNA ARRAY. One or more whip, panel, or dish antennas
used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals. The
ANTENNA ARRAY does not include the support structure.



         BUILDING-MOUNTED ANTENNA. Any antenna that is attached to
the wall of, or integrated into, buildings, church steeples, cooling towers,
elevator bulkheads, parapets, or penthouses.



         COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain,
modify, operate or replace wireless facilities on. within or adjacent to a
wireless support structure or utility pole.



         EQUIPMENT SHELTER. A cabinet or building located at the
base of or near a wireless communication facility within which are housed,
among other things, batteries and electrical equipment. This equipment is
connected to the antenna by cable.



         MONOPOLE. A tower used exclusively for wireless
communication that is self-supporting with a single shaft of steel, concrete,
or wood.



         MOUNT. The ground, base pad, or the structure to which a
wireless communication facility is attached.



         PRE-EXISTING WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY. Any tower or
antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly
issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, including permitted
towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as the approval
is current and not expired.



         RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on. below or above a public roadway,
highway, street, sidewalk, alley or utility easement. Right-of-wav does not
include a federal interstate highway, a state highway or state route under
the jurisdiction of the department of transportation, an easement that is
granted to a private property owner or a utility easement that does not
authorize the deployment sought by the wireless provider.



         ROOFTOP MOUNTED ANTENNA. An antenna that is located on top
of roof and is not a wall-mount or an alternative design structure.



         SATELLITE EARTH STATION. A device consisting of an antenna
and reflector, having any dimension of more than five feet, and is a solid or
open mesh configured structure used for reception or transmission of radio
energy to or from an earth orbit satellite or celestial body.



         SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets
both of the following qualifications:



            1.   All antennas are located inside an enclosure
of not more than six cubic feet in volume or. in the case of an antenna that
has exposed elements, the antenna and all of the antenna's exposed elements
could fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in
volume.



            2.   All other wireless equipment associated with
the facility is cumulatively not more than twenty-eight cubic feet in volume
if the equipment is mounted on the utility pole or wireless support
structure, or fifty cubic feet in volume if the equipment is ground mounted,
the following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume pursuant to this subdivision:



               A.   An electric meter.



               B.   Concealment elements.



               C.   A telecommunications demarcation box.



               D.   Grounding equipment.



               E.   A power transfer switch.



               F.   A cut-off switch.



               G.   Vertical cable runs for the connection
of power and other services.



         STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, which requires
location on the ground or attached to something having location on the ground.



         TOWER. A structure consisting of more than a single shaft
of steel or concrete used to elevate an antenna for wireless communication or
broadcasting.



         TOWER HEIGHT. When referring to a tower or alternative
structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the
highest point on the other structure including the base pad.



         WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY. A Facility for the
provision of personal wireless services as defined by the Telecommunications
Act of 1996, and any amendments thereto. WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
are composed of two or more of the following components: antenna, mount,
equipment shelter, and wall or security barrier.



   (C)   General requirements. All wireless communication facilities
(hereinafter referred to as facility) shall meet the following general
requirements.



      (1)   Inventory of existing  sites. Each applicant for a
facility shall provide to the city an inventory of its existing facilities or
sites approved for facilities that are located either within the city or the
city municipal planning area boundary (MPA). In addition to showing all
existing and approved sites, inventories shall show all other wireless
communication sites located within one mile of the proposed site, regardless
of jurisdictional location. Each inventory shall include general information
about the location, height, and design of each tower. The city may share this
information with other applicants applying for conditional use permits under
this section or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the
city; provided however, that the city is not, by sharing the information, in
any way representing or warranting that the information is accurate, and that
sites are available or suitable.



      (2)   State or federal requirements. All facilities must meet
or exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and any
other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to
regulate towers and antennas. if the standards and regulations are changed,
then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall
bring the towers and antennas into compliance with the revised standards and
regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring facilities and antennas
into compliance with the revised standards and regulations shall constitute
grounds for removal of the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense.



      (3)   Building code safety standards. To ensure the structural
integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained
in compliance with standards contained in applicable state and local building
codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the
Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon
inspection, the city concludes that a tower fails to comply with the codes
and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon
notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days
to bring the tower into compliance with the standards. Failure to bring the
tower into compliance within 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal
of the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense.



      (4)   Measurement. For the purpose of determining separation
distances, distances from property lines or districts, and setback distances,
distance shall be measured from the closest portion of the pole or structure
to the property line, district, pole, or structure in question. Tower
setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied to
facilities located in the city, irrespective of municipal and county
jurisdictional boundaries. Minimum setbacks for equipment shall conform to
the International Building Code.



      (5)   Franchises and licenses. Owners and/or operators of
wireless facilities shall certify that all franchises or licenses required by
law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless communication system
in the city have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required
franchises or licenses with the city.



      (6)   Pre-existing towers. Pre-existing towers shall be
allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance
(routine maintenance does not include replacement with a new tower of like
construction and height) and construction related to the use of the pole or
structure for the purposes of adding additional carriers shall be permitted
on the pre-existing towers. New construction, including replacement of an
existing tower, other than routine maintenance on a preexisting tower, shall
comply with the requirements of this section.



      (7)   Rebuilding damaged or destroyed non-conforming towers or
antennas. Notwithstanding this chapter, bona fide non-conforming towers or
antennas that are damaged to the extent that repairs constitute 50% of the
value of the undamaged tower or antennas, or destroyed shall not be rebuilt
without first obtaining a conditional use permit and meeting separation
requirements specified in this section. The type, height, and location of the
tower onsite shall be of the same type and of no greater intensity than the
original facility approval. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall
comply with the then-applicable building codes and shall be obtained within
180 days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is
obtained, or if the permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed
abandoned as specified in this chapter.



      (8)   Abandonment of towers or facilities. A facility shall be
deemed abandoned when the facility is not in use for a period of six
consecutive months. The owner of the facility shall remove the facility
within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of the
abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within the 90
days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner’s
expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this
provision shall not become effective until users cease using the tower.



      (9)   Federal, state, and local government exemption. Wireless
communication facilities owned by the federal, state, or city government
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.



      (10)   City Council approval. Any tower over 65 feet in height
is required to go to City Council for approval after being presented to the
Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (D)   Conditionally permitted use. A wireless communication facility
shall be a conditionally permitted use and processed in accordance with §
154.155 of this chapter, except for small wireless facilities collocated in a
right-of-way in any zone. All conditionally permitted wireless communication
facility uses shall meet the following minimum development standards.



      (1)   The maximum height of the facility, except for rooftop
or wall mounted facilities, facilities co-locating on an existing wireless
communication facility, facilities locating on existing utility poles, or
facilities located on existing vertical structures on school or municipal
property, shall be 80 feet, provided, however, if the facility is located in
any residential district or within 75 feet of the property line of
residential use or district, the maximum height shall be 65 feet.



      (2)   An installation co-locating on an existing facility
shall not increase the overall pole or tower height by more than 15 feet, and
the antennas shall not exceed a maximum height of 95 feet or 65 feet in any
residential district. Installations co-locating on existing utility poles may
increase the height of the pole by not more than 15 feet. Installations
locating on existing vertical structures on school or municipal property
shall follow the non-residential height requirements.



      (3)   The facility replacing an existing pole on school or
park grounds does not increase the original pole circumference by more than
is necessary to accommodate the additional structural requirements.



      (4)   The pole or tower shall be set back from all adjacent
residential zoning districts or residential land use property lines a minimum
of 110% of the height of the tower or pole. The pole shall be set back from
all non-residential zoning district or non-residential property lines a
minimum of five feet and shall be set back from all street property lines
equal to or greater than the building setback for the district in which the
pole or tower is located.



      (5)   Facilities co-locating on utility poles, facilities
within the right-of-way, or facilities located on school or city property
shall not be required to meet the setback requirements set forth above.



      (6)   Tower and monopole facilities visible from off-site
residential or business district view shall be camouflaged using an
alternative design tower as defined in this chapter.



      (7)   A rooftop or wall mounted facility shall be hidden from
off-site views and shall be camouflaged and screened to the extent possible
by screen walls and/or the building parapet.



      (8)   A rooftop mounted facility shall be 15 feet or less in
height as measured from the surrounding rooftop height to the top of all
appurtenances.



      (9)   A wall-mounted facility shall be 12 feet or less in
height. Wall-mounted facilities shall be mounted so as not to extend above
the roofline of the building and shall not project more than 12 inches from
the building face.



      (10)   The colors and texture of the facility shall be
compatible with the surrounding environment as determined by the city, except
as otherwise required by the FAA.



      (11)   No commercial advertising or signage shall be allowed
on-site; however, each facility shall have an identification plaque no larger
than 12 inches square permanently affixed which clearly identifies the name,
address, and emergency phone number of the provider.



      (12)   A facility shall have at least one parking space
designed to city standards. This requirement shall also include maneuvering
areas and access drives. This requirement shall be waived when sufficient
hard surface parking exists.



      (13)   The facility shall not be artificially lighted, unless
required by the FAA or other applicable authority.



      (14)   A facility may not be allowed within 1,320 feet of a
city or state designated historical site.



      (15)   The minimum separation between facilities, except for
approved alternate tower structures, rooftop or wall mounted facilities,
facilities located within the industrial zoning districts, and facilities
located on existing vertical structures on school or municipal property,
shall be 1,000 feet, unless otherwise approved by the City Council.



      (16)   Security fencing is required and shall not exceed eight
feet in height. Fencing shall be effectively screened from view by the use of
landscaping.



      (17)   Anti-climbing features shall be incorporated in the
wireless communication facility, as needed, to reduce potential for trespass
and injury.



      (18)   Co-location of city or other public safety agency
wireless communication facilities shall be permitted at no cost to the public
on private wireless communication facilities approved in accordance with this
section.



   (E)   Design standards. Wireless communication facilities shall be
designed and constructed in conformity with and/or architecturally integrated
with surrounding building designs or natural settings to minimize the adverse
visual impact and ensure the facility is compatible with the environment in
which it is located. Methods of camouflage design include:



      (1)   Canister, facilities under 45 feet in height shall
conceal antennas with a canister or approved equal.



      (2)   Monopine, facilities over 45 feet, less than 65 feet in
height shall conceal the antennas with a monopine pole or approved equal.



      (3)   Monopalm, facilities over 65 feet in height shall
conceal the antennas with a monopalm pole or approved equal.



      (4)   Screening, ground equipment shall be screened with
landscaping plantings or a material approved by the City Engineer or designee.



      (5)   Color, facilities poles and ground equipment color shall
match the surrounding existing poles or a color approved by the City Engineer
or designee.



   (F)   Standards of service. Company shall operate the site areas in
a first-class manner, and shall keep the site areas attractively maintained,
orderly, clean, neat and tidy at all times, including immediate removal of
graffiti.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-17)  (Ord. O11-09-17, passed 9-22-2011; Ord. 18-01-01,
passed 1-4-2018; Ord. O18-02-02, passed 2-22-2018)



SIGN REGULATIONS



§ 154.125  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish standards for the
regulation of signs within the city in order to safeguard the public interest
by:



   (A)   Balancing public and private objectives by allowing adequate
signage for business identification;



   (B)   Promoting the free flow of traffic and protect pedestrians and
motorists from injury and property damage which may be caused by cluttered,
distracting, and illegible signage;



   (C)   Preventing property damage and personal injury resulting from
signs which are improperly constructed or poorly maintained;



   (D)   Promoting the use of signs which are well designed, of
appropriate scale, and integrated with surrounding buildings and landscape in
order to meet the community’s desire for quality development; and



   (E)   Protecting property values, the local economy, and the quality
of life by preserving and enhancing the appearance of the streetscape which
affects the image of the city.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-10.1)



§ 154.126  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   (B)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense;
words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural
include the singular. The word “shall” is always mandatory, the word
“person” includes a firm, associations, organization, partnership, trust,
corporation or company, as well as an individual; the word “lot” includes
the words “plot” or “parcel”; the words “used” or “occupied,”
as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words
“intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied.”



      ABANDONED SIGN. Any sign located on a property or premises which
is vacant and unoccupied for a period of three months, or a sign which is
damaged, in disrepair, or vandalized and not repaired within 30 days of the
date of the damaging event.



      ADVERTISING COPY. The words, letters, or graphics painted,
carved, etched, or mounted on the face of any sign used to advertise a
business, product, service, or place.



      ALTERATION. Any change in architecture, structure, or copy of an
existing sign.



      ANIMATED SIGN. A sign which has movement or the optical illusion
of movement of any part of the sign structure, design, or pictorial segment,
including the movement of any illumination or flashing or varying of light
intensity; or the automatic changing of all or any part of the facing of a
sign; or any movement or rotation of a sign or any part of the sign
structure; or emits sounds.



      APPLICANT. Any person who applies for a sign permit in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter.



      ARTERIAL STREET. Any principal, major, or minor arterial street
as classified and designated in the city General Plan.



      AWNING SIGN. Any sign with information painted on or integrated
into a structure covered with fabric, metal, or other material and supported
by a building at one or more points.



      BILLBOARD SIGN. Any sign which advertises a business, commodity,
service, entertainment, product, or attraction sold, offered, or existing
elsewhere than on the property where the sign is located.



      BREAK AWAY DESIGN FEATURE. A structural feature built into the
sign according to the Arizona Department of Highways which allows the sign to
collapse on impact.



      BUILDING. Any structure having enclosed space and a roof for the
housing and enclosure of persons, animals, or goods.



      BUILDING WALL. The individual sides of a building.



      BUSINESS. The engaging in of the production, purchase, sale,
barter, or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise, or services, or the
maintenance or operation of offices or recreational or amusement enterprises.



      BUSINESS NAME. The name by which a business is commonly
recognized and referred to by the applicant but does not include slogans or
product information.



      CITY. The City of El Mirage, Arizona.



      CITY ATTORNEY. The City Attorney of the city.



      CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the city.



      CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the city.



      CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the city.



      COMMERCIAL FARM or RANCH SIGN. A sign that identifies the name of
any commercial farm or ranch.



      CONSTRUCTION SIGN. An on-premises, temporary sign providing
information about future development or current construction on a site and
the parties involved in the project.



      DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improve or alter real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or structure, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, or excavation drilling operations.



      DEVELOPMENT SIGN. A sign that is placed at the entrance to a
multi-family or duplex development, manufacture home park, or single-family
development to identify the name of the development.



      DIGITAL BILLBOARD.  An off-premise advertising sign which
displays electronic or digital images that are changed via electronic means
and control.



      DIRECTIONAL SIGN. An on-premises sign that includes only
information assisting in the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic such as
enter, exit, and one-way.



      DIRECTORY SIGN. Any sign, other than an identification sign,
which is centrally located and lists only the names, uses or locations of the
various businesses or activities conducted within a building or group of
buildings.



      EMERGENCY SIGN. A sign erected by a governmental agency, a public
utility company, or a contractor performing work within any right-of-way.



      FASCIA SIGN. Any sign which is mounted against the horizontal
piece covering the joint between the top of a wall and the projecting eaves
of the roof.



      FLAG. Any flag of the United States, or any state of the United
States, foreign nations having diplomatic relations with the United States,
the city, corporate flag, or any other flag adopted or sanctioned by an
elected legislative body of competent jurisdiction, or any other flag whose
display is authorized by the Constitution of the United Sates or the
Constitution of the state.



      FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign which is erected on its own
self-supporting permanent structure, detached from any supporting elements of
a building.



      GRAND OPENING SIGN. A temporary sign that announces the
introduction or promotion of a new business, store, shopping center, or
office, or the announcement, introduction, or promotion of the changing
ownership of an established business.



      HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the top of the highest element
of the sign or sign structure to the top of the curb or crown of the roadway
where no curb exists.



      IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign that identifies only the business,
place, organization, building, street address, or person on the property on
which it is located.



      ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign whose surface is artificially lighted
internally or externally.



      INFORMATION SIGN. Any sign which is used to inform the public
about a business, service, product, or place.



      INSTALL. The action of erecting, re-erecting, constructing,
placing, posting, and building.



      KIOSK SIGN. A freestanding, multiple-sided structure approved by
the city and located in public rights-of-way that displays directional
information to residential developments, commercial establishments, and/or
public or semi-public facilities.



      LOGO. A graphic symbol representing a business, activity, or use.



      MAINTENANCE. The replacing or repairing of a part or portion of a
sign necessitated by ordinary wear, tear, or damage beyond the control of the
owner.



      MANSARD. A sign permanently affixed to a wall or surface designed
to protect the edge of a roof, such surface being no more than 30 degrees
from vertical.



      MASTER SIGN PROGRAM. A total sign program for a specified
development or area that integrates all signage into a unified theme and
design.



      MENU BOARD SIGN. A permanently-mounted sign displaying the bill
of fare for a drive-thru restaurant.



      MESSAGE BOARD. A portion of a sign displaying an electronic
digital message which changes more than once a day.



      MULTIPLE TENANT COMPLEX. A non-residential development where two
or more separate businesses exist, in which there are appurtenant shared
facilities (such as parking or pedestrian mall), and designed to provide a
single area that the public can obtain varied products and services.



      MURAL.  A graphic depiction painted on a section of wall which
contains no written advertising.



      NONCOMMERCIAL SIGN. A sign which does not contain information or
advertising for any business, commodity, service, entertainment, or product.



      NON-CONFORMING SIGN. A sign lawfully erected and maintained prior
to the adoption of this subchapter which does not conform with the
requirements of this subchapter.



      OFF-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign that is located on property other
than where a business is located, the product is sold, or the service is
offered.



      ON-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign which is within the legal boundaries
of a parcel of property.



      OPEN HOUSE DIRECTION SIGN. A temporary sign used to advertise the
sale of a single house and direct traffic to the house for sale.



      PARAPET. The portion of a building exterior wall projecting above
the plate line of the building.



      PARCEL. A legal lot, plot, tract, or area of land having fixed
boundaries.



      PERMANENT SIGN. Any sign that is constructed as lasting and
enduring, remaining unchanged in character, condition (beyond normal wear),
and position, and in a permanent manner affixed to the ground, wall, or
building.



      PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT. A zoning designation that may allow a
development to have one or more principal use(s) or structure(s) and/or
variable development standards on a single parcel of ground or contiguous
parcel.



      PLANNING DIVISION. The City Planning Division.



      PLATE LINE. The point at which any part of the main roof
structure first touches or bears upon an external wall.



      POLITICAL SIGN. A temporary sign that supports candidates for
office or urges action on any other matter on the ballot of primary, general,
or special elections.



      PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not affixed to a structure or the ground.



      PROJECT. Any parcel of land with designated legal boundaries on
which development action has been approved by the city.



      PROJECTING SIGN. A sign attached to a building or other structure
and extending in whole or in part more than 14 inches beyond the building.



      PROMOTIONAL SIGN. Any temporary sign used to advertise special
sales, new products or services, or promotions, or a business and may include
pennants, balloons, streamers, flags, inflatable structures, search lights,
character or product likenesses, attention attracting media and devices, and
other non-merchandise displays.



      PUBLIC SIGN. A sign erected by or on behalf of a governmental
body to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public
information, direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic.



      READER PANEL. The portion of any sign that permits regular change
of copy, including electronic copy, which does not change more than once a
day.



      REAL ESTATE SIGN. Any temporary sign that indicates a single
premises, building, or vacant lot that is currently for sale, lease, or rent.



      ROOF LINE. The highest point of the main roof structure or the
highest point on a parapet but shall not include cupolas, pylons, projections
or minor raised portions of the roof.



      ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected on a roof, or a sign that projects
above the highest point of the roof line, parapet, or fascia of the building.



      SANDWICH BOARD. A sign composed of two faces attached to an
a-frame.



      SHINGLE SIGN. Any sign suspended from and located entirely under
a covered porch or walkway.



      SIGN. Any device (including, but not limited to, letters, words,
numerals, figures, emblems, pictures, or any part or combination) used for
visual communication that attracts the attention of the public and is visible
from public or private rights-of-way or other properties; but shall not
include any flag, badge, or insignia of any governmental unit nor shall it
include any item of merchandise normally displayed within a show window of a
business.



      SIGN COPY. The letters, words, or graphics used to convey
information on the sign.



      SIGN STRUCTURE. The supports and framework of the sign.



      SINGLE TENANT BUILDING. Any building which has only one tenant.



      SNIPE SIGN. Any sign that is posted on trees, utility poles or
structures, street lights, fences, fire hydrants, bridges, curbs, sidewalks,
park benches, or other locations on public property.



      SPECIAL EVENT. Any community event such as, but not limited to;
bazaars, street fairs, shows, exhibitions, sporting events, runs, bicycling
events, and block parties.



      SPECIAL EVENT SIGN. Any sign promoting a special event and may
include pennants, banners, balloons, streamers, flags, and
attention-attracting media and devices.



      STREET NUMBER SIGN. Any sign which gives the street address
number of the building.



      SUBDIVISION. A subdivision pursuant to the city Subdivision
Ordinance, as it exists or as it may be amended.



      SUBDIVISION ADVERTISING SIGN. Any temporary sign promoting the
sale of more than one property or buildings in a city-approved subdivision.



      SUBDIVISION ENTRANCE SIGN. Any sign designating the name of the
subdivision at the entrance of the subdivision.



      SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION FLAGS. Any flags flown within the
legal boundaries of the subdivision to attract persons to the subdivision.



      SWOOPER SIGN. A feather-shaped fabric sign attached to a curved
frame.



      TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign not designed for permanent display.



      TIME AND TEMPERATURE SIGN. A sign on which the only copy that
changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time and/or temperature.



      VEHICLE SIGN. Any sign mounted upon, painted, or otherwise
erected on trucks, cars, boats, trailers, other motorized vehicles or
equipment.



      WALL SIGN. A sign mounted flat against and projecting less than
14 inches from, or painted on the wall of a building or structure with the
exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the face of the wall, but not
including window signs.



      WINDOW SIGN. any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof,
that communicates information about an activity, business, commodity, event,
sale, or service, and is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or
glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-10.2)  (Ord. O11-04-05, passed 4-14-2011; Ord.
O12-11-11, passed 11-8-2012; Ord. O14-05-03, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 154.127  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Signs prohibited. No person shall erect, place, establish,
paint, create, or perform maintenance on a sign in the city except as
provided in this subchapter. All signs which are contrary to the provisions
of this subchapter are declared to be in violation, and may be abated as
provided by law, except as provided by § 154.134 below. The following signs
are prohibited. Any:



      (1)   Abandoned sign;



      (2)   Off-premises sign, except as permitted within this
subchapter;



      (3)   Portable sign;



      (4)   Snipe sign;



      (5)   Sign which inhibits free ingress to or egress from any
door, window, or any exit way required by the adopted building code or fire
code;



      (6)   Sign that may obstruct the view of any authorized
traffic sign, signal, or other traffic control device; or any sign by reason
of shape, color, or position that interferes with or may be confused with any
authorized traffic signal or device;



      (7)   Sign placed in a location that will obstruct vision of a
vehicle operator while entering, exiting, or traveling upon the public
right-of-way;



      (8)   Sign located in a manner which interferes with
pedestrian travel or poses a hazard to pedestrians;



      (9)   Vehicle sign when mounted or placed on any trailer,
boat, or motor vehicle that is parked, stored, or displayed in a manner to
attract the attention of the public for advertising purposes;



      (10)   Sign with flashing, blinking, or rotating lights, laser
lights, search lights, or unshielded incandescent, fluorescent, metal halide,
or high or low pressure sodium light bulbs or mercury vapor light sources;



      (11)   Sign placed in rights-of-way, except emergency, public,
or kiosk signs;



      (12)   Tethered balloons or other hazards to aviation; and



      (13)   Any other sign that is not expressly permitted by this
subchapter.



   (B)   Signs in the right-of-way.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to install a sign in any
public right-of-way, except the following:



         (a)   Public signs;



         (b)   City-owned signs; and



         (c)   Emergency signs.



      (2)   The City Manager or designee is authorized to
immediately remove any illegal sign located in any public right-of-way.



   (C)   Street number signs required. The owner of any building shall
identify every building or group of buildings with a street number sign as
approved by the City Manager or designee which shall be clearly visible from
the street. This sign shall not be computed as part of the total sign area
permitted and shall not require a permit.



   (D)   Permits and licenses required.



      (1)   No person shall erect, place, establish, paint, create,
or maintain any sign in the city without first procuring a permit pursuant to
§ 154.135, except for those signs not required to obtain a permit pursuant
to division (E) of this section.



      (2)   No person shall erect, place, establish, paint, create,
or perform maintenance on any sign in the city without first obtaining all
required permits and licenses as regulated by this subchapter or any other
laws.



   (E)   Signs not requiring a permit. No person shall be required to
have a permit for the following signs, provided however that the signs shall
be subject to any and all applicable provisions of this subchapter or any
other law:



      (1)   Temporary decorations or displays celebrating the
occasion of patriotic, religious, or local holidays or special events;



      (2)   Signs displayed during holidays as identification of
temporary sales areas for trees and similar holiday items. The signs shall be
excepted only when displayed within 30 days of the holiday;



      (3)   Public signs;



      (4)   Non-illuminated directional, or information signs of a
noncommercial public or quasi-public nature, including street, building, or
suite numbers which do not exceed six square feet;



      (5)   Directional signs. The signs shall be excepted when wall
mounted or, if detached, where not exceeding a height of three feet;



      (6)   Emergency signs;



      (7)   Political signs;



      (8)   Real estate signs; and



      (9)   Kiosk signs.



   (F)   Maintenance. Any person who owns, erects, establishes, paints,
creates, or maintains any sign, including a non-conforming sign, shall
maintain the sign in good order and repair at all times so that it does not
constitute any danger or hazard to public safety, or a visual light, and is
free of peeling paint, major cracks, or loose, dangling, or torn materials.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-10.3)  (Ord. O11-04-05, passed 4-14-2011)  Penalty,
see § 154.999



§ 154.128  LOCATION, DESIGN, AND CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   General regulations.



      (1)   All signs shall be structurally designed, constructed,
erected, and maintained in accordance with all applicable provisions and
requirements of this subchapter and in compliance with all adopted building
and electrical codes.



      (2)   Illuminated signs and flag poles are permitted by this
subchapter unless otherwise specified. Illumination may either be direct,
internal, or internal direct as allowed herein, and it is unlawful for any
person to install illumination which creates any glare or reflection onto any
adjacent property, or onto a street or alley, or so as to create a traffic
hazard.



   (B)   Sign area measurements. Sign area shall be measured as follows:



      (1)   Sign copy mounted or painted on background panel or area
distinctively painted, textured, or constructed as a background for the sign
copy shall be measured as the area contained within the sum of the smallest
rectangles that will enclose both the sign copy and the background.



      (2)   Sign copy mounted as individual words or graphics
against a wall, fascia, mansard, or parapet of a building or other structure
that has not been painted, textured, or otherwise altered to provide a
distinctive background for the sign copy shall be measured as a sum of the
smallest rectangles that will enclose each word and each graphic in the total
sign.



      (3)   Signs with multiple faces shall be measured as follows:



         (a)   Signs with two faces. If the interior angle
between the two sign faces is 60 degrees or less, the area shall be of one
face only. If the angle between the two sign faces is greater than 60
degrees, the sign area will be the sum of the areas of the two faces.



         (b)   Signs with three or more faces. The sign area will
be 50% of the sum of the areas of all faces.



      (4)   Spherical, free-form sculptural, or other non-planar
sign area shall be 50% of the sum of the sides of the smallest four-sided
polyhedron that will encompass the sign structure.



   (C)   Sign height. Sign heights shall be measured as follows:



      (1)   Freestanding sign. The height of all signs shall be the
vertical distance from the top of the highest element of the sign or sign
structure to the top of the curb or crown of the roadway where no curb
exists. The height of any monument base or other structure erected to support
or ornament the sign shall be measured as part of the sign height (refer to
Figure SR-6).



      (2)   Wall, fascia, mansard, and parapet signs. Height shall
be the vertical distance to the top of the sign or sign structure from the
base of the wall on which the sign is located.



   (D)   Location specifications.



      (1)   Sign locations shall be integrated into the design of
the building they are attached to and/or with the design of the site and the
adjacent streetscape.



      (2)   Signs shall be placed so they do not block required
access areas and so they are not obscured by any landscaping when it has
reached its full maturity.



   (E)   Design specifications.



      (1)   Signs shall be designed to be consistent with the
architectural treatment and overall character of the principal building
and/or the overall site.



      (2)   Signs shall use materials or textures which are
complementary to those used in the principal building and/or in the overall
project.



      (3)   Signs shall use colors which match or complement the
colors used on the building and/or in the overall project.



      (4)   No sign shall be suspended by chains or other devices
that will allow the sign to swing due to wind action. Signs shall be anchored
to prevent any lateral movement that would cause wear on supporting members
or connections.



      (5)   Signs shall be composed of letters and/or logos attached
to a wall or background or made an integral part of the sign face rather than
painted directly onto a wall or backlit panel.



   (F)   Construction specifications.



      (1)   Signs attached to masonry, concrete, or steel shall be
safely and securely fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts.



      (2)   There shall be no visible angle iron supports, guy wire,
braces, or supports. All sign supports shall be an integral part of the sign
design.



   (G)   Inspections. All signs for which a permit is required shall be
subject to the following inspections, unless waived by the City Manager or
designee:



      (1)   Footing inspections on all freestanding signs, including
situations where square footage or panels are added to existing freestanding
signs;



      (2)   Electrical inspections on all illuminated signs prior to
clearance; and



      (3)   Final inspection which shall cover the sign location,
structural members, and placement of the inspection marker in accordance with
this subchapter.



   (H)   Inspection markings. Any person installing or erecting a
permanent sign as regulated by this subchapter shall ensure that the signs
are marked with the maker’s name and the person or firm erecting the sign,
the date of installation, and the permit number as approved by the City
Manager or designee.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-10.4)  (Ord. O10-01-01, passed 2-11-2010)



§ 154.129  REGULATIONS BY ZONE.



   (A)   Residential zones. Residential uses in residential zones.



      (1)   General.



         (a)   Applicable zones. This division applies to all
signs for residential uses in R zones, and in all residential areas which are
vacant or are in a planned area development (P.A.D.) unless otherwise
approved.



         (b)   Permitted signs. Only signs which are specifically
permitted by this division are allowed. Any sign which is not specifically
permitted by this division is prohibited.



         (c)   Aggregate sign area allowed.



            1.   Parcels less than or equal to two acres.
Except as otherwise permitted in this subchapter, the aggregate sign area for
any parcel located in a residential zone and which is less than two acres
shall not exceed one and one-half square feet.



            2.   Parcels larger than two acres. Except as
otherwise permitted in this subchapter, the aggregate sign area for any
parcel located in a residential zone and which is larger than two acres shall
not exceed eight square feet.



      (2)   Wall signs. Wall signs are permitted, but shall not
exceed a height of 15 feet.



      (3)   Freestanding signs.



         (a)   One freestanding sign shall be permitted on each
parcel with a maximum height of five feet and a maximum area of one and
one-half square feet.



         (b)   A freestanding sign may include only the name of
the occupant and the street address. The sign shall not include any
advertising copy.



         (c)   The base shall have an aggregate width of at least
50% of the width of the sign.



         (d)   Reader panels are not permitted.



      (4)   Identification signs. Each residence in a residential
zone may have one identification sign. The sign may be a wall sign or a
freestanding sign. The sign may include only the name of the residence, the
name of the occupant, and the street address, and shall not include
advertising copy.



      (5)   Residential entry sign. A maximum of two residential
entry signs, placed at the entrance to a multi-family or duplex development,
manufactured home park, or single-family development only in order to
identify the name of the development, and with a maximum aggregate area of 24
square feet shall be permitted at each main entrance. The residential entry
signs may be freestanding signs. The residential entry signs may include only
the name of the development and the street address, but shall not include
advertising copy.



      (6)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs are permitted in
accordance with § 154.130(A) of this subchapter.



   (B)   Non-residential uses in residential zones.



      (1)   General.



         (a)   Applicable zones. This division applies to all
signs for non-residential uses in residential zones which includes but are
not limited to churches, schools, institutions, commercial farms or ranches,
public facilities, and similar activities.



         (b)   Permitted signs. Only signs which are specifically
permitted by this division are allowed. Any sign which is not specifically
permitted by this division is prohibited.



         (c)   Maximum aggregate area. The maximum aggregate area
of all signs on a parcel shall not exceed 48 square feet.



      (2)   Wall signs. Wall signs are permitted, but shall not
exceed a height of 15 feet.



      (3)   Freestanding signs.



         (a)   One freestanding sign shall be permitted on each
parcel with a maximum height of eight feet and a maximum area of 24 square
feet.



         (b)   A freestanding sign may include only the name of
the facility, building, or organization it is intended to identify. The sign
shall not include any advertising copy. The sign must include the number of
the street address, but the area of these numerals shall not be included in
calculating the allowed sign area.



         (c)   The base shall have an aggregate width of at least
50% of the width of the sign.



         (d)   No more than one-half of the allowed freestanding
sign area shall be used for reader panels.



      (4)   Wall, fascia, mansard, and parapet signs. Wall, fascia,
mansard, and parapet signs are permitted, and may identify the facility,
building, or organization by name or by name and principal activity when the
name alone does not identify the general nature of the use, and may include
the street address.



      (5)   Directional signs. Directional signs are permitted when
required to assist the flow of traffic. Directional signs shall not exceed
six square feet in area or three feet in height.



      (6)   Directory signs. Directory signs are permitted for
non-residential uses in multi-residential developments and other multiple
tenants facilities.



         (a)   Each directory shall be illuminated with a maximum
area of 18 square feet and a maximum height of six feet.



         (b)   The number and location of the signs must be
approved by the City Manager or designee.



      (7)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs are permitted in
accordance with § 154.130(A) of this subchapter.



      (8)   Murals.  Murals shall be considered as artwork and thus
a part of the design of a structure and approved as a conditional use permit
by hearings of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.



   (C)   Business and industrial zones.



      (1)   General.



         (a)   Applicable zones. This division applies to all
signs in all B and I zones and in all commercial and industrial areas in a
planned area development (P.A.D.), unless otherwise provided in this
subchapter.



         (b)   Permitted signs. Only signs which are specified
permitted by this section are allowed. Any sign which is not specifically
permitted by this subsection is prohibited.



         (c)   Aggregate sign area allowed.



            1.   Unless otherwise modified by this section,
the maximum aggregate sign area for any business is one square foot of
signage for each linear foot of the business wall elevation along the street
frontage on which the sign is displayed.



            2.   Businesses shall be permitted sign area as
described in this section for any one elevation, plus the sign area on all
other elevations not to exceed one-half square foot for each linear foot of
elevation where the sign is displayed as long as the elevation does not
directly face a residentially zoned property.



      (2)   Wall, fascia, mansard, parapet, and shingle signs.



         (a)   General.



            1.   Wall, fascia, mansard, and parapet signs are
allowed only on the exterior elevation of the space occupied by the business.



            2.   Wall, fascia, mansard, or parapet signs may
identify the individual businesses, building complex, or center by name and
may identify up to three principal services when the name alone does not
identify the general nature of the business. Any wall, fascia, mansard, or
parapet sign may include the street address, but shall not include
advertising copy.



         (b)   Wall, fascia, mansard, and parapet signs for
theaters.



            1.   One wall, fascia, mansard, or parapet sign
for a theater may contain a reader panel.



            2.   The area of the reader panel shall not exceed
75 square feet or the maximum wall sign area otherwise allowed, whichever is
less.



            3.   The reader panel shall be used exclusively
for the purpose of the identifying entertainment, motion pictures, or special
events which occur on the premises.



         (c)   Shingle signs.



            1.   One shingle sign which is designed and
oriented primarily for the aid of pedestrians is permitted per business.



            2.   The minimum clearance between the bottom of
the sign and the nearest grade or sidewalk shall be seven feet, six inches.



         3.   A shingle sign must be located immediately adjacent
to the business it identifies.



      (3)   Freestanding signs.



         (a)   General.



            1.   Freestanding signs are permitted.



            2.   The base of any freestanding sign shall have
an aggregate width at least 50% of the width of the sign.



            3.   Single tenant building. Any freestanding sign
which identifies a single tenant building shall only bear the name of the
business or building it is intended to identify, and shall not include any
advertising copy.



            4.   Any freestanding sign shall include the
number of the street address, but the area of these numerals shall not be
included in calculating the allowed sign area.



         (b)   Maximum number and height of signs allowed. One
freestanding sign shall be permitted per access to any parcel or complex but
no more than two signs per street frontage. A freestanding sign shall not
exceed a height of 30 feet.



         (c)   Aggregate sign area allowed.



            1.   Freestanding signs for multiple tenant
complexes. The maximum aggregate sign area allowed for all freestanding signs
for multiple tenant complexes is 150 square feet.



            2.   Freestanding signs for single-tenant
buildings. The maximum aggregate area allowed for freestanding signs for
single tenant buildings is 75 square feet.



         (d)   Identification of tenants in a multiple tenant
complex. Any freestanding sign within a multi-tenant building or shopping
center may identify the name of the building, complex, or center, and the
names of tenants within the complex. The signs shall not include any
advertising copy.



            1.   Any freestanding sign for a multiple tenant
complex is subject to administrative design review and approval by the
Planning Division. Appeals to the Planning and Zoning Commission must be
filed within 15 days and shall follow the requirements of § 154.159.



      (4)   Reader Panels.



         (a)   Gasoline service stations may use up to 66% of the
allowed freestanding sign area for a reader panel only to identify the
current price of fuel being sold.



         (b)   Other uses in the commercial zones may use up to
33% of the allowed freestanding sign area for a reader panel.



      (5)   Directional signs. Directional signs when required to
assist the flow of traffic are permitted, but shall not exceed six square
feet in area of three feet in height. The sign may include business
identification by word or symbol on up to 25% of the sign area.



      (6)   Directory signs. Directory signs when required to
identify the location of the various premises located within a center or
complex are permitted as follows:



         (a)    Each directory sign shall be illuminated with a
maximum area of 18 square feet and a maximum height of six feet.



         (b)   The number and location of the signs must be
approved by the City Manager or designee.



      (7)   Noncommercial signs. In all commercial and industrial
zones, noncommercial signs shall have a maximum area of 12 square feet and a
maximum height of five feet.



      (8)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs are permitted in
accordance with § 154.130(A) of this subchapter.



      (9)   Menu boards.



         (a)   Two menu boards are permitted per drive-thru lane.
The signs may be freestanding or wall-mounted.



         (b)   The maximum aggregate area for a menu board shall
not exceed 48 square feet.



         (c)   The maximum height of freestanding menu boards
shall not exceed eight feet.



      (10)   Awning signs.



         (a)   A maximum of 25% of the front face area of an
awning may be used for signage.



         (b)   The sign area shall be measured according to §
154.129(C)(4)(b) above, unless a distinctive background is provided.



         (c)   If letters or graphics are placed on the valence,
they shall not be placed elsewhere on the awning.



         (d)   Awning signs are allowed only on the exterior
elevation of the space occupied by the business.



      (11)   Message boards.



         (a)   A maximum of 33% of the allowed freestanding area
may be used for a message board.



         (b)   One message board may be permitted for each
principle arterial street frontage to the site.



      (12)   Billboards and other off-premises signs. Billboards may
be approved by conditional use permit along Olive Avenue or Northern Avenue
(Parkway), but no more than two billboards shall be approved on Olive Avenue
and no more than five billboards on Northern Avenue (Parkway) without Council
approval of a variance or development agreement.  Billboards shall not
exceed 400 square feet in area or a height of 40 feet above the nearest curb
or 60 feet above grade along Olive Avenue. New digital or static billboards
installed along Northern Avenue (Parkway) shall not exceed 672 square feet
per face, per direction in area or a height of 65 feet above the nearest curb
or grade. Graphics shall not include animated, flashing, scrolling,
intermittent, or full motion video elements. There shall be a minimum
rotation time of eight seconds between images. The signs shall have the City
of El Mirage logo integrated within the design. The appropriate application
and amount of city identification is subject to city approval via the
conditional use permit process. Network time of one image for at least eight
seconds shall be made available to the city for messaging on four digital
sign faces. No new billboards shall be permitted within 1,000 feet in any
direction from an existing billboard. All permits for billboards must receive
prior written approval from Luke Air Force Base and other governmental
entities if applicable. A one-time fee of $6,000 per site will be assessed
with approval of a digital board and payable to the city. Directional
off-premises signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area or eight feet in
height. No off-premises sign shall be located in public rights-of-way (except
for kiosks as provided in this code) or block the clear sight of any
intersection or drive;



      (13)   Sandwich boards. Two sandwich boards up to 12 square
feet in area shall be permitted on the premises during business hours but
shall not be permitted off-premises or in public rights-of-way or allowed to
block required access along a sidewalk or clear sight at any intersection or
driveway.



      (14)   Murals.  Murals shall be considered as artwork and
thus a part of the design of a structure and approved as a conditional use
permit by hearings of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-10.5) (Ord. O10-01-01, passed 2-11-2010; Ord. O11-04-05,
passed 4-14-2011; Ord. O12-02-01, passed 2-21-2012; Ord. O12-11-11, passed
11-8-2012; Ord. O14-05-03, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 154.130  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to place or install a temporary
sign in any zone except as permitted within this subchapter and the following
regulations.



   (B)   Upon written request, and for good cause, the City Manager or
designee may grant a one-time extension of any time period listed in division
(B)(6) of this section.



      (1)   Real estate signs.



      (2)   General.



         (a)   One non-illuminated sign pertaining only to the
property on which it is located shall be permitted for each street frontage.



         (b)   A maximum of two signs may be permitted per parcel.



      (3)   Residential zones.



         (a)   Undeveloped land.



            1.   For sale, lease, or rent signs on parcels of
less than five acres: each sign shall have a maximum area of six square feet
and a maximum height of five feet.



            2.   For sale, lease, or rent signs on parcels of
five acres or more: each sign shall have a maximum area of 32 square feet and
a maximum height of eight feet.



         (b)   Improved land. Each for sale, lease, or rent sign
shall have a maximum area of 12 square feet and a maximum height of six
square feet.



      (4)   Commercial and industrial zones.



         (a)   Undeveloped land. Each for sale, lease, or rent
sign shall have a maximum area of 32 square feet and a maximum height of
eight feet.



         (b)   Improved land. Each for sale, lease, or rent sign
shall have a maximum area of 12 square feet and a maximum height of six feet.



      (5)   Promotional signs.



         (a)   The following promotional signs shall be allowed
for a maximum of 30 consecutive days, no more than four times per year.



         (b)   1.   One fabric banner attached to wall.
Maximum 32 square feet; or



            2.   One freestanding board per entry with
amaximum 12 square feet, 15 feet high; or



            3.   No more than two swoopers per business, 15
square feet in area, and 15 feet in height with at least 25 feet between each
one.



         (c)   All promotional signs shall be professionally
prepared and located on private property and not on public rights-of-way or
within clear sights at intersections or drives.



      (6)   Grand opening signs. One grand opening sign display is
allowed per business. A grand opening sign display requires a new business or
change in business name, and shall be allowed for no more than 30 consecutive
days.



      (7)   Special event signs.  Special event sign displays shall
be allowed for a maximum of 30 consecutive days but no sooner than 15 days
before or ten days after the event and no more than three times per calendar
year.



      (8)   Construction and development signs.



         (a)   Non-illuminated signs are allowed with a maximum
area of 32 square feet and a maximum height of eight feet.



         (b)   If building permits for the project have not been
issued within three months after issuance of the sign permit, the sign shall
be removed and any new construction and development sign for substantially
the same project at the same location will be approved only after a building
permit for the project has been issued by the city.



         (c)   Every construction and development sign shall be
removed prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for the site.



         (d)   Any construction and development sign may identify
the name of the project, the names of the developer, contractor, architect,
subcontractor, and financier for the project, and the projected completion
date.



      (9)   Open house directional signs.



         (a)   There shall be a maximum of two off-site open
house directional signs for each home for sale, and a maximum of one on-site
open house directional sign at the property for sale.



         (b)   Each open house directional sign shall have a
maximum area of three  square feet and a maximum height of 30 inches.



         (c)   Open house directional signs may be posted only
when a salesperson is on duty at the home and shall be removed when the open
house is over.



         (d)   Open house directional signs shall not be placed
on any sidewalk or in any manner which will interfere with pedestrian travel
or pose a hazard to pedestrians.



         (e)   Open house directional signs shall not obstruct
the vision of a vehicular operator while entering, exiting, or traveling upon
either private or public right-of-way.



      (10)   Window signs.



         (a)   Window signs may be used for business
identification or advertising of any service, product, business place, or
activity on the premises.



         (b)   Window signs may include, but are not limited to,
the business name, street address, phone number, business hours, meeting
times, individual or specific products, services, or merchandise and related
price information slogans, and sale announcements.



         (c)   It is unlawful for any reason to exceed a sign
area greater than 50% of window area.



      (11)   Subdivision advertising signs (on-premises).



         (a)   One on-premises subdivision advertising sign shall
be permitted at each major entry with a maximum of four signs per subdivision.



         (b)   The maximum aggregate area of all signs shall be
160 square feet.



         (c)   The maximum height of any on-premises subdivision
advertising sign shall be 15 feet.



         (d)   The edges of the sign shall be boxed.



         (e)   No sign permits shall be issued until a
preliminary plat has been approved by the city.



         (f)   Upon expiration of a preliminary plat, if no final
plat is approved, all on-premises subdivision advertising signs must be
removed within ten days.



         (g)   On-premises subdivision advertising signs are
permitted until the sales office is no longer open.



         (h)   On-premises subdivision advertising signs shall
not be located within 100 feet of any property line of an existing residence
without the written consent of the owners of all adjacent properties.



      (12)   Subdivision advertising signs (off-premises).



         (a)   Off-premises subdivision advertising signs are
permitted only on vacant property with the written permission of the property
owner.



         (b)   A maximum of one off-premises subdivision
advertising sign is permitted for each subdivision which is equal to or less
than 60 acres. A maximum of two off-premises subdivision advertising signs
are permitted for each subdivision which is greater than 60 acres. No
off-premises subdivision advertising signs shall be located closer than 100
feet from any other subdivision advertising sign.



         (c)   Each sign shall have a maximum area of 32 square
feet and a maximum height of eight feet.



         (d)   Off-premises subdivision advertising signs are
permitted until the sales office is no longer open.



      (13)   Temporary subdivision identification flags.



         (a)   A maximum of ten temporary subdivision
identification flags per subdivision are allowed.



         (b)   The area of any flag shall not exceed 15 square
feet.



         (c)   The maximum height of any flag shall be 20 feet.



         (d)   There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet
between flags.



         (e)   All flags shall be placed within the boundaries of
the subdivision with the permission of the property owner, if this is other
than the developer.



         (f)   Temporary subdivision identification flags are
permitted until the sales office is no longer open.



         (g)   Logos are allowed on the flags, but no flag shall
include any advertising copy.



      (14)   Political signs.



         (a)   Within residential zones, the maximum aggregate
sign area for each parcel shall be 12 square feet. The maximum height of any
sign shall be six feet.



         (b)   Within commercial and industrial zones, the
maximum aggregate sign area for each parcel shall be 32 square feet for each
street frontage, and the maximum height of any sign shall be eight feet.



         (c)   The person, party, or organization responsible for
the erection or display of the political sign shall not erect or display the
signs before 60 days prior to the specific election to which the signs refer
except between a primary and general election.



         (d)   The person, party, or organization responsible for
the erection or display of the political signs shall remove the signs within
15 days after the specific election to which the signs refer. The City
Manager or designee may remove the signs pursuant to § 154.135(F).



         (e)   No person shall remove, alter, deface or cover any
political sign under the same condition as for a city, town or county as set
forth in A.R.S. § 16-1019(C) and as may be amended from time to time.



      (15)   Garage or yard sale signs.  Garage or yard sale signs
shall be permitted on a resident's private property or on other private
property with the owner's consent up to four times in any calendar year, but
such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area or five feet in height
and shall be placed no sooner than one day before the sale and removed no
later than the end of the last day of the sale [not to exceed three
consecutive days]. No such signs shall be allowed in public rights-of-way or
within the clear sight of a driveway or intersection.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-10.6)  (Ord. O10-01-01, passed 2-11-2010; Ord.
O11-04-05, passed 4-14-2011; Ord. O11-10-18, passed 10-13-2011; Ord.
O13-07-10, passed 7-2-2013; Ord. O16-05-04, passed 5-17- 2016)  Penalty, see
§ 154.999



§ 154.131  FLAGS AND FLAGPOLES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to place or install a flag in
any zone except as permitted within this subchapter.



   (B)   Any person placing or installing a flag shall comply with the
following provisions.



      (1)   A maximum of three flags on any one lot or parcel shall
be allowed in any business or industrial district.



      (2)   Parcels zoned R-43, R-1, R-la, R-2, R-3, and R-4 shall
not have more than one flagpole per parcel.



      (3)   No flag pole shall exceed the following heights per
specified zone:



         (a)   Parcels zones R-43, R-1, R-1a shall not exceed 30
feet.



         (b)   Parcels zoned R-2 and R-3, and R-4 shall not
exceed 35 feet.



         (c)   Parcels zoned B-1, B-2, and B-3 shall not exceed
35 feet.



         (d)   Parcels zoned I-1, I-2, and I-3 shall not exceed
35 feet.



      (4)   Flagpoles shall not be placed except within a landscaped
setting of not less than 200 square feet.



      (5)   Illumination of any flag or flagpole shall be in
accordance with § 154.128.



      (6)   Nothing in this section shall apply to any flag or
flagpole located on any parcel owned or operated by any federal, state, or
local government for a governmental purpose.



      (7)   Flagpoles of height in excess of 35 feet.



         (a)   A flagpole shall not exceed 35 feet in height,
except for those displaying the flags of the Unites States of America or the
State of Arizona which may be erected to a height not to exceed 100 feet.



         (b)   Any lawful flag may be flown in conjunction with
the United States and/or the State of Arizona flag(s), shall be flown beneath
them and shall not exceed either in size.



         (c)   No more than one flagpole in excess of 35 feet
shall be placed in a mobile home park, a golf course, or on a commercial site.



         (d)   No flagpole in excess of 35 feet shall be placed
on a residential lot.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-10.7) (Ord. O13-07-11, passed 7-9-2013) Penalty, see §
154.999



§ 154.132  MASTER SIGN PROGRAM.



   (A)   Purpose. The master sign program is designed to allow signage
which is appropriate to the character of the development, provides adequate
identification and information, provides a good visual environment, promotes
traffic safety, and is regulated to the extent necessary to be consistent
with the purpose and intent of the sign requirements.



   (B)   Compliance. Compliance with an approved master sign program is
deemed to be compliance with all other requirements of this subchapter,
except as otherwise stated herein.



   (C)   Master sign program criteria.



      (1)   Master sign programs shall only apply to properties
designated within a planned area development as approved by the City Council
or multiple tenant complex within a commercial or industrial zone.



      (2)   Any request for approval of a master sign program shall
be submitted on an official conditional use permit application provided by
the city. Application shall be submitted to the City Manager or designee and
acted upon by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with site plan
procedure.



      (3)   Any master sign program shall be evaluated based upon
the following criteria:



         (a)   Placement.



            1.   On-premises. All signs shall be placed where
they are sufficiently visible and readable for their function. Factors to be
considered shall include the purpose of the sign, its location relative to
traffic movement and access points, site features, structures, and sign
orientation relative to viewing distances and viewing angles.



            2.   Off-premises. Off-premises signs are
permitted only on vacant property with the written permission of the property
owner.



         (b)   Quantity.



            1.   On-premises. The number of signs that may be
approved within any planned area development or multiple tenant complex shall
be no greater than that required to provide project identification and entry
signs, internal circulation and directional information to destinations and
development sub-areas, and business identification. Factors to be considered
shall include the size of the development, the number of development
sub-areas, and the division or integration of sign function.



            2.   Off-premises. A maximum of one off-premises
advertising sign is permitted for a planned area development or multiple
tenant complex which is equal to or less than 160 acres. A maximum of two
off-premises advertising signs are permitted for a planned area development.



         (c)   Size.



            1.   On-premises. All signs shall be no larger
than necessary for visibility and readability. Factors to be considered in
determining appropriate size shall include topography, volume of traffic,
speed of traffic, visibility range, proximity of adjacent uses, amount of
sign copy, placement of display (location and height), lettering style, and
presence of distractive influences. In no event shall a plan contain a
freestanding or wall sign which exceed by more than 50% any maximum height
standard.



            2.   Off-premises. Signs shall have a maximum area
of 160 square feet and a maximum height of 15 feet. Permitted time is not to
exceed 90% of home sales.



         (d)   Materials. Sign materials shall be compatible with
architectural and/or natural features of the project.



            1.   This may be accomplished through similarity
of materials for sign structures and faces, the use of complementary colors,
similarity of architectural style, and/or the use of a consistent lettering
style or copy.



            2.   Illumination. Illumination shall be in
accordance with § 154.128(A)(1).



(Prior Code, § 21-6-10.8) (Ord. O14-05-02, passed 5-6-2014)



§ 154.133  KIOSK SIGNS.



   (A)   The purpose of a kiosk sign is to provide a uniform,
coordinated method of offering owners a means of providing directional signs
to their premises and minimize confusion among prospective consumers wishing
to locate them while promoting traffic safety and reducing the visual blight
of sign proliferation.



   (B)   The city is permitted to erect kiosk signs in the public
right-of-way at sites approved by the City Council or delegated to the City
Manager or designee.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-10.9)



§ 154.134  NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   Maintenance. Any person owning or maintaining a legal
non-conforming sign shall maintain the sign in good condition pursuant to §
154.127(F).



   (B)   Alterations. It is unlawful for any person owning or
maintaining a legal, non-conforming sign or sign structure to alter,
reconstruct, replace, or relocate the sign other than to comply with this
subchapter, except reasonable repair and maintenance limited to a maximum
total of 50% of the sign’s or structure’s reproduction cost as determined
from an appraisal by a competent appraiser.



   (C)   Removal.



      (1)   Any person owning or maintaining a legal, non-conforming
sign shall remove or bring the sign into conformance with this subchapter
when:



         (a)   More than 50% of the reproduction cost of the sign
or sign structure has been damaged or destroyed or by any means taken down;



         (b)   The condition of the sign has deteriorated to such
an extent that the cost of repairs exceed 50% of the reproduction cost of the
sign or sign structure as determined from an appraisal by a competent
appraiser; and/or



         (c)   The use of the sign or the property on which it is
located has ceased, become vacant, or been unoccupied for a period of six
months or more.



      (2)   In the event any of these should occur, the sign shall
be presumed to be abandoned and shall be removed by the owner of the
property, his or her agent, or person having the beneficial use of the
building or structure upon which the sign or sign structure is erected within
30 days after written notification from the City Manager or a designee.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-10.10)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.135  PERMITS, ADMINISTRATION, AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Code Administrator. The City Manager or designee shall be the
authorized Code Administrator for the city. The City Manager or designee
shall implement, administer, and enforce this subchapter, and may establish
rules, regulations, and procedures to implement, administer, and enforce this
subchapter.



   (B)   Sign permit applications.



      (1)   Application for a permit shall be on the official form
provided by the city and accompanied by the following information: scaled
drawings; the sign legend or commercial message; sign location and setbacks
in relation to property lines; dimensions, construction specifications;
electrical components and wiring; method of attachment and design of
structural members to which attachment is to be made; and location of the
foundation of post hole location in relation to the property line and public
right-of-way.



      (2)   The City Manager or designee shall not issue permits for
the use, construction, reconstruction, or alteration of any sign structure
until adequate information is submitted to determine the proposed action is
in conformance with the provisions of these sign regulations.



      (3)   The City Manager or designee may, in writing, suspend or
revoke a permit issued under provisions of this section whenever the permit
is issued on the basis of a material omission or misstatement of fact, or in
violation of this subchapter.



      (4)   No permit for a sign issued by the city shall be deemed
to constitute permission or authorization to maintain a public or private
nuisance, nor shall any permit issued hereunder constitute a defense in any
action to abate a nuisance.



      (5)   Whenever any sign for which a permit is required by this
subchapter has been placed, erected, or displayed without first obtaining a
permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued.
An investigation fee equal to, and in addition to, the permit fee shall be
collected.



      (6)   Whenever any sign requires an electrical permit, both
the sign permit and the electrical permit must be issued and obtained
simultaneously or may be included under one sign permit.



   (C)   Permit fees and refunds.



      (1)   Before the city issues any sign permit required by this
subchapter, the applicant shall pay all fees in accordance with the schedule
as set by City Council resolution.



      (2)   For refunds, the applicant must submit a letter of
request along with a copy of the sign permit to the City Manager or designee.
Refunds shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of the adopted
building codes and city policies.



   (D)   Variances, site plan procedures, and administrative appeals.



      (1)   An application request for a variance from the
provisions of this subchapter shall be submitted to the City Manager or
designee and acted upon by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with this
chapter, as it exists, or as it may be amended.



      (2)   An application for conditional use permits required by
this subchapter shall be submitted to the City Manager or designee and acted
upon by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with this chapter,
as it exists, or as it may be amended.



      (3)   An application for administrative appeal shall be
submitted to the City Manager or designee and acted upon by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with this chapter as it exists or as it may be
amended.



   (E)   Violations and revocations of permits. The City Manager or
designee may revoke any permit authorizing the erection of any sign which is
in violation of the permit of this subchapter. The following is the
revocation process.



      (1)   Notice of the City Manager or designee’s decision to
revoke a sign permit shall be served upon the applicant of the permit:



         (a)   By delivering in person a copy of the notice to
the applicant of the permit or to one of its officers;



         (b)   By leaving a copy of the notice with any person in
charge of the premises;



         (c)   In the event no such person can be found on the
premises, by affixing a copy of the notice in a conspicuous position at an
entrance to the premises and by the certified mailing of another copy of the
notice to the last known post office address of the applicant of the permit;
or



         (d)   By posting a copy of the notice on the sign in
violation and by the certified mailing of another copy of the notice to the
last know post office address of the applicant of the permit.



            1.   The applicant of the permit may appeal the
decision of the City Manager or designee to revoke the permit to the Board of
Adjustment, in writing, within 15 days from the date when the notice was
served.



            2.   If no appeal has been taken at the end of 15
days, the permit is revoked. The City Manager or designee shall then initiate
the process for the removal of the illegal sign in accordance with division
(F) below.



   (F)   Removal of signs.



      (1)   The City Manager or designee is authorized to require
removal of any illegal sign under the following provisions.



      (2)   Before bringing an action to require removal of any
illegal sign, the City Manager or designee shall give written notice to the
owner of the sign or the owner of the premises on which the sign is located.
The notice shall state the violation charged and the reasons and grounds for
removal, specifying the deficiencies or defects and what repairs, if any,
will make the sign conform to the requirements of this subchapter, and
specify that the sign must be removed or made to conform with the provisions
of this subchapter with the notice period provided below.



         (a)   The notice period for permanent signs shall be ten
days.



         (b)   The notice period for temporary signs shall be 48
hours.



         (c)   Re-erection of any sign or substantially similar
sign on the same premises after a compliance notice has been issued shall be
deemed a continuation of the original violation.



      (3)   Service of notice shall be made personally on the owner
or lessee, or by certified mail addressed to the owner or lessee at the
address specified in the permit or the last know address.



      (4)   If the owner of lessee of the premises upon which the
sign is located has not demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Manager
or designee that the sign has been removed or brought into compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter by the end of the notice period, then the
City Manager or designee shall certify the violations to the City Attorney
for prosecution.



      (5)   The City Manager or designee may remove any illegal sign
which exists or has been re-erected after the expiration date of the notice
period, if the owner or lessee of the premises has been issued a compliance
notice at least once before for the same violation involving the same or
similar sign.



      (6)   Notwithstanding the above, the City Manager or designee
may cause the immediate removal or repair (without notice to the owner of the
sign, or of the property on which it is located) of any unsafe or defective
sign or signs that creates an immediate hazard to persons or property, or of
any sign which is placed in any right-of-way in violation of § 151.002



      (7)   If the city removes all illegal sign pursuant to this
section, the city may petition the court to recover the costs, expenses, and
attorney fees which the city incurred in removing the illegal sign and in
bringing the petition for recovery. If the court finds by a preponderance of
the evidence that the city is entitled to recover, the court may order the
defendant to pay to the city the amount of the costs, expenses, and attorney
fees reasonably incurred by the city, and may enter judgment in favor of the
city and against the defendant in that amount.



   (G)   Prosecution of violations. Every action to prosecute a
violation of this subchapter shall be prosecuted in the manner provided in
city code.



   (H)   Liability for damages. The provisions of this subchapter shall
not be construed to relieve or to limit in any way, the responsibility or
liability of any person, firm, or corporation which erects or owns any sign,
for personal injury or property damage caused by the sign; nor shall the
provision of this subchapter be construed to impose upon the city’s
officers, City Manager, or the city employees, any responsibility or
liability by reasons of the approval of any sign under the provisions of this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-10.11)



§ 154.136  CONFLICT.



   If any portion of this subchapter is found to be in conflict with any
other provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinances
of this code, the provision which establishes the higher standard shall
prevail.



ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES



§ 154.150  PROCEDURE FOR AMENDMENTS TO THIS CHAPTER.



   (A)   Generally. In accordance with the provisions of Arizona State
Statutes, the City Council may from time to time adopt amendments to the
zoning ordinance. An amendment to this chapter may involve changes in its
text and wording, including but not limited to changes in the regulations
regarding uses, setbacks, heights, lot areas, definitions, administration,
and/or procedures. Ordinance amendments do not, however, include the rezoning
of property. Amendments may be initiated by the Council, the Planning and
Zoning Commission, or by petition of a person whose property would be
affected by the amendment.



   (B)   Application of amendment. If an individual or other party
initiates a request for an amendment to this chapter, the request must be
made on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator. The request must state
the exact section of the chapter proposed for amendment, the proposed
substitute wording, and the reasons for requesting the amendment. Graphic
material should also be submitted if it will assist in understanding the
benefits of the amendment. The submittal must be made to the Zoning
Administrator and the processing fee paid at least 30 days prior to the date
of the public hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (C)   Notice of hearing.



      (1)   No rezoning may be adopted until a public hearing has
been held on the matter by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and if
required under § 154.151(E) below by the City Council.



      (2)   A notice of the time, date, place, and purpose of the
hearings shall be given at least 15 and not more than 30 calendar days before
the hearing by:



         (a)   Publication in a newspaper of general circulation
published or circulated within the city; and



         (b)   Posting of the property in a manner that is
legible from the public right-of-way.  The posting shall comply with the
City of El Mirage Planning Department Site Posting Requirements.



      (2)   Notice shall also be sent by first class mail at least
15 days before the day of the first hearing to each owner of property
situated wholly or partly within 300 feet of the property to which the
rezoning relates. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for placing
and mailing the notices. For the purpose of giving mailed notice, the
Planning Director may require the applicant to furnish the names and
addresses of all owners of property within 300 feet of the property to be
rezoned. The Zoning Administrator shall make a copy of the notice and a list
of the owners and addresses to which the notice was sent as a part of the
record of the proceedings. The failure to receive notice by individual
property owners if notices were published and mailed 15 days prior to the
hearing shall not necessarily invalidate the proceedings.



      (3)   In proceedings involving rezoning of land which abuts
other municipalities or unincorporated areas of Maricopa County, or a
combination thereof, copies of the notice of the public hearing shall be
transmitted to the planning agency of such governmental unit abutting the
land. In proceedings involving rezoning of land that is located within the
territory in the vicinity of a military airport or ancillary military
facilities as defined in A.R.S. § 28-8461, copies of notice of public
hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the military airport.



      (4)   In proceedings involving one or more of the following
proposed changes or related series of changes in the standards governing land
uses, notice shall be provided in the manner prescribed by state law.



         (a)   A 10% or more increase or decrease in the number
of square feet or units that may be developed.



         (b)   A 10% or more increase or reduction in the
allowable height of buildings.



         (c)   An increase or reduction in the allowable number
of stories of buildings.



         (d)   A 10% or more increase or decrease in setback or
open space requirements.



         (e)   An increase or reduction in permitted uses.



   (D)   Hearing and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. An amendment not initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be referred to the Commission for study and public hearing. In its
deliberations on the matter, the Commission shall consider oral or written
statements from the applicant, the public, city staff, and its own members.
The Commission may recommend approval or disapproval, or it may table the
proposed amendment. The proposed amendment may not be tabled more than two
meetings in succession. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall notify the
City Council, in writing, of its recommendation. The recommendation shall
include the reasons for the recommendation and be transmitted to the Council
not more than 15 days after the public hearing in which the recommendation
was made.



   (E)   Hearing and decision by the City Council. The City Council,
after receipt of the report and recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, shall set a date within 30 days for a public hearing on the
amendment request. An amendment which has been recommended for denial by the
Commission shall not be reviewed by the Council except upon written request
by the applicant. In its deliberations on the matter, the Council shall
consider oral or written statements from the petitioner, the public, city
staff members, and its own members. The Council may approve the request by
ordinance, deny the request, or table the request for not more than 60 days.



(Prior Code, § 21-7-1)



Editor’s Note:



   The City of El Mirage Planning Department Site Posting Requirements,
(adopted March 24, 2005), is available from the city upon request.



§ 154.151  PROCEDURE FOR REZONINGS.



   (A)   Generally. In accordance with the provisions of Arizona
Revised Statutes, the City Council may from time to time change the zoning of
parcels of and within the municipality. These changes in zoning
classification are for the purpose of meeting the land use needs of the
residents of the city in conformance with the city’s general plan.
Rezonings may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the owner of property proposed for rezoning, the lessee having a
leasehold interest of not less than five years exclusive of an option to
renew, or the agent of any of the foregoing, duly authorized in writing, or
by petition of the person whose property would be affected by the rezoning.



   (B)   Application for rezoning. An application for a rezoning shall
be made on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator. On the application
form shall be indicated the legal description of the property, the present
zoning classification, and the recommended use of this property by the
city’s general plan. With the application, the applicant shall submit a one
inch equals 100 foot scale diagram of the rezoning illustrated on a standard
section line map. The applicant shall present evidence to the Zoning
Administrator of ownership or type of controlling interest in the property
(e.g., option to purchase). This application shall be completed, verified by
a notary public, and submitted along with the established fee to the Zoning
Administrator at least 21 days prior to the public hearing by the Planning
and Zoning Commission.



   (C)   Notice of hearing.



      (1)   No rezoning may be adopted until a public hearing has
been held on the matter by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and if
required under division (E) below, by the City Council.



      (2)   A notice of the time, date, place, and purpose of the
hearings shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation, published
or circulated with the city at least 15 days prior to the date of the first
hearing and at least 15 days prior to the date of any subsequent hearing.



      (3)   A similar notice shall be mailed at least 15 days before
the day of the first hearing to each owner of property situated wholly or
partially within 200 feet of the property to which the rezoning relates. The
Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for placing and mailing such
notices. For the purpose of giving mailed notice, the Planning Director shall
require the applicant to furnish the names and addresses of all owners or
property within 200 feet of the property to be rezoned. The Zoning
Administrator shall make a copy of the notice and a list of the owners and
addresses to which the notice was sent as a part of the record of the
proceedings. The failure to receive notice by individual property owners if
notices were published and mailed 15 days prior to the hearing shall not
necessarily invalidate the proceedings.



      (4)   In proceedings involving rezoning of land which abuts
other municipalities or unincorporated areas of Maricopa County, or a
combination thereof, copies of the notice of the public hearing shall be
transmitted to the planning agency of the governmental unit abutting the land.



   (D)   Hearing and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. A rezoning not initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be referred to the Commission for study and public hearing. In its
deliberations on the matter, the Commission shall consider oral or written
statements from the applicant, the public, city staff, and its own members.
The Commission may recommend approval or disapproval, or it may table the
rezoning application. The application may not be tabled more than two
meetings in succession. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall notify the
City Council, in writing, of its recommendation. The recommendation shall
include the reasons for the recommendation and be transmitted to the Council
not more than 15 days after the public hearing in which the recommendation
was made.



   (E)   Hearing and decision by the City Council.



      (1)   The City Council may, after receipt of the report and
recommendation of the Planning and zoning Commission, consider the rezoning
request. If requested in writing by any member of the public or of the City
Council, the Council shall hold a public hearing on the request. A rezoning
which has been recommended for denial by the Commission shall not be reviewed
by the Council except upon written request by the applicant, and shall then
require a public hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall
be given in the time and manner provided for giving of notice of the hearing
by the Commission as specified in division (C) above. During any public
hearing on the matter, the Council shall consider oral or written statements
from the applicant, city staff, the public, and its own members. The Council
may approve any request for rezoning by ordinance, deny the request, or table
the request. The application may not be tabled more than two meetings. If
approved, the City Engineer shall revise the official zoning map accordingly.



   (F)   Duration of zoning approval (conditional rezoning).



      (1)   Approval of a rezoning request shall be conditioned upon
the start of construction beginning within one year of the date of approval
action taken by the City Council. If, at the expiration of this period, the
start of construction has not begun for the use based upon the Commission’s
approved site plan for which the zoning was conditionally approved, the
property shall revert to its former zoning classification without Council or
Commission action.



      (2)   The city may authorize extensions when deemed necessary.



   (G)   Public protest against amendment. If there is a written
protest against a change in the zoning classification of a parcel of land,
signed by the owners of 20% or more of the area of lots included in the
proposed change, or of those within a distance of 150 feet, not including
street rights-of-way, the change shall not be approved except upon the
affirmative vote of three-fourths of all of the members of the City Council.
If any members of the governing body are unable to vote on such a question
because of a conflict of interest, then the required number of votes for
passage of the question shall be three-fourths of the remaining membership of
the Council, provided that the required number of votes shall in no event be
less than a majority of the full membership of the Council.



   (H)   Right-of-way dedication. The Planning and Zoning Commission
may require as a condition to the change of zone, the dedication of
right-of-way necessary for roadways as prescribed by the circulation plan
contained in the city’s general plan. The Commission may also require
dedication of land for future roadway construction that is greater than that
called for in the circulation plan of the general plan if it is deemed to be
in the best interest of the city.



(Prior Code, § 21-7-2)



§ 154.152  CITIZEN REVIEW PROCESS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the citizen review process is to
provide citizens and adjacent land owners with notice of proposed rezoning
map amendments and zoning text amendments, and the opportunity to express any
issues or concerns that they may have with the proposed rezoning map
amendment or zoning text amendment before the public hearing.



   (B)   Requirements. Every application for zoning map amendment and
zoning text amendment that requires a public hearing shall include a citizen
review process which must be implemented prior to the first public hearing.



   (C)   Notice area. The level of citizen interest and the number of
potentially affected parties will vary depending on the nature of the
application and, for zoning map amendments, the location of the site. The
target area for early notification will be determined by the applicant after
consultation with the Planning Department. At a minimum, the target area
shall include the following:



      (1)   Property owners within the public hearing notice area
required by other sections of this chapter; and



      (2)   The head of any homeowners association or registered
neighborhood within the public notice area required by other sections of this
chapter.



   (D)   Submittals. Applicants for zoning map amendments and zoning
text amendments that require a public hearing shall submit to the Planning
Department at the time of application for the zoning map amendment or zoning
text amendment a citizen review plan which includes the following:



      (1)   A list of those residents, property owners, interested
parties, political jurisdictions, and public agencies that may be affected by
the application;



      (2)   How those adjacent to and potentially affected by an
application will be notified that an application has been made;



      (3)   How those adjacent to and potentially affected parties
will be informed of the substance of the change, amendment, or development
proposed by the application;



      (4)   How those affected or otherwise interested will be
provided an opportunity to discuss the applicant’s proposal with the
applicant and express any concerns, issues, or problems they may have with
the proposal in advance of the public hearing;



      (5)   The applicant’s schedule for completion of the citizen
review process;



      (6)   How the applicant will keep the Planning Department
informed of the status of the citizen review plan; and



      (7)   Applicants will be responsible for notice and other
costs associated with the citizen review process.



   (E)   Citizen review report. Following completion of the citizen
review plan, the applicant shall provide to the Planning Department prior to
notice of the first public hearing for the zoning map amendment or text
amendment, a written report of their efforts. The report shall include a
description of the notification process, and a summary of the issues and
concerns expressed during the citizen review process. The report shall be
included with the Planning Department report provided to the City Council
and/or Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (F)   Requirements are cumulative. These requirements apply in
addition to any notice provisions required elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance.



   (G)   Early implementation. The applicant may submit a citizen
review plan and begin implementation prior to formal application for the
zoning map amendment or text amendment. This shall not occur until after the
required pre-application meeting and consultation with the Planning
Department staff, and requires the prior written approval of the Planning
Department.



   (H)   Incomplete citizen review plan and report. If the citizen
review plan and/or report does not meet the requirements of this subchapter,
the application for the zoning map amendment or zoning text amendment shall
be considered incomplete and shall not be scheduled for public hearing.



(Prior Code, § 21-7-2.2)



§ 154.153  PROCEDURE FOR VARIANCES FROM THIS CHAPTER.



   (A)   Generally. The Board of Adjustment may allow a departure from
the terms of these zoning regulations pertaining to height or width of
structures or the size of yard and open spaces where the departure will not
be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to conditions peculiar
to the property because of its size, shape, or topography, and not as a
result of the action of the applicant, the literal enforcement of this
chapter would deprive the owner of the reasonable use of the land and/or
building involved.



   (B)   Application for variance. A request for variance shall be made
by filing at least 21 days prior to the Board meeting an application with
appropriate fees with the Zoning Administrator; the application shall be
accompanied by a development plan showing such information as the Zoning
Administrator may reasonably require for purposes of this chapter. The plans
shall contain sufficient information for the Board to make a proper decision
on the matter. The request shall state the exceptional conditions and the
peculiar and practical difficulties claimed as a basis for a variance. In all
cases, the application shall include:



      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   The legal description of the property involved in the
request for variance, including the street address, if any, of the property;



      (3)   The names and addresses of the owners of the property
and any other persons having a legal interest therein;



      (4)   A site plan drawn to scale showing the property
dimensions, grading, landscaping, and location of utilities, as applicable;



      (5)   Location of all existing and proposed buildings;



      (6)   Drive accesses, driveways, access roads, parking spaces,
off-street loading areas, and sidewalks as applicable;



      (7)   The variance requested and the reasons for the request;



      (8)   Justification, in writing, that the following exist:



         (a)   Special circumstances or conditions exist that are
peculiar to the land or building for which the adjustment is sought and do
not apply generally to land or buildings in the neighborhood and have not
resulted from any act of the applicant subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter;



         (b)   The circumstances or conditions are such that the
strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the
applicant of the reasonable use of the land or building, the granting of the
adjustment is necessary for the reasonable use thereof and the adjustment
requested is the minimum adjustment that will accomplish this purpose; and



         (c)   The granting of the adjustment is in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to
the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.



      (9)   Evidence satisfactory to the Board of Adjustment of the
ability and intention of the applicant to proceed with actual construction
work in accordance with the plans within six months after issuance of permit.



   (C)   Notice of hearing. Notice of the time, date, place, and
purpose of the variance hearing shall be published once in a newspaper of
general circulation, published or circulated within the city and posted in a
conspicuous place close to the property affected at least 15 days before the
hearings, and shall be mailed at least 15 days prior to the Board meeting to
each owner of property situated wholly or partially within 200 feet of the
property to which the variance relates. The Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for mailing the notices. For the purpose of giving mailed notice,
the Zoning Administrator shall require the applicant to furnish the names and
addresses of all property owners within 200 feet of the property.



   (D)   Evidence required for variance. At the public hearing on a
variance application, the applicant shall present a statement and adequate
evidence in such form as the Board may require for the purpose of showing:



      (1)   There are special circumstances or conditions applicable
to the property referred to in the application which do not prevail on other
property in that zone;



      (2)   The strict application of the regulations would work an
unnecessary hardship and that the granting of the application is necessary
for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial existing property rights;
and/or



      (3)   The granting of the application will not materially
affect the health or safety of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood and will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to property or improvements of the neighborhood.



   (E)   Board of Adjustment action. In the event the Board of
Adjustment can determine that substantial conformity to the standards
previously established in the zone may be secured and that detriment or
injury to the neighborhood will not result from the granting of a variance as
applied for, it may approve or conditionally approve the issuance of the
permit and transmit notice of its action to the Zoning Administrator.
Approval may be granted only upon the affirmative vote of three-fourths of
all members of the Board. A report of its findings and recommendations and
any conditions imposed or required shall also be submitted promptly to the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council.



   (F)   Disapproved application. In the event the Board of Adjustment
disapproves an application for a variance, no permit shall be issued pending
further action thereon by an appeal to the superior court within 30 days from
the date the disapproval is officially entered on the minutes of the Board,
if the court shall overrule the action of the Board, then the Zoning
Administrator shall issue the requested permit without further action by the
Board unless the court orders the Board to hold a further hearing to permit
the Board to fix conditions or require guarantees as set forth in divisions
(G) and (H) below.



   (G)   Conditional approval. In approving any variance the Board of
Adjustment may designate the conditions in connection therewith as will in
its opinion secure substantially the objectives of the regulation or
provision to which the variance is granted, to provide adequately for the
maintenance of the integrity and character of the zone in which the permit is
granted, and shall provide the Zoning Administrator with a copy of the same.



   (H)   Guarantees. Where necessary, the Board of Adjustment may
require guarantees, in such form as it may deem proper under the
circumstances, to ensure that the conditions designated in connection
therewith are being or will be complied with. Where any condition under which
a variance has been granted is violated, the variance shall cease to exist
and the permit shall become null and void.



(Prior Code, § 21-7-3)



§ 154.154  PROCEDURE FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL.



   (A)   (1)   Generally. For purposes of this chapter, site plans
may be classified as major or minor site plans. All developments within the
city except individual single-family and duplex residential units and
city-owned facilities shall be subject to this chapter. A major site plan
involves one or more of the following:



         (a)   Forty or more dwelling units in a multiple-family
structure or structures.



         (b)   Fifteen thousand or more square feet of:



            1.   Office space;



            2.   Retail commercial space service commercial
space; and/or



            3.   Industrial space.



         (c)   One or more buildings on one site for:



            1.   Office use;



            2.   retail commercial use;



            3.   Service commercial use; and/or



            4.   Industrial use.



         (c)   Twenty thousand or more square feet of exterior
storage of materials or goods; and



         (d)   Parking for more than 80 vehicles.



      (2)   Any other site plan (except for a Planned Area
Development) is considered a minor site plan. Any Planned Area Development
shall be reviewed according to the regulations of § 154.158.



      (3)   The Planning and Zoning Commission has the right to
review, and require revisions to, any proposed site plans, major or minor.
The purpose of this review is to relieve demonstrable adverse impacts of the
development upon public safety, health, or welfare; to protect public
investments in roads, drainage facilities, sewage facilities, and the like;
and to ensure that the regulations of the city are upheld.



      (4)   Additionally, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
authorize the Zoning Administrator to conduct review of minor site plans. Any
needed variances for major or minor site plans must be appealed to the Board
of Adjustment.



   (B)   Application of these procedures. These procedures shall apply
to all R-2, R-3, R-4, B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1, and I-2 rezonings and all
non-single-family and duplex development within the city.



      (1)   For those rezoning requests that may not comply with the
city general plan, the site plan shall be submitted in conjunction with the
rezoning application.



      (2)   For those rezoning requests that may comply with the
general plan, the site plan shall be submitted prior to any construction or
development and may be submitted with the rezoning application.



      (3)   For those areas with desired zoning, the site plan shall
be submitted prior to any construction or development.



   (C)   Application for major or minor site plan approval.
Applications for major or minor site plan approval shall be on a form
provided by the Zoning Administrator. Site plans may be submitted at any
time; however, major site plans shall be submitted at least 17 days prior to
the Planning and Zoning Commission at which they will be heard. The
application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee and development plans
showing sufficient information for the Planning and Zoning Commission or city
staff to determine whether the proposed development will meet the development
requirements of the city. In all cases the application shall contain the
following:



      (1)   General:



         (a)   Name of project/development;



         (b)   Location of project/development by street address;



         (c)   Location map, including area within one-half mile
of site;



         (d)   Name and mailing address of developer/owner;



         (e)   Name and mailing address of engineer/architect;



         (f)   Date of plan preparation;



         (g)   North point indicator;



         (h)   Scale of not less than one inch to 100 feet; and



         (i)   Names and addresses of property owners within 200
feet of site.



      (2)   Site plan, including:



         (a)   Boundary line of property with dimensions;



         (b)   Location, identification, and dimension of
existing and proposed data, to a distance of 100 feet unless otherwise stated:



            1.   Topographic contours at a minimum interval of
two feet;



            2.   Adjacent streets and street rights-of-way to
a distance of 150 feet, except for sites adjacent to major arterial streets
where the distances shall be 200 feet;



            3.   On-site streets and rights-of-way;



            4.   Ingress and egress points;



            5.   Traffic flow on-site;



            6.   Traffic flow off-site;



            7.   Utilities and utility rights-of-way or
easements:



               a.   Electric;



               b.   Natural gas;



               c.   Telephone, cable TV;



               d.   Water; and



               e.   Sewer (sanitary treated effluent and
storm)



            8.   Buildings and structures;



            9.   Parking facilities;



            10.   Water bodies;



            11.   Surface water holding ponds and drainage
ditches surface water drainage arrows;



            12.   Significant rock outcroppings;



            13.   Sidewalks, walkways, driveways, loading
areas and docks, bikeways;



            14.   Fences and walls;



            15.   Exterior signs;



            16.   Exterior refuse collection areas;



            17.   Exterior lighting; and



            18.   Landscaping (detailed plan showing
plantings, equipment, and the like):



               a.   Botanical and common names of
vegetation to be used;



               b.   Size of plantings at time of planting
and at maturity; and



               c.   Areas to be irrigated.



         (c)   Number of employee and non-employee parking
spaces, existing and proposed, and total square footage of each;



         (d)   Site statistics including site square footage,
percent of site coverage (building and parking), dwelling unit density,
percent park or open space; and



         (e)   Reproducible copy of the site plan with
appropriate signatures shall be submitted upon approval.



      (3)   Building information (on-site), including:



         (a)   Height above mean sea level of the lowest floor
when the structure is proposed to be located in a floodway or floodplain area;



         (b)   Gross square footage of existing and proposed
structures; and



         (c)   Front, rear, and side elevations, with a
description of exterior materials to be used.



      (4)   Permits:



         (a)   A listing of all required federal, state, and city
permits and status of applications;



         (b)   Certificate of 100-year assured water supply; and



         (c)   Certificate showing compliance with minimum county
and state water quality standards.



   (D)   Notification of site plan review.



      (1)   Major site plan. A notice of major site plan review
shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission
meeting to each owner of property situated wholly or partially within 200
feet of the property to which the site plan relates. The Zoning Administrator
shall be responsible for mailing the notices. For the purpose of giving
mailed notice, the Zoning Administrator shall require the owner of the
property affected to furnish the names and addresses of all property owners
within 200 feet of the property.



      (2)   Minor site plan review. A notice of minor site plan
review shall be mailed within two working days of the date of the site plan
approval application to each owner of property situated wholly or partially
within 200 feet of the property to which the site plan relates. The Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for mailing the notices. For purpose of
giving mailed notice, the Zoning Administrator shall require the owner of the
property affected to furnish the names and addresses of all property owners
within 200 feet of the property.



         (a)   If written protest to any minor site plan is
received from any notified property owner within ten days of the mailing date
of notification, the minor site plan shall become reclassified a major site
plan.



         (b)   No additional application shall be required,
however, all requirements and procedures governing major site plan shall then
apply.



   (E)   Minor site plan review.



      (1)   In considering applications for minor site plan approval
under this chapter, the city staff, if authorized by the Commission, shall
consider the following: relationship of the plan elements to conditions both
on and off the property; conformance to the city’s zoning ordinance;
conformance to the city’s general plan; the impact of the plan on the
existing and anticipated traffic and parking conditions; the adequacy of the
plan with respect to land use; pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress;
building location and height; landscaping; lighting; provisions for
utilities; site drainage; open space; loading and unloading areas; grading;
signage; screening; setbacks; and other related matters.



      (2)   The city staff shall meet with the applicant upon
request. The city staff shall also consider oral or written statements from
the public or other city staff members. A decision shall be made on a minor
site plan within 15 days of the date of application.



      (3)   If the city staff shall determine that the proposed site
plan will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the
community nor will cause traffic congestion or seriously depreciate
surrounding property values and at the same time is in harmony with the
purposes and intent of this chapter, the plan for the area, and the general
plan, the staff will recommend to the City Council, to grant the site plan
approval, and the conditions and safeguards be imposed as they deem
necessary. Staff shall notify the Planning and Zoning Commission at its next
regular meeting of any site plan approvals.



      (4)   Minor site plan approval applications may be denied by
city staff upon finding and determination by the staff that the conditions
required for approval do not exist.



      (5)   When a minor site plan approval application is denied by
city staff, an appeal may be taken to the Planning and Zoning Commission. If
unusual or significantly difficult conditions exist which affect the site
plan, the Zoning Administrator may determine and require that the site plan
be reviewed and acted upon by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (F)   Major site plan review.



      (1)   In considering applications for major site plan approval
under this chapter, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the
following: relationship of the plan elements to conditions both on and off
the property; conformance to the city’s zoning ordinance; conformance to
the city’s general plan; the impact of the plan on the existing and
anticipated traffic and parking conditions; the adequacy of the plan with
respect to land use; pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress; building
location and height; landscaping; lighting; provisions for utilities; site
drainage; open space; loading and unloading areas; grading; signage;
screening; setbacks; and other related matters.



      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider oral
or written statements from the applicant, the public, city staff members, or
its own members. It may question the applicant and approve, deny, or table
the development proposal. The application may not be tabled for more than two
regular meetings of the Commission.



      (3)   If the Commission shall determine by motion that the
proposed site plan will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare
of the community nor will cause traffic congestion or seriously depreciate
surrounding property values and at the same time is in harmony with the
purposes and intent of this chapter, the plan for the area, and the
comprehensive plan, the Commission will recommend to the City Council to
grant the site plan approval and impose such conditions and safeguards as
they deem necessary.



      (4)   Site plan approval applications may be denied by motion
of the Commission when the motion or consent shall constitute a finding and
determination by the Commission or staff that the conditions required for
approval do not exist.



   (G)   Duration of site plan approval. An approved site plan shall be
valid for one year from its date of approval, or until the zoning on a
particular site lapses, whichever occurs first.



   (H)   Amendments to approved site plans.



      (1)   Any amendment or modification to an approved site plan
shall be submitted for approval. All amendments shall be shown on a revised
site plan drawing.



      (2)   Amendments to minor site plans shall be submitted to
city staff who may, if authorized by the Commission, approve the amendment(s)
if they determine that the amendment(s) are acceptable to the city.



      (3)   Amendments to major site plans previously approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission may be approved by the Chairperson and
Secretary of the Commission upon finding by the Chairperson and Secretary of
the Commission that the amended site plan is in substantial compliance with
the originally approved site plan. If it is determined that the amended site
plan is not in substantial compliance with the originally approved site plan,
the application shall be resubmitted and shall be subject to divisions (C),
(D), and (F) above.



(Prior Code, § 12-7-4)  (Ord. O11-09-17, passed 9-22-2011)



§ 154.155  PROCEDURE FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.



   (A)   Generally. Certain uses, while generally not suitable in a
particular zoning district, may, under certain circumstances, be acceptable.
When these circumstances exist, a conditional use permit may be granted.
Conditions may be applied to the issuance of the permit and periodic review
may be required. The permit shall be granted for a particular use and not for
a particular person or firm. No conditional use permit shall be granted for a
use which is not specifically designed as such in this chapter.



   (B)   Application for conditional use permit. The person applying
for a conditional use permit shall fill out and submit to the Zoning
Administrator the appropriate form together with the required fee. The
request for a conditional use permit shall follow the procedures and
applicable requirements for major site plans of § 154.154, Procedure for
Site Plan Review, of this chapter.



   (C)   Planning and Zoning Commission consideration and findings.



      (1)   Within 30 days after the conclusion of the public
hearing, the Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the
conditional use permit application.



      (2)   The Commission, in approving a conditional use permit,
shall, by resolution adopted by an affirmative vote of not less than the
majority of all its voting members, find as follows.



         (a)   The site for the proposed use is adequate in size
and topography to accommodate the use, and all yards, spaces, walls and
fences, parking, loading, and landscaping are adequate to properly relate the
use with the land and uses in the vicinity.



         (b)   The site for the proposed use relates to streets
and highways adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and
kind of traffic generated by the proposed use.



         (c)   The proposed use will have no adverse effect upon
the abutting property.



         (d)   The proposed use shall be in conformance with the
general plan.



         (e)   The conditions stated in the approval are deemed
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. The
conditions may include but are not limited to:



            1.   Regulation of use;



            2.   Special yards, spaces, and buffers;



            3.   Special fences, solid fences, and walls;



            4.   Surfacing of parking areas;



            5.   Requiring street, service road, or alley
dedications and improvements or appropriate bonds;



            6.   Regulations of points of vehicular ingress
and egress;



            7.   Regulation of signs;



            8.   Requiring maintenance of the grounds;



            9.   Regulation of noise, vibrations, odors;



            10.   Regulation of hours for certain activities;



            11.   Time period within which the proposed use
shall be developed;



            12.   Duration of use;



            13.   Requiring the dedication of access rights;
and/or



            14.   Other such conditions as will make possible
the development of the city in an orderly and efficient manner.



         (f)   The Commission shall, in addition to any other
conditions, impose the following general conditions upon every conditional
use permit granted.



            1.   The right to a use and occupancy permit shall
be contingent upon the fulfillment of all general and special conditions
imposed by the conditional use permit procedure.



            2.   All of the special conditions shall
constitute restrictions running with the land and shall be binding upon the
owner of the land, his or her successors or assigns.



            3.   All conditions specifically stated under any
conditional use listed in this chapter shall apply and be adhered to by the
owner of the land, his or her successors or assigns.



            4.   All of the special conditions shall be
consented to in writing by the applicant.



            5.   The resolution granting the application,
together with all consent forms, shall be recorded by the Recorder of
Maricopa County.



      (3)   Applications for conditional use permits may be approved
or denied by motion of the Commission. If an application is denied, the
denial shall constitute a finding that the applicant has not shown that the
conditions required for approval do exist. No application for a conditional
use permit which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a
period of six months from the date of the order of denial, except on the
grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by
the Commission.



   (D)   Notification of Commission action. The applicant shall be
notified of the action taken by the Commission within seven days of its
action. If the application has been granted, the permit shall be issued upon
the signature of the Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission and
the Zoning Administrator, and any conditions, automatic termination date, or
period of review shall be stated on the permit.



   (E)   Appeals to the City Council.



      (1)   A written appeal may be taken to the City Council by the
applicant or any person, firm, corporation, group, or association owning real
property within 150 feet of the conditional use applicant’s property,
aggrieved or affected by the decision of the Commission with respect to any
conditional use.



The appeal shall be filed in duplicate with the Zoning Administrator within
ten days from the date of action by the Commission.



      (2)   The appeal shall specifically state the grounds
therefore and wherein the Commission failed to conform to the requirements of
these regulations or appellate has otherwise been aggrieved or affected by
the actions of the Commission.



      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall immediately transmit one
copy of the appeal to the Commission.



      (4)   The Zoning Administrator shall inspect the appeal for
defects and validate the appeal within 48 hours of receipt. If the appeal is
defective in any particular for non-compliance, the Zoning Administrator
shall immediately send notice to the applicant of the fact and the type and
nature of the defect or defects.



   (F)   City Council decision. The City Council may by resolution
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify any decision,
determination, or requirement of the Commission, but before doing so, the
City Council must set the matter for hearing, give notice of the hearing as
is provided in § 154.151(E) and must make a written finding of fact setting
forth wherein the Commission’s findings were in error. A majority vote of
the membership of the Council shall be required to grant in whole or in part
any appealed application for conditional use permit acted upon by the
Commission.



   (G)   Modification or enlargement of structures authorized under a
conditional use permit. Any proposed additions, enlargements, or
modifications of the structures approved in any conditional use permit or any
proposed extension of the use into areas not approved in any such permit
shall be subject to §§ 154.154(C), (D) and (F) and 154.155 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 21-7-5)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.156  PROCEDURE FOR OPERATING A HOME OCCUPATION.



   (A)   Notice of intent to operate a home occupation. Any individual
wishing to apply for a business license with the intent of operating the
business from his or her home shall acknowledge by signature his or her
understanding of the requirements and conditions of § 154.108 of this
chapter, and shall agree to abide by those requirements and conditions.



   (B)   Complaints by citizens or residents. Complaints by citizens or
residents may be cause for termination of the home occupation. Upon receipt
of a complaint, a home occupation may be ordered terminated by the Zoning
Administrator upon a finding that the home occupation is incompatible or
disruptive to the neighborhood in which it is located.



   (C)   Appeal to Board of Adjustment. Any person may appeal the
Zoning Administrator’s action to the Board of Adjustment within 15 days as
per § 154.159 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 21-7-6)



§ 154.157  PROCEDURE FOR SPECIAL TEMPORARY USE PERMIT.



   (A)   Generally. Uses permitted subject to special temporary use
permit are those temporary uses which are required for the proper function of
the community or are temporarily required in the process of establishing a
permitted use, or constructing a public facility. The uses shall be so
conducted that they will not be detrimental in any way to the surrounding
properties or to the community. Uses permitted subject to a special temporary
use permit may include:



      (1)   Christmas tree sales;



      (2)   Carnivals, circuses, special events of not over 72
consecutive hours;



      (3)   Garage sales (limited to 60 consecutive hours);



      (4)   Parking and storage of earth moving or construction
equipment;



      (5)   Storage of materials incidental to the carrying on of a
public works project, subdivision, or construction project;



      (6)   Tent revival meetings;



      (7)   Tract home or lot sales office;



      (8)   Construction; garage or shed for subdivision
construction; and/or



      (9)   Such other uses as the Board may, by resolution, deem to
be within the intent and purpose of this section.



   (B)   Application and filing fees. Application for a special
temporary use permit may be made by the property owner or his or her
authorized agent. The application shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator who shall charge and collect a filing fee for each such
application, as provided in this chapter. The Zoning Administrator may also
require any information deemed necessary to support the approval of a special
temporary use permit including site plans as per § 154.154(C) of this
chapter.



   (C)   Decision. Application for special temporary use permit shall
be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator who shall approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove the application. Approval or conditional approval
shall be given only when in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator the
approval is within the intent and purposes of this section. Any person
aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Administrator may file an appeal with
the Board of Adjustment.



   (D)   Conditions. In approving such a permit, the approval shall be
made subject to a time limit and other conditions deemed necessary to assure
that there will be no adverse effect upon adjacent properties. The conditions
may include the following:



      (1)   Regulation of hours;



      (2)   Regulation of lights;



      (3)   Requirement of bonds or other guarantees for cleanup or
removal of structure or equipment;



      (4)   Parking requirements; and/or



      (5)   Such other conditions deemed necessary to carry out the
intent and purpose of this section.



(Prior Code, § 21-7-7)



§ 154.158  PROCEDURE FOR PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT (P.A.D.) APPROVAL.



   (A)   Generally. Any development proposal which meets the
requirements of § 154.065 shall be reviewed according to the provisions of
this section. All P.A.D. applications shall be reviewed and approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council prior to any physical
development on the subject property.



   (B)   Application.



      (1)   The applicant is encouraged to meet with appropriate
city staff prior to making application for P.A.D. approval to discuss the
development concept, the review and approval process, and the submittal
requirements.



      (2)   The applicant shall obtain the necessary application
forms from the Zoning Administrator. Application forms shall be properly
completed and submitted to the Zoning Administrator. Concept plan exhibits
shall accompany the application. The concept plan shall be submitted at least
seven days prior to meeting with city staff.



   (C)   Concept plan submittal requirements. The concept plan shall
indicate proposed land uses, general circulation patterns, property
boundaries, existing land uses on adjacent properties, special site
conditions or problems. A computation table showing proposed land use
allocations in acres and percent of total site area shall be included on the
concept plan.



   (D)   Preliminary development plan.



      (1)   Submittal requirements. Based upon comments received
regarding the concept plan, the applicant shall prepare a preliminary
development plan. A preliminary development plan shall be submitted at least
30 days prior to the hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The
following information shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator:



         (a)   Legal description of property and indication of
gross area;



         (b)   Nature of the applicant’s interest in the land
to be developed;



         (c)   A generalized location map showing surrounding
land use and traffic circulation patterns;



         (d)   Site conditions: an analysis of the existing site
conditions which indicates at a minimum:



            1.   Topographic contours with intervals of no
more than two feet, to a distance of 1,900 feet beyond the property boundary;



            2.   Location and extent of major vegetative cover
(if any);



            3.   Location and extent of perennial or
intermittent streams and water ponding areas;



            4.   Existing drainage patterns; and



            5.   Other information considered relevant by the
applicant or city staff.



         (e)   Proposed allocations of land use expressed as a
percentage of the total area, as well as in acres. Uses to be indicated
include:



            1.   Arterial streets;



            2.   Open space (public);



            3.   Open space (private);



            4.   Residential (if appropriate);



            5.   A stratification of residential uses in terms
of single-family detached units, patio homes, townhouses, garden apartments,
and the like;



            6.   Commercial (if appropriate); and



            7.   Industrial (if appropriate).



         (f)   A land use plan at a scale not smaller than one
inch equals 100 feet, indicating land uses, acres, and development densities
of each land use and the most nearly equivalent zoning categories; all
arterial and collector street circulation elements, pedestrian and/or bicycle
circulation elements, exact perimeter locations of any/all arterial streets
and major collector streets; open spaces; and recreational areas;



         (g)   Plans indicating the approximate alignment and
sizing of water lines, sanitary sewers, and storm sewers (if any), as well as
easements for all utilities, if necessary. Also indicated should be proposed
surface drainage patterns;



         (h)   A preliminary plat of the proposed development if
land subdivision is proposed;



         (i)   Conceptual architectural renderings indicating the
elevations and exterior wall finishes of proposed building types;



         (j)   Conceptual landscaping plans, indicating
landscaping theme character of the development;



         (k)   A traffic analysis report, if deemed necessary by
the city; and



         (l)   Phasing plan, if development is to take more than
one year.



      (2)   Planning and Zoning Commission review and hearing.



         (a)   Notice of hearing.



            1.   The Commission shall hold a public hearing on
the preliminary development plan. A notice of the time, date, place, and
purpose of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation, published or circulated within the city at least 15 days prior
to the date of the hearing.



            2.   A similar notice shall be mailed at least 15
days before the day of the hearing to each owner of the property situated
wholly or partially within 200 feet of the property to which the P.A.D.
relates. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for placing and
mailing the notices. For purposes of giving mailed notice, the Zoning
Administrator shall require the applicant to furnish the names and addresses
of all property owners within 200 feet of the property.



         (b)   Review.



            1.   In considering applications for P.A.D.
approval, the Commission shall consider the following:



               a.   Interrelationship with the plan
elements to conditions both on and off the property;



               b.   Conformance to the general plan guide;



               c.   The impact of the plan on the existing
and anticipated traffic and parking conditions;



               d.   The adequacy of the plan with respect
to land use;



               e.   Pedestrian and vehicular ingress and
egress;



               f.   Architectural design;



               g.   Landscaping;



               h.   Provisions for utilities;



               i.   Site drainage;



               j.   Open space and/or public land
dedications;



               k.   Grading; and



               l.   Other related matters.



            2.   The Commission shall consider oral or written
statements from the applicant, the public, city staff, or its own members. It
may question the applicant and approve, disapprove, or table the preliminary
development plan. The application may not be tabled for more than two regular
meetings of the Commission.



            3.   If the Commission shall determine by motion
that the proposed preliminary development plan will not be detrimental to the
health, safety, or welfare of the community, will not cause traffic
congestion or depreciate surrounding property values and, at the same time,
is in harmony with the purposes and intent of this chapter, the plan for the
area, and the general plan, the Commission may recommend granting preliminary
development plan approval, along with necessary conditions and safeguards,
including provisions, as applicable, for public land dedications.



            4.   The Commission shall notify the City Council,
in writing, of its recommendation.



      (3)   City Council consideration and hearing.



         (a)   Consideration and hearing.



            1.   The City Council, after receipt of the report
and recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, may consider the
P.A.D. request. If requested in writing by any member of the public or the
City Council, the Council shall hold a public hearing on the request. A
notice of the time, date, place, and purpose of the hearing shall be
published in the official newspaper of the city at least 15 days prior to the
date of the hearing.



            2.   A preliminary development plan which has been
recommended for denial by the Commission shall not be reviewed by the Council
except upon written request by the applicant and shall require a public
hearing.



         (b)   Review and approval.



            1.   In its deliberations on the preliminary
development plan, the Council shall consider oral or written statements from
the applicant, city staff, the public, and its own members. The Council’s
review shall encompass the same spectrum of considerations as did the
Commission’s. The City Council may approve the preliminary development
plan, deny the request, or table the request. The application may not be
tabled for more than two meetings in succession.



            2.   Conditions may be applied to the approval
and/or periodic review of the approval may be required. Approvals, if
granted, shall be for a particular development, not for a particular
applicant.



         (c)   Public protests against P.A.D. If there is written
protest against the preliminary development plan signed by the owners of 20%
or more of the property within 150 feet of the proposed P.A.D., the
preliminary development plan shall not be approved except upon the
affirmative vote of three-fourths of all members of the City Council. If the
above protest requirements are not met, approval may be by majority vote of
the membership of the City Council.



         (d)   Duration of P.A.D. zoning.



            1.   Approval of a P.A.D. rezoning request shall
be conditioned upon the start of construction beginning within one year of
the date of approval action taken by the City Council. If, at the expiration
of this period, the start of construction has not begun, the property shall
revert to its former zoning classification without Council or Commission
action.



            2.   In the case of a proposed phased development,
start of construction for the first phase must commence within one year, with
the remaining phases commencing according to the approved phasing plan.



            3.   The city may authorize extensions when deemed
necessary.



   (E)   Final development plan.



      (1)   Approval. Final P.A.D. development plan approval and the
issuance of a development permit for any portion of a P.A.D. shall occur only
when:



         (a)   A reproducible copy of the approved preliminary
development plan with appropriate signatures has been supplied to the
Community Development Department;



         (b)   The design and construction specifications for all
utilities, property, and street improvements have been approved by the City
Engineer;



         (c)   A site plan, subject to the requirements of §
154.154, for the specific portion of the P.A.D. in question has been
submitted and has been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, as in
conformance with the preliminary development plan. (Upon approval of the site
plan, a reproducible copy shall be submitted);



         (d)   Architectural elevations of the buildings, with
materials lists, are submitted and approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission;



         (e)   A landscaping plan is submitted and approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission;



         (f)   A performance bond, cash escrow agreement, or
other acceptable instrument has been deposited with the city in an amount as
set by the City Council based upon the City Engineer’s recommendation. This
financial guarantee shall be used to ensure the full completion, as
specified, of:



            1.   Public and private streets and utilities;



            2.   Landscaping; and



            3.   Publicly- and privately-owned and maintained
recreational facilities;



         (g)   Any land dedication agreements made as part of the
preliminary development plan approval are fulfilled.



      (2)   Platting requirements. All applicants for a Planned Area
Development permit shall be required to file with Maricopa County a final
plat of the Planned Area Development complying with all of the requirements
of the subdivision ordinance of the city except to the extent that the
Council may give specific permission to the effect that specific portions of
the subdivision ordinance need not be complied with. The required plats shall
contain on their face a cross-reference to the P.A.D. development plan.



   (F)   Method of withdrawing an application for P.A.D. approval. Any
application for a planned area development permit may be withdrawn by the
applicant at any time prior to filing the final plat upon written
notification to the Zoning Administrator and/or City Clerk. The P.A.D. shall
be null and void upon receipt of the notice by the city.



   (G)   Amendments to P.A.D. approval.



      (1)   Minor changes. Minor changes in the location and
placement of buildings may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator and City
Engineer where unforeseen circumstances such as engineering requirements,
dictate the change. When in question, the Zoning Administrator and the City
Engineer may determine whether the changes shall be classified as a minor or
major, or may refer the question to the Planning and Zoning Commission, if
they deem it necessary.



      (2)   Major changes. Major changes, such as alterations in
structural types, in the shapes and arrangements of lots and blocks, in the
allocation of open space or other land uses which increase density and/or
intensity of the project, and all other changes which significantly affect
the overall design or intent of the project shall be referred to the Planning
and Zoning Commission, after which the Commission shall consider and shall
either approve or deny the changes in the final development plan. If the
changes are authorized, the developer shall submit a revised plan showing the
authorized changes. Requirements of divisions (D) and (E) above shall apply
to requests for major changes.



   (H)   Denial of P.A.D. approval. If an application for planned area
development approval is denied at either the preliminary development plan or
final development plan stage, a new application for a P.A.D. approval by the
same applicant on the same site or portion of the site cannot be filed prior
to 90 days after the date of denial.



(Prior Code, § 21-7-8)



§ 154.159  PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS TO BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Application for appeal. Any aggrieved person or any officer or
department of the city affected by a decision of an administrative officer,
pertaining to this chapter, may appeal to the Board of Adjustment by filing
an application with the Zoning Administrator. The application shall state the
name and address (or city office) of the applicant and the reasons for filing
the appeal. The application shall be made within 21 days of the date of the
decision which is being appealed. The Zoning Administrator shall then
transmit to the Board the complete record of the action for which the appeal
is made. Appeals to the Board may be made only in conjunction with an action.



   (B)   Stay of proceedings. An appeal to the Board stays all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate of stay, the stay would, in his or her opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall
not be stayed other than by a restraining order granted by the Superior Court
on notice to the Zoning Administrator, with due cause shown.



   (C)   Notice of hearing.



      (1)   No appeal may be granted by the Board until a public
hearing has been held on the application. A notice of time, date, place, and
purpose of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation, published or circulated within the city at least 15 days prior
to the date of the hearing.



      (2)   If the appeal relates to a decision on a specific site,
a similar notice shall be posted in conspicuous places close to the site
affected and shall be mailed at least 15 days prior to the date of the
hearing to each owner of the property situated within 200 feet of the
property to which the appeal relates. The Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for mailing the notice. For the purpose of giving mailed notice,
the Board may require the applicant to furnish the names and addresses of all
property owners within 200 feet of the property. The failure to receive
notice by individual property owners will not necessarily invalidate the
proceedings.



   (D)   Review and decision by the Board. Within 45 days of the date
of application, but no sooner than 15 days from the date of public notice,
the Board shall hear and decide arguments for appeal to the decision in
question. The Board shall consider oral or written statements from the
appellant, his or her agent or attorney, the public, and city staff members.
The Board shall also study the record of the action from which the appeal is
taken. The Board may, by three-fourths majority of the entire Board, approve
an appeal or by simple majority, table the appeal. If tabled, the Board shall
make a decision on the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The
Board may impose such conditions and safeguards on its decision as it deems
necessary to satisfactorily correct the situation in question, but it shall
not attempt to infringe upon matters not specifically contained in the appeal.



   (E)   Notice of Board decision. The Board shall issue a written
notice of its decision to all concerned parties and to the Zoning
Administrator and the City Clerk, who shall notify the City Council and make
official record of the decision. The notice shall state the facts of the
matter as determined by the Board, the reasons for its decision, and any
conditions applied to the decision.



(Prior Code, § 21-7-9)



§ 154.160  FEES.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the intent of this section to require
petitioners to pay a portion of the public services that are necessary for
processing their request. While the city is not expecting 100% recovery of
all costs, it does feel that all required publication and mailing costs, plus
a portion of administrative costs, should be borne by the petitioner.



   (B)   Application fees.



      (1)   Fees, for matters pertinent to the administration of
this chapter, will be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council
of the city, including fees for:



         (a)   Zoning text amendments;



         (b)   Zoning map amendment (rezonings);



         (c)   P.A.D. concept plan;



         (d)   P.A.D. preliminary development plan;



         (e)   Site plans;



         (f)   Variances;



         (g)   Conditional uses;



         (h)   Special temporary uses;



         (i)   Appeals to Board of Adjustment;



         (j)   Appeals to City Council or Planning and Zoning
Commission; and



         (k)   Amendments to previously approved P.A.D.s and site
plans.



 

Application Type
 
Fees




Zoning text amendment
 
$1,000


Zoning map amendment (rezoning)
 



   R-1, R-la, R-2, R-3, R-4
 
$650, plus $30/acre


   B-1, B-2, B-3
 
$700, plus $35/acre


   I-1, I-2, I-3
 
$750, plus $40/acre


P.A.D.
 



   Preliminary development plan
 
$1,000, plus $2/acre


   Amendment (Major)
 
50% of original fee


   Amendment (Minor)
 
20% of original fee


Site Plan
 
$300, plus $15/acre


   Amendment (Major)
 
50% of original fee


   Amendment (Minor)
 
20% of original fee


Variance
 
$250


Conditional use
 
Same as required by Site Plan Fee


Appeal to Board of Adjustment
 
$200, per appeal


Appeal to Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council
 
$200, per appeal




 



      (2)   For purposes of this chapter, the first site plan filed
for a site developed prior to the effective date of this chapter or for a
site developed prior to annexation shall be considered an amendment to a
previously approved site plan.



      (3)   No filing fee shall be required for any application
filed by any agency or department of the city of any government organized
under the laws of the State of Arizona or of the United States. This
exception shall not apply to non-governmental leases of government land.



      (4)   The City Council may waive fees to avoid duplication of
charges or undue hardship.



(Prior Code, § 21-8-2)



§ 154.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   No person shall locate, erect, construct, reconstruct,
enlarge, change, maintain, or use any building or structure, or use any land
in violation of this chapter.



   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall order, in writing, the
correction of any violation. The order shall state the nature of the
violation, the code provision violated, and the time by which the violation
must be corrected. After the order has been served, no work shall proceed on
any structure or tract of land covered by such an order except to correct the
violation or to comply with the order.



   (D)   Decisions of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the
Board of Adjustment in accordance with § 154.159.



   (E)   In addition to or in lieu of the procedures outlined above,
this chapter shall be enforceable in a court of proper jurisdiction, and any
or all appropriate remedies at law or in equity shall be available for the
enforcement thereof.



   (F)   Any and all persons who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter or fail to comply therewith, or who shall fail to comply with
any lawful order or regulation made thereunder, shall severally for each and
every such violation and non-compliance respectively, forfeit and pay a fine
of not less than $50, not more than $750, and/or be imprisoned not to exceed
the time of four months for each offense, the violation constituting a Class
2 misdemeanor under the Criminal Code of the laws of the State of Arizona. In
addition, the costs of any such action may be imposed at the discretion of
the court. The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this chapter
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy the violations and defects within a
reasonable time; and each day that the prohibited condition is not corrected
or remedied shall constitute a separate offense; and the court shall impose a
fine on a per diem basis for each day that the violation is maintained.
Application of the above penalty shall not be held to preclude the forced
removal of prohibited conditions.



   (G)   This chapter shall not be construed to hold the city, its
Zoning Administrator, City Engineer, or any other city official responsible
for any damage to persons or property by reason of any inspection or
reinspection authorized herein or the failure to so inspect or reinspect or
by reason of the issuance to a building permit as herein required.



(Prior Code, § 21-8-1)



   (H)   Any person in control of any premises who fails to correct a
violation of this chapter within 30 days after notice thereof by the City
Manager or his or her designee shall be liable to the city for a civil fine
in the amount of $1,000 for each and every day beyond such 30-day period for
which the violation remains uncorrected. The City Attorney shall collect the
fines by complaint filed in the City Court pursuant to the procedures
prescribed in the city code.



(Prior Code, § 21-6-9)



   (I)   Violation of conditional use permits. Violations to the
conditions of a conditional use permit shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to the regulations of divisions (B) through (G)
above.



(Prior Code, § 21-7-5)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 155:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   155.001   Title



   155.002   Policy



   155.003   Purpose



   155.004   Authority; jurisdiction



   155.005   Definitions



Platting Procedures and Requirements



   155.030   Pre-application; contact; sketch plat



   155.031   Preliminary plat; requirements and review



   155.032   Final plat; requirements and review



Design Standards



   155.050   General improvements



   155.051   Lot improvements



   155.052   Streets



   155.053   Sidewalks and curbs



   155.054   Drainage; storm sewers; retention basins



   155.055   Water facilities



   155.056   Sewer facilities



   155.057   Utilities



   155.058   Public land reservation; parks; open spaces



Completion; Assurance



   155.080   Financial guarantees and improvements



   155.081   Inspection of improvements



   155.082   Deferral or waiver of required improvements



   155.083   Building permits; occupancy permits; issuance



   155.084   Lots outside approved subdivisions; building permits



Administration and Enforcement



   155.100   Administration



   155.101   Liability



   155.102   Interpretation; conflicts; severability



   155.103   Saving provision



   155.104   Amendments



   155.105   Fees



   155.999   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Subdivision Processes; Preliminary Plat Process; Final
Plat Process



   Appendix B:   Zoning Fees



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 155.001  TITLE.



   These regulations shall hereafter be known, cited and referred to as
the El Mirage Subdivision Regulations except as referred to herein, where it
shall be known as “this chapter.”



(Prior Code, § 15-1-1)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.002  POLICY.



   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to consider
the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided plat
as subject to the control of the city pursuant to the City of El Mirage
General Plan and Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 154 of this code) for the orderly,
planned, efficient, and economical development of the city.



   (B)   Land to be subdivided shall be of the character that it can be
used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from
fire, flood, or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until
available public facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has
been made for drainage, water, sewerage, and capital improvements such as
schools, parks, recreation facilities, transportation facilities, and other
public improvements.



(Prior Code, § 15-1-2)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.003  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is that of assuring sites suitable for
building purposes and human habitation, of providing for the harmonious
development of the city of providing adequate open spaces for traffic,
recreation, light and air, of providing proper distribution of population and
of creating conditions favorable to the health, safety, and general welfare
of the residents of El Mirage.



(Prior Code, § 15-1-3)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.004  AUTHORITY; JURISDICTION.



   (A)   Authorization for the city to adopt subdivision regulations is
given in A.R.S. § 9-463.01, 1977 compilation, Municipal Subdivision
Regulations.



   (B)   Platting jurisdiction for the city shall encompass all the
territory within the incorporated limits of the city which may be from time
to time amended through annexation.



(Prior Code, § 15-1-4)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.005  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Construction of terms; usage.



      (1)   For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers,
abbreviations, terms, and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and
defined as set forth in this section.



      (2)   Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary,
words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the
plural number include the singular; the word HEREIN means in.



      (3)   A PERSON includes a corporation, a partnership, and an
incorporated association of persons such as a club; SHALL is always
mandatory; a BUILDING includes a structure; a BUILDING or STRUCTURE includes
any part thereof; USED or OCCUPIED as applied to any land or building shall
be construed to include the words “intended, arranged, or designed to be
used or occupied.”



      (4)   Except as specifically defined herein or, if not defined
herein but defined in the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 154 of this code), all
words in this chapter shall have their customary dictionary definition.



(Prior Code, § 15-2-1)



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALLEY.  A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to
serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose
principal frontage is on some other street.



      APPLICANT.  The owner of land proposed to be subdivided, or his
or her representative.



      BLOCK.  A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination
of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, or boundary
lines of the municipality.



      BOND.  Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety
bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form
satisfactory to the City Council



      BUILDING.  Any structure built for support, shelter, or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and
includes any structure.



      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM.  A proposed schedule of all future
municipal improvement projects listed in order of construction priority
together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each
project.



      COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the city. Also
referred to as PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION or PLANNING COMMISSION.



      CONSTRUCTION PLAN.  The maps or drawings accompanying a
subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of improvements
to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the
city as a condition of the approval of the plat.



      COUNCIL.  The CITY COUNCIL of the City of El Mirage. Also
referred to as the GOVERNING BODY.



      CUL-DE-SAC.  A local street with only one outlet and having an
appropriate terminus for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.



      DEVELOPER.  The owner of land proposed to be subdivided, or his
or her representative.



      EASEMENT.  Authorization by a property owner for the use by
another, and for specific purpose, of any designated part of his or her
property.



      ENGINEER, CITY.  The PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER engaged by the city.



      ESCROW.  A deposit of cash with the local government in lieu of
an amount required and still in force on a performance or maintenance bond.



      FINAL PLAT.  The map or plan or a record of a subdivision and
any accompanying material, as described in these regulations.



      FRONTAGE.  That side of a lot abutting on a street or way and
ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot, but it shall not be considered
what would be the side of a corner lot.



      GENERAL PLAN.  The document (El Mirage General Plan), or part
thereof, officially adopted by the City Council which provides for the
development of the city and which indicates the general locations recommended
for major roadways, parks, public utilities and buildings, and land uses.



       GRADE.  The slope of a road, street, or other public way,
specified in percentage terms.



      LOT.  A piece, parcel, plot, tract, or area of land separated
from other pieces, parcels, plots, tracts, or areas by description, as in
subdivision or on a record survey map or by metes and bounds, for purposes of
sale, lease, or separate use.



      LOT IMPROVEMENT.  Any building, structure, place, work of art,
or other object, or improvement of the land on which they are situated
constituting a physical betterment of real property.



      MODEL HOME.  A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes
which typifies the units that will be constructed in a subdivision.



       MUNICIPALITY.  The City of El Mirage, as incorporated by state
law.



       NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION.  A subdivision whose intended use
is other than residential, such as commercial or industrial.



      OFF-SITE.  Any premises not located within the area of the
property to be subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the
applicant for subdivision approval.



      ORDINANCE.  Any legislative action, however denominated, of a
local government which has the force of law, including any amendment or
repeal of any ordinance.



      OWNER.  Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation
or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or
sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under
these regulations.



      PERIMETER STREET.  Any existing street to which the parcel of
land to be subdivided abuts on only one side.



      PLANNING DIRECTOR.  The individual charged by the governing body
to administer this chapter.



      PLAT.  A map, chart, survey, plan, or replat certified by a
licensed, registered land surveyor containing a description of the subdivided
land with ties to permanent monuments.



      PRELIMINARY PLAT.  The preliminary drawing or drawings,
described in this chapter, indicating the proposed manner of layout of the
subdivision.



      PROTECTIVE COVENANT.  The term PROTECTIVE COVENANT shall mean a
restriction on the use of private property within a subdivision for the
purpose of providing mutual protection against undesirable aspects of
development. PROTECTIVE COVENANTS regulating the use of land represent an
express agreement between the subdivider and the lot purchasers. Also
referred to as COVENANTS, CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS or CCRs.



      PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT.  Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway,
sidewalk, pedestrian way, trees, lawn, off-street parking area, lot of
improvement, or other facility for which the city may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may effect an
improvement where the responsibility rests with the city.



      REGISTERED ARCHITECT.  An architect registered in the State of
Arizona.



      REGISTERED ENGINEER.  An engineer registered in the State of
Arizona.



      RESUBDIVISION.  A change in a map of an approved or recorded
subdivision plat, if the change affects any street layout on the map or area
reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line; or if it affects any map or
plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling
subdivisions.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A strip of land occupied or intended to be
occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line,
oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, trees, or for
another special use.



      ROADWAY.  That portion of a street right-of-way intended for
driving or parking.



      SALE or LEASE.  Any immediate or future transfer of ownership,
or any possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease,
intestate succession,  or transfer of an interest in a subdivision or part
thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, lease,
intestate succession, or other written instrument.



      SKETCH PLAT.  A sketch preparatory to the preparation of the
preliminary plat (or final plat when deemed appropriate) to enable the
subdivider to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the
Planning and Zoning Commission as to the form of the plat and the objectives
of these regulations.



      STREET.  A general term used to describe a paved right-of-way,
municipally or privately owned, serving as a means of vehicular travel.
STREETS are classified by function as follows:



         (a)   LOCAL STREET.  A STREET intended to serve and
provide access exclusively to the properties abutting thereon, and not
connecting with other streets in such a manner as to encourage through
traffic.



         (b)   COLLECTOR STREET.  A STREET connecting local
residential streets to each other, to community facilities, and to principal,
major, or minor arterial streets.



         (c)   PRINCIPAL, MAJOR, and MINOR ARTERIAL STREETS. 
STREETS designed to carry large amounts of traffic across or through the city
and designated as such by the General Plan.



         (d)   SERVICE STREET.  A STREET running parallel to a
freeway, expressway, or other roadway, and serving abutting properties. Also
called FRONTAGE ROAD.



      STREET, DEAD-END.  A STREET or portion of a street with only one
vehicular-traffic outlet.



      SUBDIVIDE.  The act of dividing land into two or more parts by
platting, or by metes and bounds description, into tracts of less than 36
acres in any one calendar year, for the purpose of:



         (a)   Sale for building purposes;



         (b)   Laying out a municipality or any part thereof;



         (c)   Adding to a municipality;



         (d)   Laying out suburban lots; or



         (e)   Resubdivision.



      SUBDIVIDER.  Any person who:



         (a)   Having an interest in land, causes it, directly or
indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision; or



         (b)   Directly or indirectly, sells, leases, or
develops, or offers to sell, lease, or develop, or advertises for sale, lease
or development, any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit, or plat in a
subdivision; or



         (c)   Engaging directly or through an agent in the
business of selling, leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or
development a subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel site, or plat in a
subdivision; and



         (d)   Is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under
direct, or indirect common control with any of the foregoing.



      SUBDIVISION.  Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or
proposed to be divided into four or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots,
or interests or, if a new street is involved, any such property which is
divided into two or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land or any such
property, the boundaries of which have been fixed by a recorded plat, which
is divided into two or more parts, for the purpose of offer, sale, lease, or
development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms, and conditions, (including resubdivisions). SUBDIVISION includes the
division or development of residential and nonresidential zoned land, whether
by deed, metes and bounds description, devise, intestacy, lease, map, plat,
or other recorded instrument. SUBDIVISION also includes and condominium,
cooperative, community apartment, townhouse or similar project containing
four or more parcels, in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled
with the right of exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon, but plats
of the projects need not show the buildings or manner in which the buildings
or airspace above the property shown on the plat are to be divided.



      SUBDIVISION AGENT.  Any person who represents or acts for or on
behalf of a subdivider.



      SUBDIVISION PLAT.  The final map or drawings, described herein,
on which the subdivider’s plan of subdivision is presented to the Planning
and Zoning Commission and City Council for approval and which, if approved,
may be submitted to the County Recorder for filing.



      TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT.  IMPROVEMENTS built and maintained by a
subdivider during construction of the subdivision and prior to release of the
performance bond.



      TRACT.  The word TRACT shall mean a defined area of land
regardless of size.



      UTILITIES.  UTILITIES means installations or facilities,
underground or overhead, furnishing of the use of the public: electricity,
gas, steam, communication, water, drainage, sewage disposal or flood control,
owned and operated by any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or
board, duly authorized by state or municipal regulations. UTILITY or
UTILITIES may also refer to the persons, firms, corporations, departments, or
boards as tense requires.



      VACATION, PUBLIC LAND.  An official action taken by the
governing body to give up public ownership of previously owned public land,
including streets, parks or easements.



      ZONING. The word ZONING shall mean the regulation by districts of
the height, area, and use of buildings; use of land and density of population.



(Prior Code, § 15-2-2)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



PLATTING PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS



§ 155.030  PRE-APPLICATION; CONTACT; SKETCH PLAT.



   (A)   Prior to the submission of a preliminary plat as required by
this chapter, the subdivider shall contact the Planning director and any
other administrative personnel or private agencies to determine:



         (1)   Procedures and requirements for filing the sketch
plat and preliminary and final plats.



         (2)   Availability of public water and sewer or
requirements when public systems are not readily available.



         (3)   Zoning requirements on the property.



         (4)   Requirements of the duly adopted General Plan for
major and minor streets, land use, drainage, schools, parks, and other public
open space.



         (5)   The location and extent of any floodplains.



   (B)   As a part of this contact, the subdivider may discuss with the
Planning Director, his or her tentative proposals for the development of the
property.



   (C)   The subdivider shall submit, and the Planning Director shall
review and comment on, a sketch plat prior to the preparation of a
preliminary plat. the Planning Director shall make the review and make its
comments known to the subdivider within five days from the date of the
review. The sketch plat shall contain or show two-foot contours and shall
address the requirements of division (A)(1) to (5) above.



   (D)   The purpose of this pre-application procedure is to determine
any problems with the proposed development before expenses are incurred in
the preparation of a preliminary plat. No official action is required other
than to offer appropriate comments on the proposal and indicating 
suitability for proceeding through the platting process.



(Prior Code, § 15-3-1)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.031 PRELIMINARY PLAT; REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW.



   (A)   Submittal requirements.  Copies of the preliminary plat, the
number to be determined by the Planning Director, shall be submitted, with a
reproducible copy, to the Planning Director.  The preliminary plat shall
consist of a drawing or drawings and supporting material and information a
prescribed by these regulations.



      (1)   Preliminary plat.  The preliminary plat drawing shall
be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger for subdivisions
where the majority of the lots are less than five acres in size. The scale
may be reduced to one inch equals 200 feet for subdivisions in which the
minimum lot size is five acres or more. The face of the drawing shall contain
the following information:



         (a)   The name of the subdivision. The name shall not
duplicate or too closely resemble the name of any subdivision previously
filed in the city.



         (b)   Date of preparation, scale, and north arrow. The
top of each sheet shall represent north wherever possible.



         (c)   A vicinity map drawn at a scale of one inch equals
1,000 feet or one inch equals 2,000 feet, showing the location of the
proposed subdivision in the city and its relationship to surrounding
development.



         (d)   The names, addresses, and phone numbers of the
developer or subdivider, and the individual or firm responsible for the
preparation of the preliminary plat.



         (e)   A legal description of the subdivision boundary.



         (f)   The boundary lines of the subdivision in a heavy,
solid line and referenced to section or quarter section lines.



         (g)   A description of all monuments, both found and
set, which mark the boundary of the subdivision, and a description of all
control monuments used in the survey.



         (h)   Existing contours at a maximum interval of one
foot unless waived by the Planning Director.



         (i)   General location and extent of any significant
natural features such as streams, or drainage ways.



         (j)   Floodplains as delineated on maps available form
the Maricopa County Flood Control District Office.



         (k)   Location, dimensions, and names of existing roads,
streets, alleys, railroad rights-of-way and structures withing 200 feet
immediately adjacent to the property showing how they relate to the proposed
subdivision layout.



         (l)   Location, size, and grades of existing sanitary
and storm sewers and location and size of water mains, gas lines, pipelines,
or other underground utilities or installations within the proposed
subdivision and within 200 feet immediately adjacent thereto.



         (m)   Location and dimensions of all easements of record.



         (n)   Existing zoning and land use of the proposed
subdivision and immediately adjacent areas.



         (o)   Location and width of proposed streets, alleys,
pedestrian ways and easements, with proposed names for streets.



         (p)   Layout, numbers, and approximate dimensions of
proposed lots and blocks.



         (q)   Location of proposed fire hydrants, light
standards, stop signs, traffic signals, and gang mailboxes.



         (r)   Location, dimension and size in acres of all sites
proposed to be used for commercial, industrial, multi-family residential,
public or quasi-public use, with the use noted.



         (s)   A summary of the total number of acres, number of
lots, acreage of commercial or industrial areas, acreage of open space,
amount of land in rights-of-way and other descriptive material useful in
reviewing the proposed subdivision.



      (2)   Supporting material.  The following information and
material shall be a part of any preliminary plat submittal and shall
accompany the preliminary plat drawing:



         (a)   Payment of the total amount of the preliminary
plat fee.



         (b)   A statement explaining the proposed design and
function of the water, sewage, paving, sidewalk, stormwater collection and
retention systems, including preliminary drainage calculations and storm
drainage systems, their compatibility with existing systems and the timing
and/or phasing of installation. Approximate size and location of the above
may be required on the plat, as determined by the City Engineer.



         (c)   A statement describing the development and
maintenance responsibility for any private streets, ways, or open spaces.



         (d)   The recommendations of a qualified professional
engineer regarding soil suitability, erosion control, sedimentation and
flooding problems.



         (e)   A description of the phasing and scheduling of
phase for the development, if the final plat is to be submitted in separate
phases.



         (f)   A petition for annexation to the city and if the
and to be subdivided is contiguous to, and outside, either by itself or a s a
part of a larger tract, the boundaries of the city.



         (g)   An application for appropriate zoning for the
subdivided area if the area is to be annexed or if the existing zoning
district does not allow the type of use proposed.



         (h)   The names and addresses of all owner of subdivided
lots and unplatted land contiguous  to or within 200 feet of the boundary of
the proposed subdivision.



         (i)   Letters of certification and/or signed copies of
the proposed preliminary plat from appropriate agencies and utility companies
approving the proposed preliminary plat and confirming availability of
services.



   (B)   Review process.



      (1)   After receipt of the preliminary plat and all required
supporting material, the Planning Director shall schedule the plat for
consideration at the next regular meeting of the Planning and Zoning
Commission which occurs after 21 days from the date on which the plat was
submitted.



      (2)   The Planning Director will review the preliminary plat,
summarize the agency comments, add his or her written comments and
recommendations and present the material and recommendations to the Planning
and Zoning Commission for its consideration.



      (3)   At least seven days prior to the date of the Planning
and Zoning Commission meeting at which the plat is to be considered, the
Planning Director shall, from information provided by the subdivider as a
part of his or her preliminary plat submittal, notify the owners of
subdivided lots and owners of unplatted land within 200 feet of the
boundaries of the proposed subdivision of the time and date of the meeting.



      (4)   The subdivider, or duly authorized representative, shall
attend the Commission meeting at which his or her proposal is scheduled for
consideration.



      (5)   At the Commission meeting the subdivider and all other
interested or affected parties shall be allowed to offer comments. Upon the
Commission’s approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat, it shall
notify the subdivider and City Council of its decision. If conditions are
attached to its approval, the subdivider and City Council shall be informed
of the conditions. No preliminary plat may be continued (tabled) for more
than two consecutive meetings.



      (6)   Approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall be effective for one year from the date of approval.
The subdivider may apply in writing for, and the Planning and Zoning
Commission may for cause shown, grant up to a six-month extension. If a final
plat has not been submitted within this specified period on all or a portion
of the land area included in the preliminary plat, a preliminary plat must
again be submitted for approval. In a phased development, any land area for
which a preliminary plat has been approved and for which a final plat has not
been submitted within 24 months from the date of the approval of the
preliminary plat, shall not be allowed to proceed with final platting until a
new preliminary pat is submitted and approved.



(Prior Code, § 15-3-2)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.032  FINAL PLAT; REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW.



   (A)   Submittal requirements.



      (1)   Certification of accuracy.  After approval of the
preliminary plat, a final plat and required supporting material (see division
(B) below) may be prepared and submitted to the Planning Director. The final
plat shall be prepared and certified as to its accuracy by a land surveyor
registered to do the work in the State of Arizona. The final plat and
required supporting material shall conform to the design and engineering
standards set forth in these regulations and to any conditions of approval
specified by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council (see
division (F) below) during approval of the preliminary plat.



      (2)   Staged approval.  Final platting may be accomplished in
stages covering reasonable portions of the area of an approved preliminary
plat. When this is done, each sheet of the final plat shall contain a
vicinity map showing the location of the portion being submitted in
relationship to the area for which the preliminary plat was submitted. All
final plats so submitted shall be of the same scale, shall have identical
titles, legends and other information, and shall have match lines so that
mosaics of the entire subdivision can be developed. Each stage of the
subdivision shall be as nearly self-sustaining and complete as possible and
shall by itself, or in conjunction with the previous stages, meet the deign
standards set forth in these regulations so that if development of the entire
subdivision is interrupted or discontinued after one or more stages is
completed, a viable development will result.



      (3)   Final plat format.  The final plat shall be clearly and
legibly drawn in black, waterproof India ink upon mylar of .003 inch in
thickness (minimum). Required affidavits, certificates and acknowledgments
shall be legibly printed on the plat in opaque ink. The sheet size of all
final plats shall be 24 inches high by 36 inches wide.  Information on the
plat should be so positioned that a one and one-half-inch margin is on the
left hand side and a one-half-inch margin is shown on the remaining sides.
The final plat shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or
larger, or at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet for subdivisions in which
the minimum lot size is five acres or more. Each sheet of the final plat
shall be numbered and the total number of sheets comprising the plat shall be
stated on each sheet (for example: Sheet 2 of 4). The relationship of one
sheet to the other shall be shown by key maps and by match lines.



      (4)   Final plat materials.  The original mylar, two
reproducible copies (sepia not acceptable), and prints of the final plat and
copies of all required supporting material shall be submitted to the Planning
Director.



      (5)   Required signatures.  The submitted final plat shall
contain the notarized signatures of the owner or owners of any and all
equitable or legal interest in the land of whatever nature and the signature
of the registered land surveyor.



      (6)   Final plat information.  All final plats shall include
the following information on the face of the plat:



         (a)   The name of the subdivision, centered at the top
of each sheet.



         (b)   General location of the subdivision by section,
township, range, county, and state, entered under the name of the subdivision
on each sheet.



         (c)   North arrow, date, and scale on each sheet.



         (d)   Boundary lines of the subdivision in a heavy solid
line on each sheet.



         (e)   Legal description of the subdivision boundary
based on an accurate traverse, giving bearing and linear dimensions that
result in a maximum allowable error of closure of one part in 10,000.



         (f)   The location and description of the point of
beginning and its proper reference to the monumented boundary survey.



         (g)   Location and description of all monuments, found
or set.



         (h)   Bearings, distances, and curve data of all
perimeter boundary lines indicated outside of the boundary lines.



         (i)   Adjoining parcel subdivision names, parcel number
and recording information, or if not subdivided and/or not recorded, so
marked.



         (j)   On curved boundaries and on all curves within the
plat, sufficient data to allow the reestablishment of the curves on the
ground.



         (k)   The location and layout of lots, blocks, tracts,
streets, alleys, easements, and other public grounds within and immediately
adjoining the plat, with accurate dimensions in feet and one-hundredths of
feet, bearings, curve data, length of radii, and/or arcs of all curves.



         (l)   All drainage ways shall be shown on the plat.
Dedication of drainage way rights-of-way or easements may be required when it
is deemed by the city to be in the best interest of the city.



         (m)   All 65, 70, 75, 80, and 85 ldn noise level
contours generated by activities from Luke Air Force Base.



         (n)   The names of all streets.



         (o)   All lots logically and consecutively numbered in
the center of the lot with the appropriate address for each lot or parcel of
ground.



         (p)   All dimensions shown on irregularly shaped lots,
with lot area calculations.



         (q)   Parcels completely or partially surrounded by the
area being subdivided shall be clearly marked “Excepted,” and the common
boundary with the subdivision shown in a heavy solid line with bearings and
distances.



         (r)   A notation of the total acreage of the subdivision
and the total number of lots.



         (s)   A notarized certificate by all parties having any
titled interest in or lien upon the land, consenting to the recording of the
plat and dedicating public ways, grounds, and easements. Dedication shall
include a written description by section, township, and range of the tract.
If the plat contains private streets, public utilities shall be reserved the
right to install and maintain utilities in the street right-of-way.



         (t)   In cases involving vacation of public or private
streets or public ways, easements or grounds, a notarized certificate of all
parties having any titled interest in, or lien upon, the land or other
pertinent interest, consenting to the vacation shall be provided.



         (u)   A notarized certificate of a registered land
surveyor, registered under the laws of Arizona, stating that the plat is
true, accurate, and complete and that the described monuments have been found
or set as described.



         (v)   Certificate of approval of the City Engineer as
follows:



Data on this plat reviewed and approved this             day of    
              , 20  , by the City Engineer of El Mirage, Arizona.



                                                   



City Engineer



         (w)   Certificate of compliance with the preliminary
plat as approved by the City Planning and Zoning Commission as follows:



This plat is in full compliance with the original preliminary plat approved
by the City of El Mirage Planning and Zoning Commission on the          
    day of                     , 20    . The final plat
reviewed and approved this           day of                  
    , 20.



                                                   
                     



Planning and Zoning Commission Chairperson



   Planning Director



                                                  
                         



         (x)   Certificate of acceptance and approval by the City
Council as follows:



Approved by the City Council of the City of El Mirage, Arizona, this      
        day of                             , 20        .



                                       



Mayor



Attest:



                                           



City Clerk



         (y)   Certificate for recording by the County Recorder
as follows:



This plat was filed for record in the Office of the County Recorder at    
                o’clock       .m.,                    
    , 20      , and is duly recorded in Book           , Page No.
         



                                           



County Recorder



      (7)   Final plat fee.  The final plat shall be accompanied by
the total amount of the final plat fee.



   (B)   Required final plat supporting material.  The required final
plat supporting material submittal shall consist of the final plat and all
information as follows:



      (1)   Drainage collection and retention plan and report.



         (a)   A drainage plan and report for the site in
question and all pertinent off-site areas shall be prepared by a registered
engineer. The report shall examine 100-year storm flows (Q 100's), the
100-year high-water mark of any river, creek, arroyo, gully, diversion ditch,
spillway, reservoir, etc., that may in any way affect the project area, along
with the depth of flow for 100-year runoff. The watershed in all off-site
areas shall be considered fully developed. Intensities shall be for this
area’s one-hour, 100-year storm based upon two and one-half inches per
hour. A certificate shall be provided, signed, and sealed by a registered
professional engineer that all drainage facilities, utilizing gutters and
streets, are designed and sized to handle 100% of the Q 100 run-off.



         (b)   Every effort shall be made to utilize the natural
slope of the land for the storm water collection system. Subsurface drainage
systems shall be discouraged, but where necessary shall be a minimum of 18
inches in diameter. Wherever possible, run-off shall be collected in
depressed open areas throughout the proposed land development project. The
plan shall include but not be limited to the following:



            1.   Method of collection (surface and/or
subsurface.)



            2.   Depth, side slopes, and area of retention.



            3.   Calculations of volume held and required.



            4.   High water elevation.



            5.   Method of disposal of water within 36 hours.



            6.   Any other data to form a complete plan.



         (c)   The point or points in which natural drainage
flows from a property prior to development shall remain the same after the
property has been altered for the development.



      (2)   Soils report. A soils report for the site in question
and pertinent off-site areas shall be prepared by a registered engineer. The
report shall indicate the type and location of soils, using the unified soil
classification system, shall contain drill logs and swell consolidation
curves, and shall contain a discussion of any present or potential hazards,
associated with soils on the site along with measures which could be taken to
mitigate the hazards. In addition the soils report shall contain
recommendations on subsurface area drains and peripheral drains, foundation
design, erosion control measures and surface drainage.



      (3)   Grading, drainage, and development plan.



         (a)   A grading, drainage, and development shall be
prepared by a registered engineer at a scale of one inch  equals 100 feet or
larger, showing proposed rights-of-way, easements, walkways, parks, common
areas, roadways, waterlines and reservoirs, sewer lines, manholes and
treatment facilities, curbs and gutters, culverts, drains, storm water
detention and retention basins, swales, ditches and other drainage devices,
spot top of curb elevations, high and low street points, drainage arrows,
street plans, all drainage areas and acreages, all 100-year storm flow (Q
100's) adjacent to and/or flowing onto the development and on-site at each
surface flow junction, storm water pick-up and take-off points designed to
handle 100-year flow on the surface, cross sections and high water elevations
for all 100-year flows. Spot elevations shall be given for all inverts, low
points and flowing entry and exit points.



         (b)   All minimum building setbacks shall be shown. No
100-year flow line shall encroach upon any minimum setback line and all
lowest habitable floor elevations shall be, at a minimum, one foot above the
100-year flood elevation.



      (4)   Construction plans and details.  Construction plans and
details must be prepared by a registered professional engineer in the State
of Arizona and shall provide for all improvements indicated on the grading,
drainage, and development plan, including right-of-way and easement
cross-sections showing construction and placement of streets, walks, curbs,
gutters, medians, lighting standards, swales, ditches, utilities, planting
strips and property lines; details of hydrants, valves, manholes, pipe
junctions, pumps, thrust-blocking, catch basins, etc.; street profiles
showing natural and finish grades, center line and both curbs, with a minimum
vertical scale of one inch equals two feet and a horizontal scale of one inch
equals 20 feet; sanitary sewer line and manhole profiles with natural and
finish grades, showing area  underdrains, if applicable, and the location of
gravity outfall lines; storm drainage system profiles showing natural and
finish grade; erosion control and revegetation details and other details as
necessary to adequately convey the design intent. Quantity take-offs shall
also be provided.



      (5)    Deeds.  When required by the city, a warranty deed or
other acceptable instrument conveying to the city or other appropriate or
other appropriate agency any public lands other than streets, alleys, or
easements shown on the final plat and title insurance, if required by the
city on the subject parcel, shall be presented to the city upon approval of
the final plat. The method of assurance will be approved by the City Attorney.



      (6)   Title opinion.  Evidence satisfactory to the city must
be submitted showing all taxes and assessments due on the property to be
subdivided to be paid in full, showing title or control of the property to be
subdivided, and showing the property to be subdivided as fee and clear of any
liens. An attorney’s title opinion or ownership and encumbrance report from
a land title company shall be considered satisfactory evidence.



      (7)   Floodplain.  If a subdivision lies within a 100-year
floodplain, the following statement shall appear on the face of the final
plat and all contracts and agreements relating to the subdivision: “THIS
SUBDIVISION IS (OR THE FOLLOWING LOTS ARE) LOCATED IN THE ONE HUNDRED-YEAR
FLOODPLAIN AS DEFINED BY THE UNITED STATES FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
AGENCY (FEMA).”



      (8)   Financial guarantee.  A contractor’s performance bond
or other financial guarantee acceptable to the city to guarantee the complete
and timely development of any facilities or improvements which are the
subdivider’s responsibility shall be submitted as described in § 155.080
below.



      (9)   Letters of utility approval. Letters of certification
and/or signed copies of the proposed final plat from appropriate agencies and
utility companies approving the final plat.



      (10)   Covenants, conditions, and restrictions. Any covenants,
conditions, restrictions (CCRs) for the subdivision shall be submitted for
review to assure that the CCRs do not conflict with any city regulations.



   (C)   Review process.



      (1)   Planning Director review.  After receipt of the final
plat, the Planning Director shall review the submittal with the Chairperson
of the Planning and Zoning Commission for the completeness and for compliance
with the approved preliminary plat. The Director may refer copies of the
final plat to an seek comment from other officials and agencies.



      (2)   Staff review of supporting information.  Upon submittal
of all required supporting materials, the Planning Director shall review them
for completeness to determine whether a complete final plat submittal has
been made and shall refer the material to appropriate agencies for review and
comment. Upon being notified of the comments and any necessary approvals of
reviewing agencies, the Planning Director shall forward the final plat,
comments and approvals of reviewing agencies and pertinent supporting
materials to the Council. Incomplete final plats, or final plats for which
necessary approvals have not been secured, shall not be forwarded to Council
for action.



      (3)   City Council action.  Following receipt of the final
plat, the recommendation from the Planning Director and Chairperson of the
Planning and Zoning Commission that the final plat complies with the
preliminary plat, and required supporting materials, the City Council shall
either approve the final plat or disapprove the final plat and notify the
subdivider of the conditions to be met to gain approval. If disapproved final
plat is modified and resubmitted to the City Council at a later date for
their consideration, the Council may require the concurrent submittal of an
updated ownership and encumbrance report or title opinion.



      (4)   Filing with County Recorder. Upon approval by the City
Council of the final plat, the subdivider shall be notified to be submit
payment for the recording fee to the Planning Director who shall transmit the
subdivider’s recording fee and the duly approved and executed final plat to
the County Recorder for the filing of the final plat among the official
records of the county.



      (5)   Alternate approval procedure.  As an alternate
procedure and at the request of the subdivider, the City Council may approval
a final plat and instruct the Planning Director to withhold the approved
final plat from recording for a period of time to allow the subdivider to
install all of the required  public improvements according to the plans and
specifications approved by the City Engineer. This procedure, when approved
by the Council, shall be in lieu of the guarantees for installation of
improvements as set forth in division (B)(8) above. An executed standard
contract as approved by the City Attorney regarding installation of
improvements shall be submitted with the final plat. The contract shall
require that all improvements be completed no later than 12 months from the
date of the final plat was approved by the City Council and that no lot may
be sold. When the completed improvements are inspected and approved by the
City Engineer, the plat shall be recorded by the Planning Director, and the
sale of lots may then proceed according to the approved and recorded plat,
provided that a one-year warranty shall be submitted covering the completed
improvements.



   (D)   Simultaneous submittal of preliminary and final plats. For
certain subdivisions, the subdivider may, afer discussion with the Planning
Director, simultaneously submit both the preliminary plat and the final plat.
Depending on the size and complexity of the subdivision and the amount of
street dedication, any or all of the information required in the preliminary
and final plat processes may be submitted. The Director shall determine which
information must be submitted for adequate review of the subdivision. The
preliminary and final plats may then be processed concurrently. It is
possible for the preliminary and final plats to be one and the same
instrument.



   (E)   Corrected plats and subdivisions.



      (1)   If, after the approval and recording of a final plat,
errors are found in the language or numbers on the recorded plat, the
subdivider shall file a properly signed, corrected, or revised original mylar
with the Planning Director. The plat shall be noted “Corrected Plat”
under the name of the subdivision. Notations shall be made on the face of the
plat listing all corrections made and the book and page numbers where the
original plat was recorded. The director shall review the plat for
corrections, secure the signatures of the proper public officials on the
corrected plat and present the plat to the City Council for the reaffirmation
of their approval and the County Clerk for recording. The recoding of the
corrected plat shall void the incorrect original plat, and the County Clerk
shall note “Void” across the face of the incorrect plat.



      (2)   If, after the approval and recording of the final plat,
a subdivider wishes to modify the location of lot lines on part or all of the
recorded plat, and if there is no change in the location or size of dedicated
streets or other dedicated public land, the subdivider shall submit a new
final plat drawing with the lotting arrangement revised. The Planning
Director shall determine which of the required supporting materials shall be
resubmitted with the revised final plat. The plat shall be marked the
“Resubdivision of                                      
” under the name of the subdivision and shall be processed as a final plat.



      (3)   If, after the approval and recording of a final plat, a
subdivider wishes to change the street or public land location, size, or
arrangement of a part or all of the platted area, the resulting subdivision
shall be treated as a new submittal with both a preliminary plat and a final
plat required. Based on the currency of the information submitted with the
original plat and the magnitude of the change(s), the procedure described in
division (D) may be applied. the subdivision shall be identified as the
“Resubdivision of                             ”. Any action
of the City Council approving the resubdivision shall contain clear reference
to the vacation of public lands as appropriate.



   (F)   Variances from these regulations.



      (1)   When it can be shown that in the case of a particular
subdivision, strict compliance with the provisions of these regulations would
cause undue hardship, the City Council may authorize a variance to these
regulations provided that the general intent of these regulations are
preserved, that public interest is protected, and that the variances do not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the General Plan or
the zoning ordinance (Chapter 154 of this code). The granting of a variance
shall be based upon findings by the Council that:



         (a)   The subdivider is proceeding in good faith.



         (b)   There are unusual topographical or other special
circumstances associated with the property which are not the result of any
action of the subdivider and which prohibit the use of the property in a
manner similar to the use of adjacent or nearby properties.



         (c)   The variance is necessary for reasonable
development of the property in question and will alleviate a clearly
demonstrable hardship.



         (d)   The variance will not nullify the intent or
purpose of these regulations.



         (e)   Granting the variance will not be detrimental to
the general public health, safety, and welfare.



      (2)   An variance granted shall constitute the minimum
adjustment necessary to alleviate the hardship.



      (3)   A request for variance may be submitted only after the
Planning and Zoning Commission has formally reviewed the preliminary plat and
has either:



         (a)   Recommended disapproval because the plat does not
conform to these regulations; or



         (b)   Conditionally approved the plat specifying those
amendments which must appear on the final plat in order for it to be
approved. The subdivider may then seek relief from the specific provisions of
these regulations with which he or she cannot comply.



      (4)   All requests for variances shall be submitted in writing
to the Planning Director and the Planning and Zoning Commission for their
comments and recommendations. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a
recommendation which shall be submitted to the City Council for their
approval, denial, or modification. In granting a variance, compliance with
the intent of the objectives and standards of these regulations shall be
maintained. The findings and action on each variance and any conditions
imposed shall be recorded in the minutes of the Council and a copy thereof
provided to the Planning Director.



      (5)   If the subdivision variance is granted by the City
Council, the subdivider may incorporate the provisions of the variance into
the final plat to be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission and to
the Council for approval. In its review of the final plat, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall be bound by the decision of the Council regarding the
variance and shall review and approve the final plat with the variance if the
plat in all other respects conforms to the preliminary plat and any other
conditions imposed by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (G)   Vacating public lands.



      (1)   Any plat may be vacated by the owners or proprietors
thereof at any time before sale of any lots, or before any substantial
improvements have been made in the subdivision, by submitting a copy of the
plat to the City Council along with a written request for a vacation. In
cases where lots have been sold, the written request shall be by all of the
owners of lots within the plat. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make
a recommendation on the vacation to the City Council, and the Council shall
approve or disapprove the vacation. The recording of an instrument vacating
the plat shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of
the original plat and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys,
common and public grounds laid out or described in the plat.



      (2)   Streets and alleys platted and laid out under the
provisions of these regulations or laid out under any prior law of the State
of Arizona may be altered or vacated in the manner provided by law for the
alteration or discontinuance of streets and highways.



      (3)   Any part of a plat may be vacated under the provision
and subject to the conditions of division (A)(6) above and this division (G),
provided the vacating does not abridge or destroy any of the rights and
privileges of other proprietors in the plat and provided further that nothing
contained in this section shall authorize the closing or obstruction of any
public highways laid out according to law. The request for vacation shall be
made by all of the owner of lots within that portion of the overall plat
sought to be vacated.



      (4)   When any part of a plat shall be vacated as aforesaid,
streets, alleys, and other public grounds shall be assigned to all lots or
parcels adjacent to the public area being vacated in equal proportions.



      (5)   The County Clerk shall write in plain, legible letters
across that part of the plat so vacated, the word “vacated” and also make
a reference on it to the volume and page in which the instrument of vacation
is recorded.



      (6)   Land covered by a vacated plat may be replatted as
described by these regulations. Any replatting of an area already platted and
not vacated shall be construed to be a request for the vacation of the
original plat or portion thereof. Any such plat, once approved and recorded,
shall act to vacate the original plat which it replaces.



(Prior Code, § 15-3-3)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 155.050  GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Generally.  All subdivision improvements shall be in
conformance to the following rules and regulations:



      (1)   The city zoning ordinance (Chapter 154 of this code);



      (2)   The General Plan of the city including all streets,
drainage systems, and parks shown on the General Plan as adopted;



      (3)   The rules of the Arizona Department of Transportation if
the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a state highway or
connecting street;



      (4)   The rules of the Maricopa County Flood Control District;



      (5)   The rules of the Arizona Department of Health Services
and the Maricopa County Department of Health Services relative to water and
sanitary sewage disposal; and



      (6)   The design standards and regulations adopted by the
city, which shall include, but not be limited to, the Uniform Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction and the Uniform Standard Details
for Public Works Construction, as sponsored and distributed by Maricopa
Association of Governments.



   (B)   Self-imposed restrictions.  If the owner places restrictions
on any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those  required
by the zoning ordinance (Chapter 154 of this code) or this chapter, the
restrictions or reference thereto may be required to be indicated on the
subdivision plat, or the Planning and Zoning Commission may require that
protective covenants be recorded with the County Clerk.



   (C)   Monuments. The applicant shall place permanent reference
monuments in the subdivision as approved by a registered land surveyor and
the City Engineer.



   (D)   Character of the land; land unsuitable for development.  Land
which the Planning Zoning Commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision
of development because  of flooding, improper drainage, rock formations,
adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features
which will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare
of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its
surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate
methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, upon recommendation of the City Engineer, to solve the
problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. The land shall be set
aside for uses that shall not involve such a danger.



   (E)   Subdivision name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall
not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other
subdivision in the area covered by this chapter. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall have the final authority to designate the name of the
subdivision which shall be determined at sketch plat approval.



(Prior Code, § 15-4-1)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.051  LOT IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Lot arrangement.  The lot arrangement shall be such that
there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other
conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance
with the zoning ordinance (Chapter 154 of this code) or in providing driveway
access to buildings on the lots from an approved street.



   (B)   Lot dimensions.  Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum
standards of the zoning ordinance (Chapter 154 of this code). Where lots are
more than double the minimum required area for the zoning district, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may require that the lots be arranged so as to
allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would
be necessary to serve the potential lots, all in compliance with the zoning
ordinance (Chapter 154 of this code) and  this chapter. In general, side lot
lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street
lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot
plan. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection
of buildings, observing the minimum set backs from both streets. Depth and
width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or
industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking
and loading facilities required for the type of use and development
contemplated, as established in the zoning ordinance (Chapter 154 of this
code).



   (C)   Double frontage lots and access to lots.



      (1)   Double frontage lots.  Double frontage and reversed
frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation
of residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation.



      (2)   Access from major and minor arterials. Lots shall not,
in general, derive access exclusively from an arterial street. Where driveway
access from an arterial street may be necessary for several adjoining lots,
the Planning and Zoning Commission may require that the lots be served by a
combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards on the
street. Where possible, driveways should be designed and arranged so as to
avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic on arterial streets.



   (D)   Soil preservation, grading, and seeding.



      (1)   Soil preservation and final grading. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued until final grading has been completed in
accordance with the approved final subdivision plat.



      (2)   Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide
positive drainage away from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall
be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage
shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from
each lot onto adjacent lots.



   (E)   Debris and waste.  No cut trees, debris, rocks, rubbish, or
other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land, or left or
deposited on any lot or street at the time of the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.



   (F)   Fencing and screen walls.  Each subdivider and/or developer
shall be required to furnish and install fences and/or screen walls wherever
the City Council determines that a hazardous condition may exist. The fences
shall be constructed according to standards established by the zoning
ordinance (Chapter 154 of this code) and shall be noted as to height and
material on the final plat. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until
the fence improvements have been duly installed.



   (G)   Performance bond to include lot improvement.



      (1)   The performance bond or other financial guarantee shall
include an amount to guarantee completion of all requirements contained in
this section, including but not limited to, soil preservation, final grading,
lot drainage, removal of debris and waste, fencing, and all other lot
improvements required by the City Council.



      (2)   Whether or not a certificate of occupancy has been
issued, at the expiration of the performance bond, the city may enforce the
provision of the bond where th provision of this section or any other
applicable law, ordinance, or regulation have not been satisfied.



(Prior Code, § 15-4-2)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.052  STREETS.



   (A)   General requirements.



      (1)   Frontage on improved streets.  No subdivision shall be
approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on, and access
from, an existing street and unless the street is: A street shown upon a plat
approved by the City Council and recorded in the County Recorder’s office.
The street or highway must be suitably improved as required by Maricopa
Association on Governments (MAG) Specifications, or be secured by a
performance bond required under these subdivision regulations, with the width
and right-of-way required by these subdivision regulations or the General
Plan. Wherever the area to be subdivided is to utilize existing road
frontage, the road shall be suitably improved as provided herein.



      (2)   Grading and improvement plan. Roads shall be graded and
improved and conform to the city construction standards and specifications by
the City Engineer, in accordance with the construction plans required to be
submitted prior to final plat approval.



      (3)   Topography and arrangement.



         (a)   Roads shall be related appropriately to the
topography. Local roads shall be curved wherever possible to avoid conformity
of lot appearance. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as
possible of the building sites at, or above, the grades of the streets.
Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original
topography. Specific standards are contained in the design standards of these
regulations.



         (b)   All streets shall be properly integrated with the
existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and the dedicated rights-of-way
as established in the General Plan.



         (c)   Local streets shall be laid out to conform as much
as possible to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to
permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum
number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property.



         (d)   Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary
lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other
physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the City Council, the
extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of
the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future
development of adjacent tracts.



      (4)   Blocks.



         (a)   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for
two tiers of lots or appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block
width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads,
waterways, or parks.



         (b)   The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be
such as are appropriate for the locality and the type of development
contemplated, but block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 1,000
feet or 15 times the minimum lot width required in the zoning district.



         (c)   In long blocks the City Council may require the
reservation of an easement through the block to accommodate utilities,
drainage facilities, emergency access, or pedestrian traffic.



      (5)   Access to arterial streets. Where a residential
subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed arterial street,
the city may require that access to the streets be limited by one of the
following means:



         (a)   The subdivision of lots so that the lots back onto
the arterial street and front onto a parallel local street; no direct access
shall be provided from the arterial street.



         (b)   A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or
short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to a parallel
street, with the rear line of their terminal lots backing onto the arterial
street.



         (c)   A marginal access or service road (separated from
the arterial street by a planting or landscaped strip and having access
thereto at suitable points.)



      (6)   Street names.  Street names shall be sufficiently
different in sound and spelling from other street names in the city so as not
to cause confusion. A street which exists or is planned as a continuation of
an existing street shall bear the same name.



      (7)   Street names and regulatory signs. The applicant shall
deposit with the city at the time of final subdivision approval an amount
equal to the cost of each street sign required by the City Engineer at all
road intersections. The city shall install all street signs before issuance
of certificates of occupancy for any residence on the streets approved.
Street name signs are to be placed at all intersections within or abutting
the subdivision, the type and location of which are to be approved by the
City Engineer.



      (8)   Street lights.  Installation of street lights shall be
required in accordance with the design and specification standards approved
by the City Engineer. All street lights shall utilize luminaries that
minimize reflection into the night sky. Lighting on local and collector
streets shall maintain a minimum of .4 lumens at any given point along the
street right-of-way while .7 lumens shall be maintained along arterial
streets. In addition, light standards shall be spaced such that each
intersection is provided at least one light standard.



      (9)   Construction of streets and dead-end streets.



         (a)   Construction of streets.  The arrangement of
streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between
adjacent properties when the continuation is necessary for convenient
movement of traffic, effective fire protection, for efficient provision of
utilities, and where the condition is in accordance with the city General
Plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must be a
dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the
property line and there shall be a notation on the subdivision plat that land
outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abuttors whenever the
street is continued. The city may limit the length of temporary dead-end
streets in accordance with the design standards of these regulations.



         (b)   Dead-end streets (permanent).



            1.   Where a street does not extend to the
boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the city
for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer
to the boundary than 50 feet. However, the city may require the reservation
of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian
traffic, or utilities. A cul-de-sac shall be provided at the end of a
permanent dead-end street in accordance with city construction standards and
specifications.



            2.   For greater convenience  to traffic and more
effective police and fire protection, permanent dead-end streets shall, in
general, be limited in length in accordance with the design standards of
these regulations.



   (B)   Design standards.



      (1)   General.  In order to provide for streets of suitable
location, width, and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and
afford satisfactory access to police, fire protection, sanitation, and
street-maintenance equipment, and to coordinate streets so as to compose a
convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties. Table 1
below sets forth design standards for streets.



 

Table 1


Design Standards for Streets


Improvements/Standards
 
Dimensions in Feet


Minimum width of right-of-way
 




     Local
 
50


     Minor collector
 
60


     Major collector
 
80


     Minor arterial
 
110


   Major arterial
 


     - Multi-land roadway
 
130


     - Parkway
 
150


Minimum width pavement (defined as face of curb to face of curb)
 


     Local
 
32


     Minor collector
 
44


     Major collector
 
64


     Minor arterial
 
68


   Major arterial
 


     - Multi-lane roadway
 
92


   - Parkway
 
102


Maximum posted speed limit
 


     Local
 
25 mph
 
–


     Minor collector
 
30 mph
 
–


     Major collector
 
35 mph
 
–


     Minor arterial
 
40 mph
 
–


     Major arterial
 
45 mph
 
–


Minimum radius of curve
 


     Local
 
300


     Minor collector
 
300


     Major collector
 
450


     Minor arterial
 
575


     Major arterial
 
750


Minimum length of tangents between reverse curves
 


     Local
 
150


     Minor collector
 
150


     Major collector
 
200


     Minor arterial
 
270


     Major arterial
 
280


Minimum sight distance
 


     Local
 
175


     Minor collector
 
260


     Major collector
 
325


     Minor arterial
 
400


     Major arterial
 
475


Minimum turn around (local streets only)
 


   Right-of-way diameter
 
120


   Pavement
 
100


   Center island (if required)
 
40


Maximum length of cul-de-sac
 


   Permanent
 
600


   Temporary
 
100


Source: BRW, Inc., 1987; Guidelines for Urban Major Street Design, ITE




 



      (2)   Street and sidewalk surfacing and improvements.



         (a)   After sewer, water, and other utilities have been
installed by the developer, the applicant shall construct curbs and gutters
and shall surface or cause to be surfaced roadways to the widths prescribed
in this chapter. The surfacing shall be of the character as is suitable for
the expected traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in the
surrounding areas. Types of pavement shall be as determined by the City
Engineer. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains, and bridges.



         (b)   All street pavements, shoulders, drainage, and
utility improvements and structures, curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall
conform to the Uniform Standard Details Specifications adopted by the City
Council and shall be incorporated into the construction plans required to be
submitted by the developer for plat approval.



      (3)   Railroads and limited access highways.  Railroad
rights-of-ways and limited access highways where so located as to affect the
subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows:



         (a)   In residential districts a buffer strip at least
25 feet in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the
district shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited
access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be
designated on the plat: “This strip is reserved for screening. The
placement of structures, except for street signs and lighting is
prohibited.”



         (b)   In districts zoned for business, commercial, or
industrial uses, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately
parallel to the railroad shall, wherever practicable, be at a sufficient
distance therefrom to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial
sites.



         (c)   Streets parallel to the railroad when intersecting
a street which crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent
practicable, be a distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad
right-of-way. The distance shall be determined with due consideration of the
minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of
appropriate approach gradients.



      (4)   Intersections, angles of.  Streets shall be laid out so
as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed
intersection of two new streets at an angle of less than 75 degrees shall not
be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection
and should be approximately at right angles at least 100 feet therefrom. Not
more than two streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



      (5)   Widening and realignment of existing streets.  Where a
subdivision borders an existing narrow street or when the General Plan or
zoning ordinance (Chapter 154 of this code) indicates plans for realignment
or widening of a street that would require the use of some of the land in the
subdivision, the applicant shall be required to improve and dedicate at his
or her expense the areas for widening or realignment of the streets. The
streets shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant at his or her own
expense to the full width as required by these subdivision regulations. Land
reserved for any road purposes may be counted in satisfying yard requirements
of the zoning ordinance (Chapter 154 of this code), whether the land is to be
dedicated to the municipality in fee simple or as an easement for future
expansion or as a private street.



(Prior Code, § 15-4-3)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.053  SIDEWALKS AND CURBS.



   The following are required improvements:



   (A)   Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated non-pavement
right-of-way of all streets as illustrated on Table 2 below.



   (B)   Concrete curbs and gutters are required for all streets.
Collector and arterial streets shall require six-inch vertical curbs.



   (C)   Sidewalks shall be improved as required in § 155.052(B) above.



 

Table 2


Sidewalk Requirements


Type of Street
 
Sidewalk Requirement




Local
 
Optional (at Council directive)*


Collector
 
Both sides, four feet wide, or, as bike route, eight feet wide; one foot
inside right-of-way line


Arterial
 
Both sides, five feet wide, or, as bike route, eight feet wide; one foot
inside right-of-way line


Note to table: *But where provided, four feet wide


Source: BRW, Inc., 1987




 



(Prior Code, § 15-4-4)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.054  DRAINAGE; STORM SEWERS; RETENTION BASINS.



   (A)   General requirements. The city will not recommend for approval
any plat of a subdivision which does not make adequate provision for storm or
flood water run-off channels or basins. The storm water drainage system shall
be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm drainage
shall be accommodated in the streets, gutters, or retention basins unless
otherwise indicted by the City Engineer. Sub-surface drainage systems shall
be discouraged, but where storm sewers are required, the cost shall be born
by the developer for storm sewers to a size of 24 inches; if over 24 inches
in size and determined to be for benefit outside of the subdivision, the
costs may be shared, as determined by the City Council, but only for that
portion determined to be of benefit outside the subdivision.



      (1)   Use of street for drainage.  Curbed streets shall be
designed and constructed to carry the storm water run-off from a ten-year
storm between curbs. When peak flows form the designated storm exceed the
street capacity, an open area drainage and retention system shall be designed
to carry the excess  storm water. The rational method based on the run-off
factors in division (B) below shall be used to determine the peak flows.
Fifteen minutes maximum may be used for the time of concentration for the
runoff across the lots.



      (2)   Peak flows in streets.  Peak flows from a 100-year
storm shall be carried within the cross section between buildings (front
yards and streets). The finish floor elevation of all buildings shall be one
foot above the 100-year storm. All finished floors shall be a minimum of 14
inches across the low outfall of the site.



      (3)   Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert,
gutter, or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to
accommodate potential run-off from its entire upstream drainage area, whether
inside or outside the subdivision. The City Engineer shall determine the
necessary size of the facility, based on the provisions of the construction
standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential
watershed development permitted by the zoning ordinance (Chapter 154 of this
code.)



      (4)   Effect on downstream drainage areas. The City Engineer
shall also study the effect of each subdivision on the existing downstream
drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Local government
drainage studies together with the other studies as shall be appropriate,
shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that
the additional run-off incident to the development of the subdivision will
overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the City Council may
withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the
improvement of the potential condition in a sum as the City Council shall
determine. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be
provided to an adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage
watercourse or facility.



      (5)   Areas of poor drainage. Whenever a plat is submitted for
an area which is subject to flooding, the City Council may approve the
subdivision provided that the applicant fills the affected area of the
subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place the elevation of streets and
lots at a minimum of 12 inches above the elevation of the maximum probable
100-year flood, as determined by the City Engineer. The plat of the
subdivision shall provide for an overflow zone along the bank of any stream
or watercourse, of a width which shall be sufficient in times of high water
to contain or move the water, and no fill shall be placed in the overflow
zone nor shall any structure be erected or placed therein. The boundaries of
the overflow zone shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer.



      (6)   Floodplain areas. The City Council may, when it deems it
necessary for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future
population of the area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage,
and the sanitary facilities, prohibit the subdivision of any portion of the
property which lies within any 100-year floodplain as determined in the
zoning ordinance (Chapter 154 of this code.) These floodplain areas shall be
preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from clearing,
grading, or dumping of earth, waste material, or stumps, except at the
discretion of the City Council.



   (B)   Retention requirements.



      (1)   Areas for retention.  All water from a 100-year storm
of a one-hour duration (approximately 2.4 inches), which falls within the
area being developed, including the respective one-half of all abutting
streets (whether or not it is a dedicated street which may exist by an
improvement district and owned by the city) shall be retained within the
boundaries of the developed land. No retention shall be allowed in public
rights-of-way. The method of collection and retention shall be approved by
the Department of Public Works. The method of retention calculation, drainage
flows, and removal of storm water within 36 hours shall conform to division
(B)(5) and (6) below.



      (2)   Retention basin capabilities. All retention basins shall
have a design capacity to preclude a water depth in excess of three feet
resulting from a 100-year, one-hour storm. The depth of retention basins
shall be measured from lowest adjacent top of curb. In no event shall storm
water stand in the retention basins longer than 36 hours. Drywells (or other
approved methods of removing storm water within 36 hours) shall be required
for any depth of retention over one foot, provided a volume greater than1,000
cubic feet is being retained in a single retention area. However equalizer
pipes from smaller to larger retention areas may be required by the City
Engineer.



      (3)   Dedication. No retention basins will be controlled or
owned by the city unless dedicated as part of the city’s park and open
space system. Non-dedicated retention basins shall be maintained by the
owner. All retention basin areas shall be designated as easement areas for
retention purposes and shall have a recorded protective covenant requiring
perpetual maintenance.



      (4)   Residential lots for retention.  On-lot retention is
permissible in single-family developments to a maximum of six inches, but
shall not be used for calculating development retention requirements.



      (5)   Retention calculations.



         Total volume required = (2.4 in/12) x (drainage area) x
(average run-off coefficient)



      (6)   Run-off factors.



         (a)   The run-off factor used in computation must be
justified by a typical cross section of actual area calculation.



 

Concrete pavement (concrete, brick, etc.)
 
0.95


Roofs/asphalt pavement
 
0.85


Grass lawn
 
0.15


Desert lawn or rock lawn
 
0.70



 



         (b)   Infiltration into the dry well cannot be
considered to reduce the size of the retention area. The property owner of
record shall be responsible for the design, performance, operation, or
maintenance of dry wells used with on-site retention. A percolation rate of
0.8 cfs per dry well over a 36-hour period shall be used in calculating the
number of dry wells.



      (7)   Joint development. Two or more developers may join
together to provide a common retention facility. A letter of agreement signed
by all developers participating in the common retention area must be
presented to the City Engineer, and the recorded plat shall indicate that the
retention area is a joint facility. The joint retention area must meet all
criteria as a single area.



   (C)   Dedication of drainage easements.



      (1)   General requirements. Where a subdivision is traversed
by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, a storm water easement or
drainage right-of-way shall be provided conforming substantially to the lines
of the watercourse, and of the width and construction, or both as will be
adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible it is desirable that the drainage
be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for
maximum potential volume of flow.



      (2)   Drainage easements.



         (a)   Where topography or other conditions make
impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way,
perpetual, unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width for the drainage
facilities shall be provided across property outside the road lines and with
satisfactory access to the road. Easements shall be included on the plat.
Drainage easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or
to other drainage facilities.



         (b)   When a proposed drainage system will carry water
across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must
be secured and indicated on the plat.



         (c)   The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by
drainage or conservation easement, land on both sides of existing
watercourses, to a distance to be determined by the City Council.



         (d)   Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to
flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in
areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state
as drainage ways.



(Prior Code, § 15-4-5)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.055  WATER FACILITIES.



   (A)   General requirements.



      (1)   The subdivider shall connect to the city water system
and install adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to
the specifications of the City Engineer. All water mains shall be at least
six inches in diameter.



      (2)   Water main extensions shall be approved by the City
Engineer.



      (3)   To facilitate the above, the location of all fire
hydrants, all water supply improvements, and the boundary lines of proposed
districts, indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown
on the preliminary plat, and the cost of installing them shall be included in
the performance bond to be furnished by the developer.



   (B)   Fire hydrants.  Fire hydrants shall be required for all
subdivisions. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 300 feet apart in
multi-family, commercial, and industrial developments and no more than 500
feet apart in single-family developments, and shall be within 300 feet of any
structure and shall be approved by the City Fire Chief. To eliminate future
street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants themselves, and
all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a
street shown on the subdivision plat.



(Prior Code, § 15-4-6)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.056  SEWER FACILITIES.



   (A)   General requirements.  The applicant shall install sanitary
sewer facilities in a manner prescribed by the Uniform Standard Details and
Specifications and the City Engineer.



   (B)   Public sewerage required.  For all subdivisions, sanitary
sewer facilities shall connect with public sanitary sewage system. Sewers
shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades and sizes required by the
Uniform Standard Details and Specifications and the City Engineer.



   (C)   Mandatory connection to public sewer system.  If a public
sanitary sewer is installed within 200 feet of an individual lot, the owner
thereof shall be required to connect to the sewer for the purpose of
disposing of waste, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to
maintain upon any property the use of an individual sewage disposal system
thereafter.



   (D)   Design criteria for sanitary sewers.



      (1)   Design factors.



         (a)   Sanitary sewer systems should be designed for the
ultimate drainage basin population. Consideration should be given to current
zoning regulations, and should be given to current zoning regulations, and
approved planning and zoning reports where applicable. Sewer capacities
should be adequate to handle the anticipated maximum hourly quantity of
sewage and industrial waste together with an adequate allowance for
infiltration and other  extraneous flow. The unit design flows presented
hereinafter should be adequate in each case for the particular type of
development indicated. Sewers shall be designed for the total tributary area
using the following criteria:



 



One- and two-family dwellings
 
.02 cfs/acre*


Apartments, townhouses, condominiums
 


   One- and two-story
 
.02 cfs/acre


   Three- though six-story
 
.03 cfs/acres


Commercial - small stores, offices and miscellaneous businesses
 
.02 cfs/acre


Shopping centers
 
.02 cfs/acre


Industrial buildings
 
As directed by the City Engineer


Note to table * Cubic feet per second per acres




 



         (b)   These design factors shall apply to watersheds of
300 acres or less. Design factors for watersheds larger than 300 acres and
smaller than 1,000 acres shall be computed on the bases of a linear decrease
from the applicable design factor for an area of 300 acres to a design factor
for .01 cfs/acre for an area of 1,000 acres unless otherwise directed by the
City Engineer. Design factors for watersheds larger than 1,000 acres shall be
.01 cfs/acre unless otherwise directed by the City Engineer.



      (2)   Maximum size. The diameter of sewers proposed shall not
exceed the diameter of the existing or proposed outlet, whichever is
applicable, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.



      (3)   Minimum size. No public sanitary sewer shall be less
than eight inches in diameter.



      (4)   Minimum slope. All sewers shall be designed to give mean
velocities, when flowing full, of not less than 2.0 feet per second. All
velocity and flow calculations shall be based on the Manning Formula using an
“N” value of 0.013. The slopes shall be minimum for size indicated.
Exceptions to these minimum slopes shall be made at the upper end of lateral
sewers serving less than 30 houses. The sewers shall have a minimum slope of
0.76%. Where lateral sewers serve less than ten houses, the minimum slope
shall be not less than 1%. Table 3, below, lists minimum slopes for various
sewer sizes:



 

Table 3


Minimum Slope by Sewer Size


Sewer Size (in Inches)
 
Minimum Slope in Feet per 100 Feet




8
 
0.33


10
 
0.24


12
 
0.19


15
 
0.14


18
 
0.11


21
 
0.093


24
 
0.077


Source: BRW, Inc., 1987; Arizona Department of Health Services Bulletin
Number 11




 



      (5)   Alignment.  All sewers shall be laid with straight
alignment between manholes, unless otherwise directed or approved by the City
Engineer.



      (6)   Manhole location.  Manholes shall be installed at the
end of each line; at all changes in grade, size, or alignment; at all
intersections; and at distances not greater than 400 feet for sewers less
than 18 inches, and 500 feet for sewers 18 inches in diameter and larger.



      (7)   Manholes.  The difference in elevation between any
incoming sewer and the manhole invert shall not exceed 12 inches except where
required to match crowns. The use of drop manholes will require approval by
the City Engineer. The minimum inside diameter of the manholes shall conform
to those specified by the City Engineer. Inside drop manholes will require
special considerations; however, in no case shall the minimum clear distance
be less than that indicated above. When a smaller sewer joins a larger one,
the crown of the small sewer shall not be lower than that of the larger one.
The minimum drop through manholes shall be 0.2 feet.



      (8)   Sanitary sewer locations.  Sanitary sewers shall be
located within street or alley rights-of-way unless topography dictates
otherwise. When located in easements on private property, access shall be
provided to all manholes. A manhole shall be provided at each street or alley
crossing. End lines shall be extended to provide access from street or alley
rights-of-way where possible. Imposed loading shall be considered in all
locations. Not less than three feet of cover shall be provided over top of
pipe in street and alley rights-of-way or three feet in all other areas.



      (9)   Cleanout and lampholes. Cleanouts and lampholes will not
be permitted.



      (10)   Water supply interconnections.  There shall be no
physical connection between a public or private potable water supply system
and sewer which will permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into
the potable supply. Sewers shall be kept removed from water supply wells or
other water supply sources and structures.



      (11)   Relationship of sewers to water mains.  A minimum
horizontal distance of six feet shall be maintained between parallel water
and sewer lines. At points where sewers cross water mains, the sewer shall be
constructed of cast iron pipe or encased in concrete for a distance of ten
feet in each direction from the crossing, measured perpendicular to the water
line. This will not be required when the water main is at least two feet
above the sewer line.



      (12)   Extraordinary situations.  These design criteria are
not intended to cover extraordinary situations. Deviations will be allowed
and may be required in those instances where considered justified by the City
Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 15-4-7)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.057  UTILITIES.



   (A)   Location.  All utility facilities, including but not limited
to gas, electric power, except electrical lines exceeding 13,000 KV capacity,
telephone, and cable television shall be located underground throughout the
subdivision. All utility facilities existing throughout the subdivision shall
be located in either the street right-of-way and its adjacent easement of in
a dedicated alley except, where easements between alleys and street
rights-of-way are necessary to connect the utilities, as approved by the
city. Underground service connections to the street property line of each
platted lot shall be installed at the subdivider’s expense. At the
discretion of the City Council, the requirement for service connections to
each lot may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be retained in single
ownership and intended to be developed for the same primary use.



   (B)   Easements.



      (1)   Proper coordination shall be established between the
subdivider and the applicable utility companies for the continuation of
utility easements established in adjoining properties, when rights-of-way or
dedicated alleys are not appropriate.



      (2)   Where topographical, locational, or other conditions are
such as to make impractical the inclusion of utilities within rights-of-way
or dedicated alleys, perpetual unobstructed easements of at least ten feet in
width shall be provided. Easements shall be indicated on the plat.



(Prior Code, § 15-4-8)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.058  PUBLIC LAND RESERVATION; PARKS; OPEN SPACES.



   (A)   Where a proposed park, playground, open space, or other public
use shown on the General Plan is located in whole or in part in a
subdivision, the Commission and City Council shall require that the area or
areas be shown on plats in accordance with the requirements specified in this
section. The area or areas shall be reserved to the city by the subdivider if
the City Council approves the reservation.



   (B)   The Commission shall require that plats show sites of a
character, extent, and location suitable for the development of a park,
playground, or other stated public purposes.



   (C)   In all new residential subdivisions the city may require that
7% of the gross area be reserved for public recreation space, school sites,
or other public use with the percentage bing in addition to property reserved
for streets, alleys, easements, or other public ways.



   (D)   The city or other public agency shall enter into an agreement
on the method of acquiring the reserved land area prior to approval of the
final plat.



(Prior Code, § 15-4-9)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



COMPLETION; ASSURANCE



§ 155.080  FINANCIAL GUARANTEES AND IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Financial guarantees.



      (1)   The City Council shall require that the applicant
provide a financial guarantee such as a performance bond, an irrevocable
letter of credit, assurance of completion, funds in escrow, or other
guarantee acceptable to the city prior to recording the final subdivision
plat in an amount sufficient to secure to the city the satisfactory
construction, installation, and dedication of the required improvements. The
financial guarantee shall also secure all lot improvements on the individual
lots of the subdivision as required in this chapter. The amount of the
financial guarantee shall be 100% of the cost of the installation and
materials necessary to complete the subdivision, including street lights,
street name signs, street regulatory signs and all grading.



      (2)   (a)   The financial guarantee shall comply with all
statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney as to
form, sufficiency, and manner of execution, as set forth in this chapter. The
period within which required improvements must be completed shall be
specified by the City Council in the resolution approving the final
subdivision plat and shall be incorporated in the financial guarantee and
shall not, in any event, exceed two years from the date of final approval.



         (b)   The financial guarantee shall be approved by the
city as to amount and surety and conditions satisfactory to the governing
body. The City Council may, upon proof of difficulty, grant an extension of
the completion date set forth in the guarantee for a maximum period of one
additional year.



   (B)   Completion of improvements.  As an alternative to requiring a
contractor’s performance bond, the City Council, at its discretion, may
allow the procedures for completion of improvements described in §
155.032(B) above.



   (C)   Temporary improvement.  The applicant shall build and pay for
all costs of temporary improvements required by the City Council and shall
maintain them for the period specified by the City Council. Prior to
construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the developer shall
file with the City Engineer a separate, suitable, financial guarantee for
temporary facilities, which guarantee shall ensure that the temporary
facilities will be properly constructed, maintained, and removed.



   (D)   Governmental units. Governmental units to which these
financial guarantees and contract provisions apply may file in lieu of the
contract or financial guarantee  a certified resolution or ordinance  from
officers or agencies authorized to act in their behalf, agreeing to comply
with the provisions of this section.



   (E)   Failure to complete improvements. For subdivisions for which
no financial guarantee has been posted, if the improvements are not completed
within the period specified by the City Council in the resolution approving
the plat, subject to § 155.032(B) above, the approval shall be deemed to
have expired. In those cases where a financial guarantee has been posted and
required improvements have not been installed within the terms of the
guarantee, the city may thereupon declare the guarantee to be in default,
call on the guarantee, and require that all the improvements be installed
regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the
financial guarantee is declared to be in default.



   (F)   Acceptance of dedication and maintenance.  Acceptance of
dedication of land for streets, public areas, and easements shall be by
resolution of the City Council. The resolution approving the final plat shall
constitute the acceptance, provided a statement of dedication is placed on
the plat. The approval by the City Council of a subdivision plat shall not be
deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance of maintenance by the city of
any street or easement improvements shown on the plat. The City Council may
require the plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. A
separate resolution accepting improvements and maintenance shall be required
following installation of all improvements.



(Prior Code, § 15-5-1)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.081  INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   General procedures and fees.  The City Council shall provide
for inspection of required improvements during construction and insure their
satisfactory completion. The applicant shall pay to the city an inspection
fee of 2% of the amount of the financial guarantee or the estimated cost of
required improvements, and the subdivision plat shall not be signed by the
Mayor unless the fee has been paid at the time of approval. If the City
Engineer finds, upon inspection that any of the required improvements have
not been constructed in accordance with the city’s construction standards
and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for completing the
improvements. Wherever the cost of improvements is covered by a performance
bond, the applicant and the bonding company shall be severally and jointly
liable for completing the improvements according to the specifications.



   (B)   On-site representative.  The developer shall designate, in
writing, the name of the agent who shall be available at all times during its
progress and who shall not be replaced without a written notice to the City
Engineer. The agent will be the developer’s representative at the site and
shall have the authority to act on the developer’s behalf.



   (C)   Release or reduction of the financial guarantee.



      (1)   Certificate of satisfactory completion.  The City
Council will not accept dedication of required improvements, nor release nor
reduce any financial guarantee, until the City Engineer has submitted a
certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily
completed and until the applicant’s engineer or surveyor has certified to
the City Engineer through submission of detailed “as-built” construction
plans of the subdivision, prepared on mylar, indicating location, dimensions,
materials, and other information required by the City Council or City
Engineer, that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements is
in accordance with the construction plans for the subdivision and that a
title insurance policy has been furnished to, and approved by, the City
Attorney indicating that the improvements shall have been completed, are
ready for dedication to the city and are free and clear of any and all liens
and encumbrances. Upon the approval and recommendation, the City Council
shall thereafter accept the improvements for dedication and maintenance in
accordance with established procedure.



      (2)   Reduction of financial guarantees.  A financial
guarantee may be reduced upon actual dedication of public improvements and
then only to the ratio that the public improvement dedicated bears to the
total public improvements for the plat. In no event shall a financial
guarantee be reduced below 25% of the principal amount, unless all
improvements have been dedicated in which case it may be reduced to zero,
provided a maintenance bond is posted.



      (3)   Maintenance of improvements; warranty.



         (a)   The applicant shall be required to maintain all
improvements within the subdivision and/or on the individual subdivided lots,
until acceptance of the improvements by the City Council. If there are any
certificates of occupancy on a street where improvements have not been
dedicated to the city, the city may on 12-hours’ notice effect emergency
repairs and charge them to the applicant.



         (b)   The applicant shall be required to file a
maintenance guarantee with the City Council prior to dedication of the
improvements, in the amount of 10% of the improvements costs in a form
satisfactory to the City Attorney, in order to assure the satisfactory
condition of the required improvements, including all lot improvements on the
individual subdivided lots for a period of one year after the date of their
acceptance by the City Council and dedication of the improvements to the City
Council.



(Prior Code, § 15-5-2)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.082  DEFERRAL OR WAIVER OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The City Council may defer or waive at the time of final
approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all
improvements as, in its judgement, are not requisite in the interests of the
public health, safety, and general welfare, or which are inappropriate
because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities.



   (B)   Whenever it is deemed necessary by the City Council to defer
the construction of any improvement required herein because of incompatible
grades, future planning, inadequate or lack of connecting facilities, or for
other reasons identified by the city, the applicant shall pay his or her
share of the costs of the future improvements to the city prior to signing of
the final subdivision plat, or the applicant my post a bond insuring
completion of the improvements upon demand of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 15-5-3)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.083  BUILDING PERMITS; OCCUPANCY PERMITS; ISSUANCE.



   (A)   No certificate of occupancy for any building in the
subdivision shall be issued prior to completion, inspection, and approval by
the City Engineer, and dedication of it to the city of all utilities required
to serve the building for which a certificate of occupancy is requested.



   (B)   The extent of street improvements shall be adequate for
vehicular access by the prospective occupant and by police and fire
protection equipment, prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.



   (C)   No building permit shall be issued for the final 10% of lots
in a subdivision (or if 10% is less than two, for the final two lots of a
subdivision), until all public improvements required by the City Council for
the plat have been fully completed and dedicated to the city.



(Prior Code, § 15-5-4)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.084  LOTS OUTSIDE APPROVED SUBDIVISIONS; BUILDING PERMITS.



   (A)   Planning Directorreview.  If any lot or parcel is to be
created within the city where the creation of the lot or parcel does not
require the use of the requirements and procedures of §§ 155.030et seq. and
§§ 155.050et seq., the owner of the lot or parcels to be created shall be
required to discus with the Planning Director the lot or parcel creation to
determine the eventual ability to receive a building permit for the lot or
parcel.



   (B)   Subject to other city requirements. Regardless of subjectivity
to §§ 155.030et seq. and §§ 155.050et seq., any newly created lot or
parcel shall be subject to the provisions of other city regulations,
including the zoning ordinance (Chapter 154 of this code.)



   (C)   Planning Director certification.  The Planning Director shall
certify whether or not the newly created lot or parcel meets all city
requirements relative to receiving a building permit, noting any conditions,
if they exist.



(Prior Code, § 15-5-5)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 155.100  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   These regulations shall be administered and enforced by the
Planning and Development Department of the city, or other agency as
designated by the City Council, through the Planning Director.



   (B)   All subdivision plats submitted to the city shall first have
been examined by Planning Director and the El Mirage Planning and Zoning
Commission in accordance with the procedures established by these
regulations. As part of their examination, the Director and the Commission
may consult with other public or private agencies to determine whether or not
the plat, as proposed, will contribute to the orderly growth and development
of the city. The actions of the Department, the Commission and the Council
shall be governed by the procedures and schedules set forth above.



(Prior Code, § 15-1-5)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.101  LIABILITY.



   The city shall hold harmless the Planning Director, other city agencies
and officials, and their official agents and representatives, when acting in
good faith and without malice, from all personal liability for any damage
that may accrue to any person or property as a result of any act required by
these regulations, or for the omission of any act on the part of the
Department, agency or official or their authorized agents in the discharge of
their duties hereunder. Any suit brought against the city or the city
administration because of any act or omission in the carrying out of the
provisions of these regulations shall be defended by the city’s legal
department through final determination of the proceedings.



(Prior Code, § 15-1-6)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.102  INTERPRETATION; CONFLICTS; SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   Interpretation.  In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
necessary for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.



   (B)   Conflicts with public and private provisions.



      (1)   Public provisions. This chapter is not intended to
interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
statute, or other provision of law except as noted herein. Where any
provisions of this chapter impose restrictions different from those imposed
by any other provision of this chapter or any other ordinance, rule or
regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.



      (2)   Private provisions. This chapter is not intended to
abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement or
restriction, provided that where the provisions of this chapter are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than the easement,
covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of this
chapter shall govern. Where the provisions of the easement, covenant, or
private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations more
restrictive than this chapter, and the private provisions are not
inconsistent with this chapter or determinations thereunder, then the private
provisions shall be operative and supplemental to this chapter and
determinations made thereunder.



   (C)   Separability. If any part or provision of this chapter or
application thereof to any person or circumstances  is judged invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction, the judgement shall be confined in its
operation to the part, provision, or application directly involved in all
controversy in which the judgement shall have been rendered and shall not
affect or impair the validity of the remainder of this chapter or the
application thereof to other persons or circumstances.



(Prior Code, § 15-1-7)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.103  SAVING PROVISION.



   This chapter shall not be construed as abating any action now pending
under or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or
discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation,
or as waiving any right of the municipality under any section or provision
existing at the time of adoption of this chapter or as vacating and annulling
any rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation, by lawful action of
the municipality except as shall be expressly provided for in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 15-1-8)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.104  AMENDMENTS.



   For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety and general
welfare, the governing body may from time to time amend the provisions
imposed by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 15-1-9)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



§ 155.105  FEES.



   (A)   Preliminary plat. The fees for preliminary plats are
incorporated by reference.



   (B)   Final plat. The fees for final plats are incorporated by
reference.



   (C)   Recording fee. As determined by the County Recorder. To be
submitted to the Planning Director after approval of the final plat and made
payable to Maricopa County.



   (D)   Variances. The fees for variances are incorporated by
reference.



   (E)   Annexation plats. The fees for annexation plats are
incorporated by reference.



(Prior Code, § 15-6-1)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988; Res.
R97-11-32, passed 11-13-1997; Res. R07-12-31, passed 12-13-2007)



§ 155.999  PENALTY.



   Any and all persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter or fail to comply therewith, or who shall fail to comply with any
lawful order or regulation made thereunder, shall severally for each and
every violation and noncompliance respectively, forfeit and pay a fine of not
less than $50, nor more than $750 and/or be imprisoned not to exceed to the
time of four months for each offense, the violation constituting a Class 2
misdemeanor under the Criminal Code of the laws of the State of Arizona. In
addition, the costs of any action may be imposed at the discretion of the
court. The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this chapter shall
not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall
be required to correct or remedy it to continue; and all such persons shall
be required to correct or remedy the violations and defects within a
reasonable time; and each day that the prohibited condition is not corrected
or remedied shall constitute a separate offense; and the court shall impose a
fine on a per diem basis for each day that the violation is maintained.
Application of the above penalty shall not be held to preclude the forced
removal of prohibited conditions.



(Prior Code, § 15-6-2)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



APPENDIX A:  SUBDIVISION PROCESSES, PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCESSES; FINAL PLAT
PROCESS



Subdivision Processes



   Before any property is divided into four or more parcels, whether for
sale of property or to build on the property, a subdivision plat must be
approved by the City Council and recorded in the County Recorder’s office.
The owner of the property to be subdivided must give his or her consent in
writing before the City Council can approve the final plat.



Preliminary Plat Process







 



Final Plat Process







 



*Final plat supporting information consists of final plat and required final
plat material as per § 155.032(B)



(Prior Code, Appendix A)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



APPENDIX B: ZONING FEES



   The zoning fees are adopted by reference.



(Prior Code, Appendix B)  (Ord. O88-06-007, passed 10-13-1988)



 


