
Guadalupe, Arizona Code of Ordinances


GUADALUPE, ARIZONA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



Local legislation current through 2017-03, passed 7-13-2017









Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   How code is designated and cited



   10.02   Construction of ordinances



   10.03   Definitions



   10.04   References to chapters, sections, or divisions; conflicting
provisions



   10.05   Section headings



   10.06   Effect of repeal



   10.07   Severability of parts of code



   10.08   Repeal of existing ordinances



   10.09   Code is public record



 



   10.99   Penalty



§ 10.01  HOW CODE IS DESIGNATED AND CITED.



   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated “The Code of the Town of Guadalupe,
Arizona,” and may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as the
“Guadalupe Town Code”.



(1989 Code, § 1-1)



§ 10.02  CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES.



   The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall be
observed in the construction of this code and the ordinances of the town,
unless such construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest
intent of the Council or the context of this code or the ordinances of the
town.



(1989 Code, § 1-2)



§ 10.03  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   When this code or an ordinance requires an act to be done
which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such
requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an
authorized agent.



   (B)   Words of the masculine gender include the feminine; words in
the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include
the singular.



   (C)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future includes the present.



   (D)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      CODE or THIS CODE. The Code of the Town of Guadalupe, Arizona,
unless the context indicates otherwise.



      COUNCIL. The Common Council of the Town of Guadalupe, Arizona.



      COUNTY. Maricopa County, Arizona.



      DAY. The period of time between any midnight and the midnight
following.



      DAYTIME. The period of time between sunrise and sunset.



      DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER, OR EMPLOYEE.
Whenever any department, board, commission, office, officer, or employee is
referred to, it shall mean a department, board, commission, office, officer,
or employee of the town unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.



      IN THE TOWN  OR WITHIN THE TOWN. Include all territory over
which the town now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the
exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.



      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words purporting to give a joint authority
to three or more town officers or other persons shall be construed as giving
such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it
shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority.



      MONTH. A calendar month.



      NIGHTTIME. The period of time between sunset and sunrise.



      OATH. Includes affirmation or declaration.



      OR, AND. “Or” may be read “and”, and “and” may be
read “or”, if the sense requires it.



      PERSON. Extends and be applied to firms, corporations, or
voluntary associations, as well as to individuals, unless plainly
inapplicable.



      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property, except
real property as defined in this section.



      PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.



      PROPERTY. Include real and personal property.



      REAL PROPERTY. Include lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



      SHALL and MAY. “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is
permissive.



      SHALL HAVE BEEN. Include past and future cases.



      SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK. Includes a mark when the
signer cannot write, such signer’s or subscriber’s name being written
near the mark by a witness who writes his or her own name near the signer’s
or subscriber’s name; but a SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK can be
acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement
only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.



      STATE. The State of Arizona.



      TENANT OR OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land shall include
any person holding a written or an oral lease or who occupies the whole or
part of such building or land, either alone or with others.



      TIME; COMPUTATION. The time within which an act is to be done as
provided in this code or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when
expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last, except that if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday it
shall be excluded; and when such time is expressed in hours, the whole of
Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.



      TIME; REASONABLE. In all cases where any section of this code
shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to
be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time
only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty or
compliance with such notice.



      TOWN. The Town of Guadalupe, Arizona.



      WEEK. Consists of seven consecutive days.



      WRITING. Includes any form of recorded message capable of
comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report,
statement, or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made
in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.



      YEAR. A calendar year, except where otherwise provided.



(1989 Code, § 1-3)



§ 10.04  REFERENCES TO CHAPTERS, SECTIONS, OR DIVISIONS; CONFLICTING
PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Additional rules of construction. In addition to the rules of
construction specified in §§ 10.02 and 10.03, the rules set forth in this
chapter shall be observed in the construction of this code.



   (B)   References to this code. All references to chapters, sections,
or divisions are to the chapters, sections, and divisions of this code unless
otherwise specified.



   (C)   Conflicting provisions-different chapters. If the provisions
of different chapters of this code conflict with or contravene each other,
the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions
growing out of the subject matter of such chapter.



   (D)   Conflicting provisions-same chapter. If conflicting provisions
are found in different sections of the same chapter, the provisions of the
section which is last in numerical order shall prevail unless such
construction is inconsistent with the meaning of such chapter.



(1989 Code, § 1-4)



§ 10.05  SECTION HEADINGS.



   Headings of the several sections of this code are intended as a
convenience to indicate the contents of the section and do not constitute
part of the law.



(1989 Code, § 1-5)



§ 10.06  EFFECT OF REPEAL.



   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so
provided. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution, or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under
the ordinance repealed.



(1989 Code, § 1-6)



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this code shall be
severable, and, if any provision of this code is held unconstitutional for
any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality
shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of the code.



(1989 Code, § 1-7)



§ 10.08  REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.



   (A)   Effective date of repeal. All ordinances of the town except
those specially exempted in this section, now in force and effect are hereby
repealed effective at         on               , but all rights,
duties, and obligations created by said ordinances shall continue and exist
in all respects as if this code had not been adopted and enacted.



   (B)   Ordinances exempt from repeal. The adoption and enactment of
this code shall not be construed to repeal or in any way to modify or affect:



      (1)   Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding
franchises, annexations, dedications, or zoning;



      (2)   Any ordinance making an appropriation;



      (3)   Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any
bond issue may have been authorized;



      (4)   The running of the statute of limitations in force at
the time this code becomes effective;



      (5)   The continued existence and operation of any department,
agency, commission, or office heretofore legally established or held;



      (6)   Any bond of any public officer;



      (7)   Any taxes, fees, assessments, or other charges incurred
or imposed;



      (8)   Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming,
approving, or accepting any compact or contract with any other municipality,
the state, or any county or subdivision thereof, or with the United States or
any agency or instrumentality thereof; or



      (9)   Any ordinance authorizing or setting out rules and
regulations for the employment of persons by or through the town.



(1989 Code, § 1-9)



§ 10.09  CODE IS PUBLIC RECORD.



   The town code is declared to be public record and the Town
Manager/Clerk is directed to keep three copies thereof available for
inspection at the Town Hall.



(Ord. 2005-09, passed 9-8-2005; Res. 2005-13, passed - -)



§ 10.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this
code, except as otherwise provided in this code, shall be guilty of a Class 1
Misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall
be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described.



   (B)   Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any
act required by Title VII of this code constitutes a civil traffic violation
unless otherwise provided in that chapter. Civil traffic violations are
subject to the provisions of A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 5, and amendments
thereto.



   (C)   Any person who is convicted of a misdemeanor criminal offense
in the municipal court and who, as a consequence, is incarcerated in the
county jail, may as a part of any sentence imposed by the municipal court be
required to reimburse the town for its actual expense incurred to the county
by reason of such confinement in an amount to be set from time to time by the
Council and tracking the amount paid by the town for jail services for every
prisoner day not to exceed the monetary limits established in division (A)
above.



(1989 Code, § 1-8)  (Ord. 90-04, passed 8-8-1990; Ord. 1991-01, passed
2-14-1991)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   MAYOR AND COUNCIL



      31.   TOWN OFFICIALS



      32.   TOWN POLICIES



      33.   POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS



      34.   TOWN MAGISTRATE



      35.   FINANCES AND TAXATION



CHAPTER 30:  MAYOR AND COUNCIL



Section




Council




   30.001   Elected officers



   30.002   Corporate powers



   30.003   Duties of office



   30.004   Vacancies in Council



   30.005   Compensation



   30.006   Oath of office



   30.007   Bond



   30.008   Financial disclosure statement




Mayor




   30.020   Selection of Mayor



   30.021   Vice Mayor



   30.022   Acting Mayor



   30.023   Powers and duties of the Mayor



   30.024   Absence of Mayor



   30.025   Failure to sign documents




Council Election




   30.040   Primary election



   30.041   Non-political ballot



   30.042   General election nomination



   30.043   Election to office



   30.044   Candidate financial disclosure



   30.045   Election dates




Council Procedure




   30.060   Regular meetings



   30.061   Special meetings



   30.062   Meetings to be public



   30.063   Quorum



   30.064   Agenda



   30.065   Order of business



   30.066   Committees and commissions



   30.067   Voting



   30.068   Suspension of rules




Ordinances, Resolutions, and Contracts




   30.080   Prior approval



   30.081   Introduction



   30.082   Requirements for an ordinance



   30.083   Effective date of ordinances



   30.084   Signatures required



   30.085   Publishing required



   30.086   Posting required




COUNCIL




§ 30.001  ELECTED OFFICERS.



   (A)   The elected officers of the town shall be six Council members
and a Mayor. The Mayor and Council members shall constitute the Council and
shall continue in office until assumption of duties of office by his or her
duly elected or appointed successors.



   (B)   Council members shall serve four-year overlapping terms in the
manner provided by state statute. The Mayor shall serve a two-year term as
set forth in § 30.020.



(1989 Code, § 2-1-1)  (Ord. 2008-05, passed 8-28-2008)



§ 30.002  CORPORATE POWERS.



   The corporate powers of the town shall be vested in the Council and
shall be exercised only as directed or authorized by law. All powers of the
Council shall be exercised by ordinance, resolution, order, or motion.



(1989 Code, § 2-1-2)



§ 30.003  DUTIES OF OFFICE.



   The Mayor and Council members shall assume the duties of office at the
regularly scheduled Council meeting next following the date of the general
election at which, or effective as of the date of which, the Mayor and
Council members respectively were elected.



(1989 Code, § 2-1-3)  (Ord. 2008-05, passed 8-28-2008)



§ 30.004  VACANCIES IN COUNCIL.



   The Council shall fill by appointment, for the unexpired term, any
vacancy that may occur for whatever reason.



(1989 Code, § 2-1-4)



§ 30.005  COMPENSATION.



   The compensation of elective officers of the town shall be fixed from
time to time by resolution of the Council.



(1989 Code, § 2-1-5)



§ 30.006  OATH OF OFFICE.



   Immediately prior to assumption of the duties of office, each Council
member shall, in public, take and subscribe to the oath of office.



(1989 Code, § 2-1-6)



§ 30.007  BOND.



   (A)   Prior to taking office, every Council member shall execute and
file an official bond, enforceable against the principal and his or her
sureties, conditioned on the due and faithful performance of his or her
official duties, payable to the state and to and for the use and benefit of
the town or any person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act or
default of such officer in his or her official capacity.



   (B)   A person so injured or aggrieved may bring suit on such bond
under provisions identical to those contained in A.R.S. § 38-260. Bonds
shall be in such sum as shall be provided by resolution, and the premium for
such bonds shall be paid by the town.



(1989 Code, § 2-1-7)



§ 30.008  FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT.



   The Mayor and each Council member shall file by January 31 of each year
a financial disclosure statement in a form and with such information as
provided by resolution of the Council.



(1989 Code, § 2-1-8)




MAYOR




§ 30.020  SELECTION OF MAYOR.



   The Mayor shall be chosen by a vote of the people at the general
election in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-232.03. The Mayor shall serve a
two-year term.



(1989 Code, § 2-2-1)  (Ord. 2008-05, passed 8-28-2008)



§ 30.021  VICE MAYOR.



   At the same meeting at which the Mayor is selected, the Council shall
designate one of its members as Vice Mayor, who shall serve at the pleasure
of the Council. The Vice Mayor shall perform the duties of the Mayor during
his or her absence or disability.



(1989 Code, § 2-2-2)



§ 30.022  ACTING MAYOR.



   In the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the
Council may designate another of its members to serve as acting Mayor who
shall have all the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Mayor during
such absence or disability.



(1989 Code, § 2-2-3)



§ 30.023  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.



   The powers and duties of the Mayor shall include the following:



   (A)   Shall be the chief executive officer of the town.



   (B)   Shall be the Chairperson of the Council and preside over its
meetings. Mayor may make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote
in all its proceedings.



   (C)   Shall enforce the provisions of this code.



   (D)   Shall execute and authenticate by signature such instruments
as the Council or any statutes, ordinances, or this code shall require.



   (E)   Shall make recommendations and suggestions to the Council.



   (F)   By proclamation, declare a local emergency to exist due to
fire, conflagration, flood, earthquake, explosion, war, bombing, or any other
natural or human-made calamity or disaster or in the event of the threat or
occurrence of riot, rout or affray, or other acts of civil disobedience which
endanger life or property within the town. After declaration of such
emergency, the Mayor shall govern by proclamation and impose all necessary
regulations to preserve the peace and order of the town, including, but not
limited to:



      (1)   Imposition of a curfew in all or any portion of the town;



      (2)   Ordering the closing of any business;



      (3)   Closing to public access any public building, street, or
other public place; and/or



      (4)   Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement
agencies and organizations within or without the political subdivision for
assistance.



   (G)   Shall perform such other duties required by state statute and
this code as well as those duties required as chief executive officer of the
town.



(1989 Code, § 2-2-4)



§ 30.024  ABSENCE OF MAYOR.



   The Mayor shall not be absent from the town for a greater period than
15 days without the consent of the Council.



(1989 Code, § 2-2-5)



§ 30.025  FAILURE TO SIGN DOCUMENTS.



   If the Mayor refuses or fails to sign any ordinance, resolution,
contract, warrant, demand, or other document or instrument requiring
signature for five days consecutively, then a majority of the members of the
Council may, at any regular or special meeting, authorize the Vice Mayor or,
in the absence of the Vice Mayor, an acting Mayor to sign such ordinance,
resolution, contract, warrant, demand, or other document or instrument which
when so signed shall have the same force and effect as if signed by the Mayor.



(1989 Code, § 2-2-6)




COUNCIL ELECTION




§ 30.040  PRIMARY ELECTION.



   When determining the primary election results under the nonpartisan
election procedure as set forth in the relevant Arizona Revised Statues, any
candidate who shall receive, at the primary election, a majority of all the
votes cast shall be declared to be elected to the office for which he or she
is a candidate effective as of the date of the general election, and no
further election shall be held as to said candidate; provided that if more
candidates receive a majority than there are offices to be filled, then those
equal in number to the offices to be filled receiving the highest number of
votes shall be declared elected.



(1989 Code, § 2-3-1)



§ 30.041  NON-POLITICAL BALLOT.



   Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the
support of the candidate.



(1989 Code, § 2-3-2)



§ 30.042  GENERAL ELECTION NOMINATION.



   If at any primary election held as above provided there be any office
for which no candidate is elected, then as to such office, said election
shall be considered to be a primary election for nomination of candidates for
such office, and the second or general municipal election shall be held to
vote for candidates to fill such office. Candidates to be placed on the
ballot at the general municipal election shall be those not elected at the
primary election and shall be equal in number to twice the number to be
elected to any given office or less than that number if there be less than
that number named on the primary election ballot. Persons who receive the
highest number of votes for the respective offices at such first election
shall be the only candidates at such second election, provided that if there
be any person who, under the provisions of this subchapter, would have been
entitled to become a candidate for any office except for the fact that some
other candidate received an equal number of votes therefor, then all such
persons receiving an equal number of votes shall likewise become candidates
for such office.



(1989 Code, § 2-3-3)



§ 30.043  ELECTION TO OFFICE.



   The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive
the highest number of votes shall be declared elected.



(1989 Code, § 2-3-4)



§ 30.044  CANDIDATE FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.



   Each candidate for the office of Council member shall file a financial
disclosure statement when such candidate files a nomination paper. The
statement shall contain such information as required by resolution of the
Council.



(1989 Code, § 2-3-5)



§ 30.045  ELECTION DATES.



   The primary election shall be held on every even-numbered year on the
tenth Tuesday prior to a general election at which candidates for public
office are to be elected. The date for the general election shall be on the
first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of every even-numbered year.



(A.R.S. §§ 16-201 and 16-211)




COUNCIL PROCEDURE




§ 30.060  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   The Council shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth
Thursday of each month at 6:00 p.m.; provided that when the day fixed for any
regular meeting of the Council falls upon a day designated by law as a legal
holiday, such meeting shall be held at the same hour on the next succeeding
day not a holiday, unless otherwise noticed by the town. When deemed
appropriate, any regular meeting date of the Council may be changed or
cancelled by the Mayor or by a majority of the Council except that at least
one regular meeting a month must be held and that such notice of the
cancelled or rescheduled meeting shall be given to the public as is
reasonable and practicable under the circumstances.  All regular meetings of
the Council shall be held in the Council chambers of the town, unless
otherwise noticed by the town.



(1989 Code, § 2-4-1)  (Ord. 92-01, passed 6-25-1992; Res. 2017-01, passed -
-2017)



§ 30.061  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   The Mayor, or the Council upon written request of three members, may
convene the Council at any time after giving at least 24 hours’ notice of
such meeting to members of the Council and the general public. The notice
shall include the date, hour, and purpose of such special meeting. In the
case of an actual emergency, a meeting may be held upon such notice as is
appropriate to the circumstances. Notice of such meeting shall be made
pursuant to state law.



(1989 Code, § 2-4-2)



§ 30.062  MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC.



   All proceedings of the Council shall be open to the public, except that
upon approval by a majority vote of the Council, the Council may meet in a
closed executive session pursuant to the provisions of state law. Notice of
meetings shall be given in a manner consistent with state statutes.



(1989 Code, § 2-4-3)



§ 30.063  QUORUM.



   The Common Council shall, by ordinance, fix the time and place of
holding stated meetings, and the Council may be convened at any time by the
Mayor.  A majority of the Council members shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time and
compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalty
as the Council may, by ordinance, have previously prescribed. No such
adjournment shall be a day beyond the next stated meeting of the Council.



(A.R.S.  § 9-233)  (1989 Code, § 2-4-4)



§ 30.064  AGENDA.



   Prior to each Council meeting, on or before a time fixed by the Council
for preparation and distribution of an agenda, whichever is earlier, the Town
Manager/Clerk shall collect all written reports, communications, ordinances,
resolutions, contracts, and other documents to be submitted to the Council
and prepare a draft copy of an agenda according to the order of business and
furnish said draft copy to the Mayor, the Manager, and the Attorney for
review. Upon the approval of the Mayor, after receiving comments from the
Manager and the Attorney, a final version of the agenda shall be provided to
the Mayor, each Council member, the Manager, and the Attorney along with any
material pertinent thereto. In the event that the Mayor has deleted any
proposed agenda item or refused to place an item on the agenda, said item
will be placed on the next regular meeting agenda providing that not less
than three Council members request in writing that such item be placed on
said future agenda. Unless the Mayor consents to a shorter period, said
written request must be made no later than two weeks prior to the next
regular meeting wherein such agenda item would be considered.



(1989 Code, § 2-4-5)  (Ord. 2000-02, passed 6-8-2000)



§ 30.065  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   The business of the Council shall be taken up for
consideration and disposition in the following order:



      (1)   Call to order;



      (2)   Roll call;



      (3)   Invocation/Pledge of Allegiance;



      (4)   Approval of minutes;



      (5)   Call to the public;



      (6)   Discussion and possible action items;



      (7)   Town Manager’s report;



      (8)   Comments from the Council; and



      (9)   Adjournment.



   (B)   The Mayor, or in his or her absence, the Vice Mayor or other
Chairperson at the Council meeting shall have the power to deviate from the
order of business set forth above by taking listed items out of order when
the need arises. In addition, on those occasions where large numbers of
persons wish to address the Council, the Mayor or other Chairperson shall
have the right to limit the number of persons speaking under the call to the
public; direct that some of those wishing to speak be moved to the back of
the agenda or to another agenda when it appears that the agenda item known as
the call to the public will overwhelm the rest of the agenda.



(1989 Code, § 2-4-6)  (Ord. 2005-09, passed 9-8-2005)



§ 30.066  COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS.



   The Mayor and Council shall create such committees and commissions,
standing or special, as they deem necessary and have the right to appoint
members thereto. They shall perform such duties as the Mayor and Council
require.



(1989 Code, § 2-4-7)  (Ord. 2007-05, passed 10-11-2007)



§ 30.067  VOTING.



   (A)   The Mayor shall vote as a member of the Council.



   (B)   Upon the request of any member, the ayes and nays upon any
question shall be taken and entered in the minutes.



(1989 Code, § 2-4-8)



§ 30.068  SUSPENSION OF RULES.



   Any of the provisions of this subchapter may be temporarily suspended
in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of
three-fourths of the members present, except that this section shall not be
construed to permit any action that is contrary to state statutes.



(1989 Code, § 2-4-9)




ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, AND CONTRACTS




§ 30.080  PRIOR APPROVAL.



   All ordinances, resolutions, and contract documents shall, before
presentation to the Council, have been reviewed as to form by the Attorney
and shall, when there are substantive matters of administration involved, be
referred to the person who is charged with the administration of the matters.
Such person shall have an opportunity to present his or her comments,
suggestions, and objections, if any, prior to the passage of the ordinance,
resolution, or acceptance of the contract.



(1989 Code, § 2-5-1)



§ 30.081  INTRODUCTION.



   Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action
by the Council shall be introduced and sponsored by a member of the Council,
except that the Attorney or the Town Manager/Clerk may present ordinances,
resolutions, and other matters or subjects to the Council, and any member of
the Council may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinance,
resolution, matter, or subject be adopted; otherwise, they shall not be
considered.



(1989 Code, § 2-5-2)



§ 30.082  REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ORDINANCE.



   Each ordinance should have but one subject, the nature of which is
clearly expressed in the title. Whenever possible, each ordinance shall be
introduced as an amendment to this code or to an existing ordinance, and, in
such case, the title of the sections to be amended shall be included in the
ordinance.



(1989 Code, § 2-5-5)



§ 30.083  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   No ordinance, resolution, or franchise shall become operative until 30
days after its passage by the Council and approval by the Mayor, except
measures necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, or
safety of the town, but such an emergency measure shall not become
immediately operative unless it states in a separate section the reason why
it is necessary that it should become immediately operative, and unless it is
approved by the affirmative vote of three-fourths of all the members elected
to the Council, taken by ayes and nays and approved by the Mayor.



(1989 Code, § 2-5-6)



§ 30.084  SIGNATURES REQUIRED.



   Every ordinance passed by the Council shall, before it becomes
effective, be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Town Manager/Clerk.



(1989 Code, § 2-5-7)



§ 30.085  PUBLISHING REQUIRED.



   Only such orders, resolutions, motions, regulations, or proceedings of
the Council shall be published as may be required by state statutes or
expressly ordered by the Council.



(1989 Code, § 2-5-8)



§ 30.086  POSTING REQUIRED.



   Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, forfeiture, or other
punishment shall, after passage, be posted by the Town Manager/Clerk in three
or more public places within the town and an affidavit of the person who
posted the ordinance shall be filed in the office of the Town Manager/Clerk
as proof of posting.



(1989 Code, § 2-5-9)



CHAPTER 31:  TOWN OFFICIALS



Section




General Provisions




   31.01   Officers



   31.02   Additional officers



   31.03   Bond



   31.04   Vacancies; holding more than one office



   31.05   Additional powers and duties




Officers




   31.20   Town Manager



   31.21   Town Clerk



   31.22   Town Marshal



   31.23   Town Engineer



   31.24   Town Attorney



   31.25   Town Magistrate



   31.26   Juvenile hearing officers




Office of Zoning Administrator




   31.40   Established



   31.41   Appointment of Administrator



   31.42   Duties



   31.43   Fees



   31.44   Appeals




Departments




   31.55   Library Department



Cross-reference:



   Town Magistrate, see Ch.34



   Town policies, see Ch. 32



   Zoning, see Ch. 154




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 31.01  OFFICERS.



   There are hereby created the offices of Town Manager, Town Clerk, Town
Marshal, Town Engineer, Town Attorney, and Town Magistrate who shall be
appointed by the Council and who shall serve, with the exception of the
Magistrate, at the pleasure of the Council. The Magistrate shall be appointed
for a term of office as provided in § 34.02.



(1989 Code, § 3-1-1)



§ 31.02  ADDITIONAL OFFICERS.



   The Council may appoint and remove from time to time such other
officers as it may deem necessary and that are not provided for in this code
or state statute.



(1989 Code, § 3-1-2)



§ 31.03  BOND.



   The Council shall require each officer of the town to give bond for the
due discharge of his or her duties in such sums and with such security as it
may direct and approve as determined by resolution. The town shall pay the
costs of such bond.



(1989 Code, § 3-1-3)



§ 31.04  VACANCIES; HOLDING MORE THAN ONE OFFICE.



   Any vacancy that shall occur in any town office shall be filled by
appointment by the Council, provided that one person may hold more than one
office and that, at the discretion of the Council, the functions of a town
official may be validly performed and discharged by a deputy or another town
official, or an otherwise qualified individual not holding office but
employed at the pleasure of the Council.



(1989 Code, § 3-1-4)



§ 31.05  ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.



   In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this code, each
officer shall have such further powers, perform such further duties, and hold
such other office as may be provided by the Council through ordinance,
resolution, or order.



(1989 Code, § 3-1-5)




OFFICERS




§ 31.20  TOWN MANAGER.



   (A)   Office created. The office of the Town Manager is hereby
created and established. The Town Manager shall be appointed by the Council
wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive ability and
qualifications and shall hold office for and at the pleasure of the Council.



   (B)   Bond. The Town Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond
to be approved by the Council in such sum as may be determined by the
Council. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties imposed upon the Manager as prescribed in this subchapter. Any premium
for such bond shall be a proper charge against the town.



   (C)   Compensation. The Town Manager shall receive such compensation
as the Council shall fix from time to time.



   (D)   Removal procedure. The Manager may be removed by a majority
vote of the Council. If requested, the Council shall grant him or her a
public hearing within 30 days following notice of removal. During the interim
the Council may suspend the Manager from duty, but shall continue his or her
salary and if the removal becomes final shall pay his or her salary for one
month following the removal date. This division (D) shall not apply if the
town and the Manager have agreed otherwise in a written contract or a written
memorandum of understanding; in such a case, the written agreement shall
control.



   (E)   Powers and duties. The Town Manager shall be the
administrative head of the government of the town under the direction and
control of the Council except as otherwise provided by the Council. He or she
shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all
affairs of the town. In addition to his or her general powers as
administrative head and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her
duty and he or she shall have the powers set forth in divisions (E)(1)
through (E)(12) below:



      (1)   Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service,
suspend or remove all officers and employees of the town not appointed by the
Council. He or she may authorize the head of a department or office to
appoint, suspend, or remove subordinates in such department or office;



      (2)   Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the Council
together with a message describing the important features and be responsible
for its administration after adoption;



      (3)   Prepare and submit to the Council at the end of the
fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities
of the town the preceding year;



      (4)   (a)   Act as the controller and chief financial
officer of the town, and keep the Council advised of the financial condition
and future needs of the town;



         (b)   Direct the Finance Director and such other
deputies and assistants as he or she shall deem necessary in the preparation
of any financial documents related to the town, and in such other duties as
he or she shall designate; and



         (c)   Receive and safely keep all monies that shall come
to the town and pay out the same when authorized by the Council. He or she
shall keep a separate record and account of each different fund provided by
the Council, apportion the monies received among the different funds as
prescribed by the Council, and keep a complete set of books showing: every
money transaction of the town; the state of each fund; from what source the
money in each fund was derived and for what purpose expended; and he or she
shall make monthly reports to the Council of all receipts and disbursements
and the balance in each fund. At the end of the fiscal year, he or she shall
make a full and detailed statement of the receipts and expenditures of the
town during the year, specifying the different sources of revenue and the
amount received from each, all appropriations made by the Mayor and Council,
and the object for which they were made, and the amount of money expended
under each, the evidences of indebtedness issued, and what portion remains
thereof outstanding, with the rate and amount of interest due thereon, and
the amount of cash on hand.



      (5)   Serve as personnel officer with such duties as directed
by the Council, prescribed by this code and as set forth in the personnel
rules and regulations. He or she shall recommend to the governing body a
standard schedule of pay for each appointive office and position in the town
service, including minimum, intermediate, and maximum rates. He or she shall
authorize the payment of overtime pay for such employees as may work in
excess of a normal work period. Such rates of pay and periods of work shall
be in conformity with wages and salaries enacted by the Council;



      (6)   Recommend to the governing body from time to time
adoption of such measures as he or she may deem necessary or expedient for
the health, safety, or welfare of the community or for the improvement of
administrative services;



      (7)   Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments,
or units under his or her jurisdiction, with the approval of the Council. The
Manager may be the head of one or more departments;



      (8)   Attend all meetings of the Council, unless excused
therefrom, and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the
Council. He or she shall be entitled to notice of all regular and special
meetings of the Council;



      (9)   In case of accident, disaster, or other circumstances
creating a public emergency, the Manager may award contracts and make
purchases for the purpose of meeting said emergency, but he or she shall file
promptly with the Council a certificate showing such emergency and the
necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all
expenditures;



      (10)   See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced;



      (11)   Investigate the affairs of the town or any department
or division thereof. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters
concerning the administration of the government of the town and in regard to
service maintained by the public utilities in the town, and see that all
franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the town are faithfully
observed; and



      (12)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the
Council, not inconsistent with state law or town ordinances.



   (F)   Council not to interfere with appointments or removals. With
regard to officers and employees appointed by the Manager, neither the
Council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any
person to, or his or her removal or suspension from, such office by the
Manager or any of his or her subordinates, or in any manner take part in the
appointment or removal of such officers and employees in the administrative
services of the town. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its
members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the Manager.



(1989 Code, § 3-2-1)  (Ord. 92-02, passed 7-23-1992; Ord. 2001-02, passed
2-22-2001)



§ 31.21  TOWN CLERK.



   (A)   Records. The Clerk shall keep a true and correct record of all
business transacted by the Council and any other records that either pertain
to the business of the town or that the Council directs. The Clerk shall
number, plainly label, and file separately in a suitable cabinet all
ordinances, resolutions, notices, deeds, surveys, leases, paid and unpaid
vouchers, inventories, letters, orders, and other documents of whatever
nature.



   (B)   Public inspection of records. The Clerk shall keep convenient
for public inspection all public records and public documents under his or
her control, as provided by state statute.



   (C)   Monthly reports. The Clerk shall prepare and collect from town
officers and employees such monthly reports prepared in such manner and to
include such information as may be directed by the Council.



   (D)   Minutes. The Clerk shall prepare or cause to be prepared all
minutes of Council proceedings and ensure their correctness and accuracy.



   (E)   Ordinances, resolutions, budgets, and notices. The Clerk shall
process, record, file, publish, and, if required by state statute, post all
ordinances, resolutions, budgets, and notices that may be passed by the
Council.



   (F)   Duties as Clerk.  The Clerk shall also perform the duties of
the town executive secretary as the Town Manager may direct.



   (G)   Election official. The Clerk shall be the town election
official and perform those duties required by state statute.



   (H)   Licenses. The Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued all
licenses that may be prescribed by state statute or this code.



   (I)   Administrative duties. The Clerk shall perform those
administrative responsibilities and duties that are conferred upon him or her
by the Council in addition to those specified in this code.



(1989 Code, § 3-2-2)  (Ord. 92-03, passed 7-23-1992)



§ 31.22  TOWN MARSHAL.



   The Marshal shall be the Chief of Police and shall perform such duties
as may be required by law and as the Council may deem necessary. For police
protection and public safety services, the town is authorized to contract
with other law enforcement agencies and when this is done by the town, the
person assigned by the contracting agency to interact with the town shall be
deemed the Town Marshal.



(1989 Code, § 3-2-3)



§ 31.23  TOWN ENGINEER.



   The Engineer shall have charge of the town streets, sewers, and
waterworks and shall perform such duties as may be required of him or her by
law and such other duties as the Council may deem necessary.



(1989 Code, § 3-2-4)



§ 31.24  TOWN ATTORNEY.



   The Attorney shall act as the legal counselor and advisor of the
Council and other town officials and, as such, shall give his or her opinion
in writing when requested.



   (A)   He or she shall draft all deeds, contracts, conveyances,
ordinances, resolutions, and other legal instruments when required by the
Council.



   (B)   He or she shall approve as to form, in writing, all drafts of
contracts and all official or other bonds before final approval or acceptance
thereof by the Council.



   (C)   He or she shall return within ten days all ordinances and
resolutions submitted to him or her for consideration by the Council, with
his or her approval or disapproval as to form noted thereon, together with
his or her reasons therefor.



   (D)   He or she shall prosecute and defend all suits, actions, or
causes where the town is a party and shall report to the Council, when
required, the condition of any suit or action to which the town is a party.



(1989 Code, § 3-2-5)



§ 31.25  TOWN MAGISTRATE.



   The Town Magistrate shall be the presiding officer of the
Magistrate’s Court and shall be selected by the Council and shall perform
those functions necessary to the maintenance of the Magistrate’s Court as
provided by state statute.



(1989 Code, § 3-2-6)



§ 31.26  JUVENILE HEARING OFFICERS.



   The appointment by the presiding judge of the juvenile court in the
county of all judges of the town court, regular and pro tempore, to serve as
juvenile hearing officers, is hereby approved.



(Ord. 94-01, passed 9-22-1994)




OFFICE OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR




§ 31.40  ESTABLISHED.



   The office of Zoning Administrator of the town is hereby established.



(1989 Code, § 3-6-1)



§ 31.41  APPOINTMENT OF ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by the Council and may be
the Town Manager/Clerk, or any other individual appointed by the Council,
which the Council finds to be qualified to hold said position.



(1989 Code, § 3-6-2)



§ 31.42  DUTIES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to enforce
the zoning ordinances of the town. In this respect, it shall be the duty of
the Zoning Administrator to review building permits and business licenses and
to interpret the code to make sure the particular business or building is
allowed at that particular location. The Zoning Administrator will make
interpretations of the code and enforce the code.



   (B)   It shall also be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to make
recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission as to zoning changes
that are necessary in the town, and, upon the filing of an application with
the Zoning Commission for a change of zoning, the Zoning Administrator shall
hold a hearing after giving the same notice that it requires for a regular
Planning and Zoning Commission meeting prior to making said recommendations.
After holding a public hearing, the Zoning Administrator shall make his or
her recommendations, in writing, citing the facts upon which he or she relies
in making his or her decisions and shall submit his or her recommendations to
the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to the Planning and Zoning
Commission holding any hearings which deal with the rezoning of any parcel of
property within the town.



(1989 Code, § 3-6-3)



§ 31.43  FEES.



   The Council shall be authorized to establish a uniform schedule of fees
to be charged by the Zoning Administrator for any duties performed by the
Administrator, and such fee schedule shall become effective upon approval by
the Council.



(1989 Code, § 3-6-4)



§ 31.44  APPEALS.



   Any decision or recommendation of the Zoning Administrator shall be
appealable to the Board of Adjustment as established in the zoning ordinance
of the town.



(1989 Code, § 3-6-5)




DEPARTMENTS




§ 31.55  LIBRARY DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   A town library department is hereby created to provide library
services for the town. The Department shall be administratively responsible
to the Town Manager, who shall establish administrative procedures and
policies governing its operation.



   (B)   The Council, at its discretion, may appoint a Library Advisory
Board to assist in library policy matters.



(1989 Code, § 3-5)



CHAPTER 32:  TOWN POLICIES



Section




Personnel System




   32.01   Creation and scope



   32.02   Conditions of employment



   32.03   Rules and regulations



   32.04   Political contributions



   32.05   Personnel Board




Purchasing




   32.20   In general



   32.21   Bidding



   32.22   Determination of lowest responsible bidder



   32.23   Performance bond



   32.24   Emergency purchases



   32.25   Forms



   32.26   Professional services



   32.27   Cooperative purchasing




Smoking Regulations




   32.40   Purpose



   32.41   Definitions



   32.42   Prohibition and regulation of smoking in town-owned
facilities



   32.43   Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places



   32.44   Regulation of smoking in places of employment



   32.45   Where smoking is not regulated



   32.46   Posting requirements



   32.47   Regulation of tobacco products in vending machines



   32.48   Storage and display of tobacco products



 



   32.99   Penalty




PERSONNEL SYSTEM




§ 32.01  CREATION AND SCOPE.



   There is hereby adopted a merit system for the employees of the town,
the provisions of which shall apply to all employees of the town, except
elected officials, officers of the town appointed by the Council, persons
engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, or technical services,
temporary employees, volunteer firefighters, and volunteer personnel who
receive no regular compensation from the town.



(1989 Code, § 3-3-1)



§ 32.02  CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT.



   The appointment, promotion, and tenure of every employee shall be
conditioned solely on merit and fitness and the satisfactory performance of
the duties and responsibilities assigned. No employee or applicant for
employment shall be discriminated against on the basis of race, color,
religion, sex, age, or political affiliation.



(1989 Code, § 3-3-2)



§ 32.03  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Council may adopt by resolution rules and regulations to give
effect to this subchapter, which may be modified or changed from time to
time, but such rules and regulations shall follow the generally accepted
principles of good personnel administration.



(1989 Code, § 3-3-3)



§ 32.04  POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS.



   No officer, official, or employee of the town shall use any influence
or pressure upon any employee to obtain any assessment or contribution of
money or time, either direct or indirect, for any political campaign or
personal gain.



(1989 Code, § 3-3-4)



§ 32.05  PERSONNEL BOARD.



   There is hereby created a Personnel Board of the town, which shall
consist of seven members from the citizens of the town appointed by the Mayor
and ratified by the Council. The scope of the Personnel Board shall be
limited to the conduct of hearings on certain employee grievances and
forwarding advisory recommendations to the Mayor and Council. The members of
the Personnel Board shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council.



(1989 Code, § 3-3-5)




PURCHASING




§ 32.20  IN GENERAL.



   The Town Manager shall be the purchasing agent for the town. No
purchase or contract for services of any kind or description, payment for
which is to be made with town funds shall be made by the purchasing agent or
any officer, employee, or agent of the town except as set forth in this
subchapter and unless said purchase is in accordance with the adopted town
budget.



   (A)   Under $3,000. Whenever any contemplated purchase or contract
for services is for the sum of less than $3,000, the purchasing agent may
order the item as needed without further formality.



   (B)   $3,000 to $4,999 inclusive. Whenever any contemplated purchase
or contract for services is for the sum of at least $3,000 but not more than
$4,999, the purchasing agent shall solicit at least three bids for item or
service. Said solicitation may be orally obtained by him or her, and he or
she then award the purchase or contract of service to the lowest responsible
bidder.



   (C)   $5,000 to $9,999 inclusive. Whenever any contemplated purchase
or contract for services is for the sum of more than $5,000 but less than
$9,999, the purchasing agent shall solicit at least three written bids for
the item or service on bid forms and award the purchase or contract of
services to the lowest responsible bidder.



   (D)   $9,999 and over. Whenever any contemplated purchase or
contract for service is for the sum of $9,999 or more, the purchasing agent
shall cause to be published in two issues of a newspaper of general
circulation in the town, notice inviting bids, which notice shall be
published at least ten days prior to the date set for the receipt of the
bids. The notice herein shall include a general description of the articles
to be purchased or services to be performed and the time and place for
opening bids. In addition, the purchasing agent shall post a notice inviting
bids in the Town Hall and may also mail to all responsible prospective
suppliers a copy of the notice inserted in the newspaper.



   (E)   No contract of $9,999 or more shall be let except by the
Council. Whenever any contemplated purchase or contract for services is for
the sum of $9,999 or more, the purchasing agent (Town Manager) shall present
the bids to the Council for approval, and advise the Council of the
advantages or disadvantages of contract and bid proposals.



   (F)   Professional services. Bidding and other requirements of this
subchapter shall not apply except to comply with any specific applicable
federal, state, or contractual procurement regulations and requirements
pursuant to divisions (A) through (E) above. This division (F) does not apply
to contracts with persons appointed by the Town Council to act as town
officials, including, but not limited to, the Town Manager/Clerk, Town
Attorney, Town Magistrate, or special consultants who are not “technical
registrants” as defined by the Arizona Revised Statutes.



   (G)   Exclusive service. In the event there is only one firm or
company or individual capable of providing a particular service or commodity
and such services or commodities cannot be secured from other persons or
companies, this section shall not be applicable and such services or
commodities can be secured without bidding.



(1989 Code, § 3-4-1)  (Ord. 2012-03, passed 7-27-2012)



§ 32.21  BIDDING.



   The purchasing agent and all parties contracting with the town shall
follow the procedure set forth in this section in relation to all bids
required under § 32.20(D).



   (A)   All notices and solicitation of bids shall state the time and
place for opening.



   (B)   All bids shall be submitted sealed to the purchasing agent and
shall be identified as bids on the envelope.



   (C)   All bids shall be opened in public at the time and place
stated in the public notice.



   (D)   A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted in the Town
Hall for public inspection.



   (E)   The purchasing agent under § 32.20(A) through (C) and the
Council under § 32.20(D) shall have the authority to reject any and all bids
and parts of all bids and re-advertise or re-solicit bids.



(1989 Code, § 3-4-3)



§ 32.22  DETERMINATION OF LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.



   Unless the Council or purchasing agent shall exercise the right of
rejection as provided by § 32.21, the purchase or contract shall be made
from and with the lowest responsible bidder for the entire purchase or
contract or for any part thereof. In determining the lowest responsible
bidder, the Council and purchasing agent shall consider:



   (A)   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required;



   (B)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
services promptly or within the specified time, without delay or interference;



   (C)   The quality of performance of previous contracts;



   (D)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws
and ordinances of the town;



   (E)   The financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform
the contract; and



   (F)   The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies or
services.



(1989 Code, § 3-4-4)



§ 32.23  PERFORMANCE BOND.



   The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require a performance
bond, in cash or otherwise, for such amount as he or she may deem sufficient
to secure the execution of the contract for the best interest of the town.



(1989 Code, § 3-4-5)



§ 32.24  EMERGENCY PURCHASES.



   In case of an emergency which requires immediate purchases of supplies
or services and when time is of the essence, the Mayor shall be empowered to
authorize the purchasing agent to purchase or secure services without
complying with the procedures of this subchapter. A full report in writing of
the circumstances of any emergency purchase shall be filed by the purchasing
agent with the Town Council at its next meeting.



(1989 Code, § 3-4-6)



§ 32.25  FORMS.



   The purchasing agent shall prescribe and maintain such forms as he or
she shall find necessary for the operation of the provisions of this
subchapter.



(1989 Code, § 3-4-7)



§ 32.26  PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.



   Unless required by the Council, the bidding and other requirements of
this subchapter shall not apply to professional services. Such services shall
include, but not be limited to, the following: physicians; attorneys;
engineers; and similar professions.



(1989 Code, § 3-4-8)



§ 32.27  COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.



   This subchapter shall not apply to purchases made by, through, or with
the state or its political subdivisions. The town may make purchases or award
contracts for services without a formal bidding process whenever other
governmental units have done so for the same item or service if, in the
opinion of the purchasing agent, a separate bidding process is not likely to
result in a lower price for such items or services.



(1989 Code, § 3-4-9)




SMOKING REGULATIONS




§ 32.40  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Since the smoking of tobacco or any plant is a positive danger
to the health and a material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort, and a
health hazard to those who are present in confined spaces.



   (B)   Electronic smoking devices, which first entered the united
states market in 2007, are electronic inhalers meant to simulate cigarette
smoking. Electronic smoking devices use a heating element that vaporizes a
liquid solution. Many electronic smoking devices release nicotine, a highly
addictive substance, while some merely release flavored vapor. They are
designed to mimic traditional smoking implements in their use and appearance.
Although the long-term effects of electronic smoking devices may require
further study, the United States Food and Drug Administration has found that
some devices contain toxins and carcinogens and has expressed concerns about
their safety. Use of electronic smoking devices, particularly in places where
smoking is prohibited, may interfere with smokers’ attempts to quit by
making it easier for them to maintain their nicotine addiction. Children and
youth who experiment with electronic smoking devices may become addicted to
nicotine and ultimately switch to smoking cigarettes.



   (C)   Therefore, in order to serve the public health, safety, and
welfare, the declared purpose of this subchapter is to restrict smoking
within enclosed places, in particular, public places and places of employment.



(Ord. 2002-08, passed 5-9-2002; Ord. 2014-03, passed 8-14-2014)



§ 32.41  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BAR. An area devoted primarily to alcoholic beverage service to which
food service is only incidental.



   CONTROL DEVICE. Electronic or mechanical control which causes the
contents of a vending machine to be distributed.



   DESIGNATED SMOKING AREA. Any area outdoors which is outside of any
enclosed public place and removed from building entrances and exits. Any
DESIGNATED SMOKING AREAS must be so situated as to allow non-smoking
individuals to conduct normal activity in a smoke-free environment.



   DISTRIBUTION. To give, sell, deliver, dispense, issue, offer to give,
sell, deliver, dispense, or issue, or cause or hire any person to give, sell,
deliver, dispense, issue, or offer to give, sell, deliver, dispense, or issue.



   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE or ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE. Any product
containing or delivering nicotine or any other similar substance intended for
human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking through
inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the product. The term includes any such
device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an
e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape pen, or under any product
name or description.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person who is employed by any employer for direct or
indirect monetary wages or profit.



   EMPLOYEE WORK AREA. Any areas within a place of employment, which share
a common ventilation heating or air conditioning system.



   EMPLOYER. Any person or entity employing the services of an employee.



   ENCLOSED PUBLIC PLACES. Any area closed in by a roof and walls with
openings for ingress and egress which are available to and customarily used
by the public. ENCLOSED PUBLIC PLACES governed by this subchapter shall
include, but not be limited to, public areas of grocery stores, waiting
rooms, public and private schools, doctors’ office buildings, community
centers, child care centers, public restrooms, all indoor facilities and any
public places already regulated by A.R.S. § 36-601.01 and
restaurants/cafeterias, bars, sports bars, bowling alleys, and billiard
halls. A private residence is not a “public place”.



   MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.



   PERSON. Any natural person, corporation, partnership, firm,
organization, or other legal entity.



   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any enclosed area under the control of a private
or public employer. A private residence is not a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any area to which the public is invited or permitted.



   SMOKE OR SMOKING. Includes the:



      (1)   Carrying or placing of a lighted cigarette or lighted
pipe or any other lighted smoking equipment in one’s mouth for the purpose
of inhaling and exhaling smoke or blowing smoke rings;



      (2)   Placing of a lighted cigarette or lighted cigar or
lighted pipe or any other lighted smoking equipment in an ashtray or other
receptacle, and allowing smoke to diffuse in the air;



      (3)   Carrying or placing of a lighted cigarette or lighted
pipe or any other lighted smoking equipment in one’s hands or any appendage
or devices and allowing smoke to diffuse in the air; or



      (4)   Using an electronic smoking device designed for the
purpose of inhaling and exhaling aerosol or vapor.



   TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless
tobacco, snuff, or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for
smoking, chewing, inhalation, or other manner of ingestion, including
electronic smoking devices.



   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electronic, or other similar device
which dispenses tobacco products.



(Ord. 2002-08, passed 5-9-2002; Ord. 2014-03, passed 8-14-2014)



§ 32.42  PROHIBITION AND REGULATION OF SMOKING IN TOWN-OWNED FACILITIES.



   (A)   All enclosed public places, places of employment, and employee
work areas owned, leased, or operated by the town shall be subject to this
subchapter.



   (B)   Smoking is prohibited in all vehicles and enclosed public
places, places of employment, and employee work areas owned, leased, or
operated by the town.



(Ord. 2002-08, passed 5-9-2002)  Penalty, see § 32.99



§ 32.43  PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN ENCLOSED PUBLIC PLACES.



   No person shall smoke in any enclosed public place of employment except
outdoors in designated smoking areas.



(Ord. 2002-08, passed 5-9-2002)  Penalty, see § 32.99



§ 32.44  REGULATION OF SMOKING IN PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   Within 90 days after the effective date of this subchapter,
each employer in each place of employment within the town shall adopt,
implement, and maintain a smoking policy containing at a minimum the
following requirements:



      (1)   Prohibition of smoking in all employee work areas within
the town; and



      (2)   Prohibition of smoking in employer conference and
meeting rooms, classrooms, auditoriums, restrooms, waiting areas, medical
facilities, hallways, stairways, and elevators.



   (B)   The employer shall announce its smoking policy within 90 days
after the effective date of this subchapter to all its employees working in
work areas within the town.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to those listed
in § 32.45.



   (D)   No employee shall be terminated or subject to disciplinary
action solely as a result of his or her complaint about smoking or
non-smoking in the workplaces.



(Ord. 2002-08, passed 5-9-2002)



§ 32.45  WHERE SMOKING IS NOT REGULATED.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter to the contrary,
the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this
subchapter:



   (A)   Private residences;



   (B)   Yaqui or other religious ceremony practiced pursuant to the
American Indian Religious Freedom Act of 1978 (42 U.S.C. § 1996, Pub. Law
95-34) as amended;



   (C)   Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests which are on a
separately partitioned ventilation system;



   (D)   Retail stores that deal exclusively in the sale of tobacco
products and smoking paraphernalia, including electronic smoking devices, as
long as separately partitioned and on a separate ventilation system;



   (E)   On-stage smoking as part of a stage production, ballet, or
similar exhibition; or



   (F)   Conference/meeting rooms and private meeting rooms while
places are being used exclusively for private functions, as long as
separately partitioned and separately ventilated.



(Ord. 2002-08, passed 5-9-2002; Ord. 2014-03, passed 8-14-2014)



§ 32.46  POSTING REQUIREMENTS.



   “Smoking” or “No Smoking” signs, or the international “No
Smoking” symbol shall be clearly and conspicuously posted by the owner,
operator, manager, employer, or other person in control in every place where
smoking is controlled by this subchapter.



(Ord. 2002-08, passed 5-9-2002)



§ 32.47  REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS IN VENDING MACHINES.



   No person shall permit the distribution of tobacco products through the
operation of a vending machine in a public display.



(Ord. 2002-08, passed 5-9-2002)  Penalty, see § 32.99



§ 32.48  STORAGE AND DISPLAY OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS.



   No person who owns, conducts, operates, or maintains a business where
tobacco products are sold, nor any person who sells or offers for sale
tobacco products, shall store or display, or cause to be stored or displayed,
such tobacco products in an area or manner that is accessible to the public
without employee assistance.



(Ord. 2002-08, passed 5-9-2002; Ord. 2014-03, passed 8-14-2014)  Penalty,
see § 32.99



§ 32.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   Citations may be issued for violation of §§ 32.42,
32.43, 32.44, and 32.46.



      (2)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
32.42, 32.43, 32.44, and 32.46 shall be liable for the imposition of a civil
sanction not to exceed $25 for the first offense and $50 for each successive
offense. Each day a violation of §§ 32.42, 32.43, 32.44, and 32.46
continues after a citation for the violation has been issued constitutes a
separate violation.



      (3)   The town shall provide for payment by mail of civil
fines under §§ 32.40 through 32.48.



      (4)   Any owner, manager, operator, or employer of any
establishment controlled by §§ 32.40 through 32.48 shall, upon either
observing or being advised of a violation of § 32.43, have the obligation to
inform the violator of the appropriate requirements of this law and then
request immediate compliance.



      (5)   Any person or employer who owns, manages, operates, or
otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to §§ 32.40 through
32.48 has the responsibility:



         (a)   To properly set aside “no smoking” areas;



         (b)   To properly post signs required hereunder; and



         (c)   To take the action required by division (B)(4)
above when observing or being advised of a violation.



      (6)   Any employer who knowingly and intentionally violates §
32.44 may be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $500. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute and be
punished as a separate offense.



      (7)   By enforcing §§ 32.40 through 32.48, the town
undertakes only to promote the general welfare and health of the community.
It does not assume, nor does it impose on its officers and employees, an
obligation for breach of which it is liable in money damages to any person
claiming injury from such breach.



      (8)   Each instance of violation of § 32.48 shall constitute
a separate civil offense. For the first civil offense at a retail site, the
fine is $100. For the second and third civil offense at a retail site, the
fine is $500. However, if more than three violations occur at a retail site
in any consecutive 12-month period, the person or entity operating such
retail site shall be subject to a minimum fine of $500 or a maximum fine of
$2,500.



(Ord. 2002-08, passed 5-9-2002; Ord. 2014-03, passed 8-14-2014)



CHAPTER 33:  POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS



Section




Police Department




   33.01   Created; composition



   33.02   Police Commissioner



   33.03   Appointment of officers



   33.04   Compensation of officers



   33.05   Departmental rules and regulations



   33.06   Duties of Police Department



   33.07   Answering calls outside the town




Fire Department




   33.20   Created; composition



   33.21   Departmental rules and regulations



   33.22   Appointment of Chief



   33.23   Powers and duties of Chief



   33.24   Appointment and duties of firefighters



   33.25   Entry upon adjacent property



   33.26   Equipment



   33.27   Providing fire protection



   33.28   Acknowledgment of right-of-way



   33.29   Fire alarms



   33.30   Orders of Fire Chief



   33.31   Adoption of the International Fire Code




POLICE DEPARTMENT




§ 33.01  CREATED; COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created a Police Department for the town which shall
consist of a Chief of Police who shall also serve as Town Marshal, and as
many police officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary by the
Council for the safety and good order of the town.



(1989 Code, § 4-1-1)



§ 33.02  POLICE COMMISSIONER.



   (A)   There shall be, in addition to the Chief of Police, the office
of Police Commissioner. The duties of the Police Commissioner are as follows:



      (1)   Administrative oversight of the operations of the Police
Department;



      (2)   Periodic inspection and review of Department records,
procedures, and personnel;



      (3)   Maintenance of overall efficiency and effectiveness of
the operations of the Department;



      (4)   Managerial supervision of the Department and the Chief
of Police as related to accomplishing, expediting, and enforcing the policies
of the Council;



      (5)   Compliance enforcement with applicable state and federal
laws or regulations governing, guiding, or pertaining to the operations of
the Police Department; and



      (6)   Appointment of the Chief of Police with the concurrence
of the Council.



   (B)   The powers of the Police Commissioner shall be:



      (1)   Full authority to carry out such administrative,
personnel, and procedural actions as are necessary to achieve the policy of
the Council; and



      (2)   Authority to suspend, remove, or discharge the Chief of
Police on the basis of just cause, emergency, malfeasance of office,
misfeasance of office, or conduct unbecoming an officer.



   (C)   The Police Commissioner may or may not be a certified law
enforcement officer.



   (D)   In the absence of Council action to the contrary, the Town
Manager shall be the Police Commissioner.



(1989 Code, § 4-1-2)



§ 33.03  APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.



   The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Police Commissioner/Town
Manager with the concurrence of the Council. The Police Chief shall appoint
police officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the safety
and good order of the town by the Council.



(1989 Code, § 4-1-3)



§ 33.04  COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS.



   The Chief of Police and the police officers of the town shall be
compensated as determined by the Council. The Chief of Police shall not
receive any perquisites, commissions, or compensation for his or her services
as Chief of Police, except as the Council may prescribe.



(1989 Code, § 4-1-4)



§ 33.05  DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Police Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with
such departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be adopted
by the Council.



(1989 Code, § 4-1-5)



§ 33.06  DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   It is the duty of the Police Department, under the direction of the
Chief of Police, to:



   (A)   Enforce this code, ordinances of the town, and the statutes of
the state within jurisdictional limits as conferred by law and to arrest and
charge the violators thereof;



   (B)   Take charge of the town jail and all prisoners confined
therein, and all those who are sentenced to labor on the streets or public
works of the town and to see that orders and sentences with reference to such
are fully executed and complied with;



   (C)   Deliver any persons who may be confined in the jail upon
conviction of a crime committed under the jurisdiction of the Magistrate’s
Court to any authorized officer of the town who shall at any time demand such
prisoners. Any such authorized person so demanding and receiving such
prisoners shall work such prisoners on the streets, alleys, parks, or other
facilities of the town or on any and all authorized work as may be determined
by the Council;



   (D)   Render such account of the Police Department, its duties and
receipts as may be required by the Council, and keep records of the office
open to inspection by the Council at any time, except those records as may be
exempted by state or federal law;



   (E)   Enforce the traffic regulations of the town as specified in
Title VII of this code and enforce the traffic laws of the state within the
limits of the town;



   (F)   Inspect and ascertain the condition of traffic-control devices
of every description which have been erected within the town on the authority
of the Council and to notify the Council of any defects found therein; and



   (G)   Perform such additional duties as may be required by the
Council.



(1989 Code, § 4-1-6)



§ 33.07  ANSWERING CALLS OUTSIDE THE TOWN.



   The members of the Police Department of the town are duly authorized to
answer calls for aid and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the town
pursuant to mutual aid agreements and state statutes.



(1989 Code, § 4-1-7)




FIRE DEPARTMENT




§ 33.20  CREATED; COMPOSITION.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Fire Department for the town, which
shall consist of a Chief, an Assistant Chief, and as many firefighters as may
be deemed necessary from time to time by the Chief and approved by the Town
Manager.



   (B)   In the event that the Fire Chief is absent or that position is
open, the Assistant Fire Chief shall serve as the acting Fire Chief reporting
directly to the Town Manager.



(1989 Code, § 4-2-1)  (Ord. 2001-08, passed 10-11-2001)



§ 33.21  DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Fire Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with
such departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be adopted
by the Chief and the Town Manager and approved by the Council.



(1989 Code, § 4-2-2)  (Ord. 2001-08, passed 10-11-2001)



§ 33.22  APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF.



   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall be appointed by the
Town Manager who shall have the right to demote, dismiss, or discharge the
Chief, or if the Chief’s position is open, the Assistant Chief subject to
the Chief’s right to appeal to the Council.



   (B)   The Assistant Chief has the right to appeal directly to the
Council only if he or she is serving as the acting Chief, otherwise the
Assistant Chief would file an appeal of any such decision by the Fire Chief
with the Town Manager.



   (C)   Both the Chief and the Assistant Chief positions are
“exempt” salaried positions.



(1989 Code, § 4-2-3)  (Ord. 2001-08, passed 10-11-2001)



§ 33.23  POWERS AND DUTIES OF CHIEF.



   It shall be the duty of the Chief to:



   (A)   Be accountable to the Manager for the personnel, morale, and
general efficiency of the Fire Department;



   (B)   Direct the operations of the Fire Department subject to the
rules and regulations thereof;



   (C)   Be present at all fires, if possible, and plan and direct the
extinguishment thereof. During the progress of a fire, the authority of the
Fire Chief shall be absolute in all matters directly concerning the
extinguishment of the fire and the disposition of property endangered by it;



   (D)   Conduct suitable drills or instruction in the operation and
handling of equipment, first aid and rescue work, salvage, a study of
buildings in the town, water supplies, and all other matters generally
considered essential to good firemanship and safety of life and property from
fire;



   (E)   Assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of
arson by investigating or causing to be investigated the cause, origin, and
circumstances of all fires;



   (F)   Inspect buildings and premises and serve written notice upon
the owner or occupant to abate, within a specified time, any and all fire
hazards that may be found. For the purpose of conducting such inspection, the
Chief is hereby empowered to enter any and all buildings and premises within
the town at any reasonable hour. Any person served with such written notice
shall comply and notify the Chief of his or her compliance within a
reasonable time;



   (G)   Keep complete records of all fires, inspections, apparatus and
equipment, personnel, and other information about the work of the Department
open to Council inspection and submit a complete monthly report of such
information to the Town Manager;



   (H)   Make a complete annual report, in writing, to the Council at
such time as may be specified by the Council, and such report shall include
the information specified in division (G) above, together with comparative
data for previous years and recommendations for improving the effectiveness
of the Department;



   (I)   Enforce or cause to be enforced all ordinances, laws, and
regulations of the town and state, insofar as they pertain to fire and
safety; and



   (J)   Demote, dismiss, or expel any officer or member of the
Department for neglect or refusal to perform departmental duties, subject to
the right of any members so demoted, dismissed, or expelled to appeal
pursuant to the town’s personnel rules and procedures.



(1989 Code, § 4-2-4)  (Ord. 2001-08, passed 10-11-2001)



§ 33.24  APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF FIREFIGHTERS.



   Firefighters shall be appointed at such time and in such manner as the
Fire Chief may deem necessary, subject to the approval of the Manager. Such
appointees shall have telephones in their homes. The firefighters shall be
subject to supervision by the Fire Chief or the Assistant Fire Chief.



(1989 Code, § 4-2-5)  (Ord. 2001-08, passed 10-11-2001)



§ 33.25  ENTRY UPON ADJACENT PROPERTY.



   It is lawful for any firefighter acting under the direction of the
Chief or another officer in command to enter upon the premises adjacent to or
in the vicinity of any building or other property that is on fire, for the
purpose of extinguishing such fire. No person shall hinder, resist, or
obstruct any firefighter in the discharge of his or her duty as provided in
this subchapter.



(1989 Code, § 4-2-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 33.26  EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   The Department shall be equipped with such equipment, acquired
or leased by the town, as may be required from time to time to maintain its
efficiency and properly protect life and property from fire. Recommendations
concerning apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by the Chief, and,
after approval by the Council, such apparatus and equipment shall be
purchased in such manner as may be designated by the Council. All equipment
of the Department shall be safely and conveniently housed in such places as
may be designated by the Council.



   (B)   No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any
private purpose, nor shall any person willfully take away or conceal any
article used in any way by the Department. No person shall enter any place
where the fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment
belonging to the Department unless accompanied by, or having special
permission of, an officer or authorized member of the Department. No fire
apparatus or equipment shall be hired out or permitted to leave the fire
station except in response to a call for aid at a fire within the corporate
limits of the town or in response to a call for aid at a fire in an area
authorized for fire protection service or mutual aid under provisions of §
33.27.



(1989 Code, § 4-2-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 33.27  PROVIDING FIRE PROTECTION.



   The Council may enter into agreements or contracts to furnish fire
protection inside or outside the town or enter into mutual aid agreements,
and the Fire Department is authorized to render firefighting service pursuant
to the terms of such agreements or contracts.



(1989 Code, § 4-2-8)



§ 33.28  ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   Each member of the Department who drives a private motor vehicle shall
be issued suitable insignia which may be attached to such motor vehicle. All
motor equipment of the Department shall have right-of-way over all other
traffic when responding to an alarm. No unauthorized vehicle shall follow
within 500 feet of any apparatus belonging to the Department, nor park any
vehicle or otherwise cause any obstruction to be placed within 20 feet of the
entrance to any fire station or other place where fire apparatus is stored or
within 15 feet of any fire hydrant. No person shall drive any vehicle over
fire hose except upon specific orders from the Chief or other officer in
charge where the hose is used.



(1989 Code, § 4-2-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 33.29  FIRE ALARMS.



   Suitable arrangements or equipment shall be provided for citizens to
turn in an alarm and for notifying all members of the Department so that they
may promptly respond. It is unlawful for any person knowingly to turn in or
cause to be turned in a false alarm.



(1989 Code, § 4-2-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 33.30  ORDERS OF FIRE CHIEF.



   It is unlawful for any firefighter or citizen to refuse to obey an
order issued by the Fire Chief pursuant to his or her authority.



(1989 Code, § 4-2-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 33.31  ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.



   The International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, (IFC 2012) copyrighted by
the International Conference of Building Officials and the Western Fire
Chief’s Association, and the Uniform Fire Standards 2012 Edition (UFS 2012)
with modifications as adopted by the Arizona State Fire Marshal are hereby
adopted as the International Fire Code and the Uniform Fire Standards of the
town and are made a part of this subchapter the same as though said Code was
specifically set forth in full hereafter, at least three copies of said Codes
shall be filed in the office of the Town Manager/Clerk and kept available for
public use and inspection. With the adoption of this code and by the
provisions of the town code, the intent of the Mayor and Council is to
approve adoption and implementation of all future editions adopted by the
State of Arizona of the International Fire Code.



(1989 Code, § 4-3)  (Ord. 2001-01, passed 1-25-2001)



CHAPTER 34:  TOWN MAGISTRATE



Section




General Provisions




   34.01   Magistrate Court established



   34.02   Town Magistrate



   34.03   Powers and duties of Town Magistrate



   34.04   Proceedings of Court



   34.05   Incompatibility of office



   34.06   Home detention and electric monitoring




Discipline of Magistrate




   34.20   In general



   34.21   Due process



   34.22   Amendments



   34.23   Reports and recommendations



   34.24   Records



   34.25   Application of state rules of procedure



   34.26   Meetings



   34.27   Rules



Cross-reference:



   General offenses, see Ch. 130



   Penalty, generally, see § 10.99



   Town officials, see Ch. 31




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 34.01  MAGISTRATE COURT ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established in the town a Magistrate’s Court which
shall have jurisdiction of all violations of this code, and jurisdiction
concurrently with justices of the peace of precincts in which the town is
located of violation of laws of the state committed within the limits of the
town.



(Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-28-2002)



§ 34.02  TOWN MAGISTRATE.



   (A)   The presiding officer of the Magistrate’s Court shall be the
Town Magistrate, who shall be appointed by and report to the Town Council.
The Town Magistrate shall serve a term of two years for the initial
appointment, with the beginning and end of the term to be specified at the
time of appointment.



   (B)   (1)   Candidates for Town Magistrate must be at least 30
years old, of good moral character, admitted as a member in good standing
with the State Bar of Arizona, a resident of Maricopa County, Arizona for the
five years immediately preceding appointment and have been engaged in the
active practice of law for not less than six months immediately preceding
appointment as the Town Magistrate.



      (2)   The term active practice of law includes serving as a
judge, magistrate, or other judicial officer, or other commensurate
experience the Town Council determines to be the equivalent of practicing
law, or serving as a judge, magistrate, or other judicial officer.



   (C)   After an initial two-year term appointment, the Town Council
may reappoint the Town Magistrate. All terms for reappointment shall be for a
period of two years.



   (D)   Nothing in this subchapter shall change the town’s right,
after a due process hearing, to remove the Magistrate for cause.



(Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-28-2002; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-23-2014)



§ 34.03  POWERS AND DUTIES OF TOWN MAGISTRATE.



   The powers and duties of the Magistrate shall include:



   (A)   The powers and duties set forth and conferred upon the Town
Magistrate under the provisions of the state constitution and statutes, this
code, and the ordinances and resolutions of the town;



   (B)   The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered each action
and the proceedings of the court therein;



   (C)   (1)   Fines and deferred prosecution.



         (a)   The responsibility for establishing the amounts of
all fines, penalties, bails, bonds, or other fees or monies derived therefrom
as provided by law and in accordance with the Minimum Accounting Standards
for Arizona Courts.



         (b)   Where the Town Attorney has established a deferred
prosecution program for adult and/or juvenile offenders providing that the
Town Attorney may defer, prior to a guilty plea or a trial, or any other
proceeding in juvenile cases, the prosecution of a person committing a crime
and provide in a written deferred prosecution agreement certain terms
required to be satisfied by the defendant or juvenile prior to the dismissal
of the action, in such cases the court may require and collect a
participation fee in the amount of $100. Said fee to be paid to the town in
accordance with this subchapter and division (D) below.



      (2)   Magistrate Court Enhancement Fund.



         (a)   There is hereby created a Court Enhancement Fund,
which shall be used exclusively to enhance the technological, operational,
and security capabilities of the Magistrate Court.



         (b)   The Court Enhancement Fund shall be funded by an
enhancement fee in the amount of $10, which shall be applied to each charge,
offense, or count where the Magistrate Court imposed a fine, sanction,
penalty, or assessment. All applicable surcharges shall be applied to the
court enhancement fee, and shall be paid over to the State Supreme Court. The
enhancement fee shall also apply to fees collected for court authorized
diversion programs. COURT AUTHORIZED DIVERSION PROGRAM, as used in this
section, means a program in which an individual charged with any civil,
criminal, or petty offense is not prosecuted for the offense on successful
completion of an authorized diversion program and it includes authorized
defensive driving courses.



         (c)   The Court Enhancement Fund shall be established as
a designated fund account with the Town Finance Department. The Magistrate
Court shall collect enhancement fees and the Town Finance Department shall
deposit them in the Court Enhancement Fund in the same manner as other town
funds. Interest earned on fund monies shall be credited to, and deposited in,
the Enhancement Fund account.



         (d)   The Magistrate Court shall administer the Fund and
may make expenditures from the Fund for the purposes provided in this
section. Monies from the Fund shall supplement, not supplant, monies already
provided to the Magistrate Court by the town.



         (e)   The Magistrate Court shall annually submit to the
Mayor and Town Council a report detailing the amount of money collected and
expended during the reporting period and the progress made in court
enhancement.



      (3)   Reimbursement for costs. Any person who has been
detained on an arrest warrant or convicted of a misdemeanor criminal offense
by the Magistrate Court and sentenced to a term of incarceration in the
county jail, or any other detention facility authorized by law, may as a part
of any fine imposed by the Magistrate Court, be required to reimburse the
town for all or any part of the actual expenses the town has or will incur to
the county or other authorized detention authority by reason of the
incarceration. Jail costs include, but are not limited to, any or actual
costs incurred by the town while the misdemeanant is incarcerated; the amount
equals the number of days the misdemeanant is actually incarcerated in the
county jail or detention facility multiplied by the prevailing per diem rate
charges to the town at the time that the misdemeanant is incarcerated; and/or
any and all medical costs and fees incurred.



      (4)   Administrative fee for warrants.



         (a)   When a Magistrate of the Municipal Court issues a
warrant for failure to pay a fine, restitution, or any other monetary
obligation, or for failure to comply with a term or condition of sentence, an
administrative fee in the amount of $50 shall be imposed upon the person for
whom the arrest warrant is issued; and this fee shall be added to the amount
set forth in the arrest warrant.



         (b)   The Magistrate may require the warrant fee be paid
prior to quashing, removing, or satisfying any warrant issued by the
Municipal Court.



      (5)   Authority to waive fine or fee. The Magistrate may waive
all or any part of a fine or fee when the payment of all or any part of the
fine or fee would cause a hardship to the defendant or a waiver would be in
the interest of justice.



      (6)   Collection of fees.



         (a)   In addition to any other remedies which will be
allowed by law, the Town Attorney is authorized to file any appropriate civil
suit in any court of appropriate jurisdiction for recovery of the fees
referred to herein and/or may cause to be recorded a certified copy of any
judgement or restitution order as a lien against the defendant’s property.



         (b)   The town may, if a fine is imposed for the
violation of the town code, an ordinance, or a statute of the state within
the jurisdiction of the court, have execution against the property of the
defendant as in civil actions. Any certified copy of a judgment issued by the
Magistrate Court may be recorded within the State of Arizona or any other
state of the United States.



         (c)   A defendant who defaults in his or her obligation
for the payment of monies owed or due to the Magistrate Court including, but
not limited to, restitution, fines, sanctions, surcharges, assessments,
penalties, bonds, costs, and fees, is liable for any fees and charges
assessed by a collection agency that is licensed pursuant to A.R.S. Title 32,
Chapter 9, Article 2, as amended, and that is engaged by the Magistrate Court
to collect and enforce such payment. The collection fees and charges assessed
by the collection agency shall be added to the sum or sums due from and
chargeable against the defendant.



   (D)   Payment of all fees, fines, penalties, and other monies
collected by the court to the Treasurer;



   (E)   Submitting a monthly report to the Council summarizing court
activities for that month;



   (F)   Preparation of a schedule of civil traffic violations not
involving the death of a person, listing specific bond for each violation;



   (G)   Prepare reasonable personnel rules and regulations for
employees of the town court. Said rules must be approved by the presiding
judge of the Superior Court in the county and ratified by the Town Council
which may not withhold its ratification without due cause. During any period
of time where said personnel rules are not in force or where a situation
arises that is not covered by these rules, then the most recent Judicial
Merit System Resolution and Rules adopted by the Superior Court of the county
shall apply;



   (H)   The Magistrate shall be the Personnel Director for the town
court and shall be responsible for the hiring, discipline, and termination of
all employees of the town court subject to the court’s personnel rules; and



   (I)   Prepare an annual budget proposal for the court and
participate in the budget workshops or Council meetings where the court’s
budget will be discussed.



(Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-28-2002; Ord. 2005-04, passed 6-9-2005)



§ 34.04  PROCEEDINGS OF COURT.



   (A)   The proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the
state constitution, the applicable state statutes, and rules of the State
Supreme Court pertaining to municipal courts. The proceedings shall also be
conducted in accordance with the rules of criminal procedure for the Superior
Court, unless otherwise prescribed, and providing this code and resolutions
of the town are not in conflict therewith.



   (B)   The Magistrate Court proceedings shall be commenced by
complaint under oath and in the name of the state setting forth the offense
charged with and such particulars of time, place, person, and property as to
enable the defendant to understand distinctly the character of the offense
complained of and to answer the complaint.



   (C)   If the Magistrate is satisfied that probable cause exists that
the person committed the offense for which he or she is charged, the
Magistrate shall issue a summons or a warrant of arrest.



(Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-28-2002)



§ 34.05  INCOMPATIBILITY OF OFFICE.



   No Town Manager, Assistant Town Manager, Town Clerk, Town Marshal, Town
Engineer, Town Attorney, or anyone whose duties as an employee of the town
have a direct relationship with the administration of the town as set out in
Chapter 31 of this title shall hold the office of Town Magistrate.



(Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-28-2002)



§ 34.06  HOME DETENTION AND ELECTRIC MONITORING.



   (A)   To the extent authorized by applicable law, the Town
Magistrate or Assistant Town Magistrate (the “Judge”) of the Town
Magistrate Court (the “Court”) may, in the exercise of the Judge’s
discretion, order home detention, electronic monitoring, and alcohol/drug
testing as a term of an adult sentence ordered by the Court, as provided
herein.



      (1)   A defendant may be sentenced to home detention,
electronic monitoring, and alcohol/drug testing in any situation where such
person is sentenced or ordered confined to any jail in this state, upon such
terms and conditions as the Judge may direct.



      (2)   A defendant is not eligible for home detention if any of
the following apply:



         (a)   The defendant constitutes a risk to himself,
herself, or other members of the community;



         (b)   The defendant has a past history of violent
behavior;



         (c)   The conviction for which the defendant is being
sentenced is a domestic violence offense pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3601, as
amended;



         (d)   The conviction for which the defendant is being
sentenced is an act of prostitution or solicitation pursuant to A.R.S. §
13-3214, as amended; or



         (e)   The defendant is not eligible pursuant to A.R.S.
§ 9-499.07, as amended.



      (3)   If a defendant is sentenced to jail confinement by the
Court in any driving under the influence (“DUI”) charge (A.R.S. §§
28-1381 et seq., as amended), the Court may substitute home detention for a
portion of the jail term as provided in this section. Any defendant placed in
a home detention program as a term of a DUI sentence must serve an initial 24
consecutive hours in jail, except as provided in division (A)(4) below. The
defendant shall bear the costs of incarceration and be responsible for
payment thereof.



      (4)   If a defendant is sentenced pursuant to A.R.S. §
28-1381(K), as amended, or A.R.S. § 28-1382(D) or (E), as amended, the
defendant must first serve a minimum of 15 consecutive days in jail before
being eligible to be placed in a home detention program. The defendant shall
bear the costs of incarceration and be responsible for payment of thereof.



   (B)   A defendant placed in a home detention program shall be
subject to electronic monitoring in the defendant’s home and shall be
required to remain at home during the hours specified by the Court. A
defendant sentenced pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 28-1381 or 28-1382 shall be
tested at least once daily for the use of alcohol or drugs in a manner
approved by the Court.



   (C)   If the defendant attends educational classes in the county or
is employed within the county, the Court may permit the defendant to attend
classes or leave home for employment during specified hours. The Court may
permit the defendant to attend religious services or funerals, or to seek
medical care or other Court-approved counseling.



   (D)   The Court may, but is not required to, order that prisoners
participate in community restitution work programs. In such a program, the
following constitute acceptable community restitution work: municipal and
other government public works projects; or other projects sponsored and
supervised by public or private community organizations. All such private
community organizations must be certified as non-profit entities as defined
by Internal Revenue Code § 501(C)(3). The defendant may not be compensated
for such work. The Town Council shall act as the town’s Community
Restitution Committee unless, in its discretion, it chooses to appoint an
advisory committee. The presiding Magistrate of the town’s Court shall have
full discretion to determine which community restitution programs, if any,
shall be approved and which defendants, if any, shall be assigned to
community restitution work.



   (E)   A defendant placed in a home detention program shall bear the
expense and be responsible for payment of the full cost of the home
detention, including electronic monitoring and alcohol or drug testing costs,
to the program provider/administrator. The Court may assess a lesser amount
based on the ability of the person to pay pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-499.07(D).
Non-payment of any program costs may result in termination of home detention.
The Court shall order the defendant to reimburse the town for any home
detention costs the town incurs as a result of the defendant being sentenced
to home detention.



   (F)   (1)   The Court shall terminate a defendant’s
participation in a home detention program and require the defendant to
complete the remaining term of any sentence by jail confinement if the Court
finds the defendant:



         (a)   Has not successfully completed Court-ordered
alcohol or drug screening and treatment pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 28-1381 or
28-1382, or pursuant to any other Court-ordered program; or



         (b)   Has left the home during home detention without
permission of the Judge or supervising authority.



      (2)   The Court may terminate a defendant’s participation in
the home detention program and require jail confinement for any other
violation of the terms of the home detention order.



   (G)   As required by A.R.S. § 9-499.07(D), in addition to any other
fees or costs, the Court shall order that the defendant pay an electronic
monitoring fee of $30 per month while being electronically monitored. Said
fee shall be used by the town to offset the costs of monitoring the program.



(Ord. 2010-03, passed 11-10-2010)




DISCIPLINE OF MAGISTRATE




§ 34.20  IN GENERAL.



   (A)   The town recognizes and respects the division of powers
between the legislative branch and the judicial branch. It enforces the
concept that a judge must remain independent and free to exercise his or her
responsibilities pursuant to Administrative Order 2017-19, and the most
recent Arizona Code of Judicial Conduct and Arizona Code for Judicial
Administration (ACJA). For this reason, the Town Council enacts this
subchapter to provide appropriate enforcement of the above mentioned
standards.



   (B)   The discipline mechanism set forth in this subchapter shall be
exercised with restraint and caution and only in the event that a judicial
officer of this town is accused of violation of said standards. Discipline
shall be applied only upon notice, due process, and a showing of violation of
the standards governing the conduct of municipal judges and the statutes and
ordinances governing this town.



(Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-28-2002)



§ 34.21  DUE PROCESS.



   (A)   Any matter shall be heard either before the Town Council or,
upon consent of a majority of the Town Council, by a three-member panel
designated by the Town Council, or by a special master, not a member of the
Town Council, appointed by the Town Council. The Town Council, panel, or
special master shall designate the time and place of the hearing. If there is
a panel, members of the panel shall select a president by majority vote. The
Magistrate shall be given at least 20-days’ notice of time and place of the
hearing. Either the Town Manager/Clerk or counsel employed by the Town
Council, or both, as determined by it, shall present the matter at the
hearing. At the hearing, such evidence shall be received and oral evidence
will be taken on oath or affirmation. The Town Mayor, special master, or
chairperson of the panel, or any member designated by him or her, may issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and production of records,
documents, or other tangible things designated therein, as may be required.
No matter shall proceed under this subchapter without prior direction by the
Town Council upon reasonable cause.



   (B)   The Magistrate shall have the right to defend against the
charges, to be represented by counsel, to examine and cross-examine witnesses
and to require the issuance of subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses or
for the production of any evidentiary matter.



   (C)   The proceedings at all formal hearings shall be fully recorded
manually or by a recording device. When the hearing is before a three-member
panel or a special master, the record shall be transcribed upon request and
the original and one copy thereof shall be filed with the Town Manager/Clerk.
Cost of transcribing shall be paid by the requesting party.



   (D)   (1)   Order of hearing shall be:



         (a)   First, the party presenting the matter shall
produce evidence;



         (b)   Second, the Magistrate shall present evidence;



         (c)   Third, the party presenting the matter shall offer
rebuttal; and



         (d)   Fourth, each side shall, if desired, make brief
concluding argument.



      (2)   Burden of proof shall be on the party presenting the
matter and shall be proven by a preponderance of the evidence.



   (E)   Upon showing of an egregious act(s) that the Council finds as
constituting immediate threat to public safety or order, the Council may
suspend the Magistrate at the time of such finding and request the presiding
judge of the Superior Court in the county appoint an interim presiding judge
until conclusion of the matter or until a new Town Magistrate is appointed in
accordance with §§ 34.01 through 34.06. Any suspension shall be with pay.



(Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-28-2002)



§ 34.22  AMENDMENTS.



   The Town Council, panel, or special master may at any time allow
amendments to the notice or answer, but if amendment is allowed, the opposing
party shall be allowed time to respond. No amendments shall be allowed after
the hearing.



(Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-28-2002)



§ 34.23  REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.



   (A)   Any three-member panel or special master conducting a hearing
shall, within 20 days after its conclusion, unless additional time is allowed
by the Council, make a report to include findings of fact and suggested
conclusions of law and recommendations, and transmit such report and the
record to the Council which shall file the same in its permanent records. A
copy of the report shall be delivered forthwith to the Magistrate.



   (B)   The Council may thereafter either dismiss the matter, or if it
finds good cause it may decide the censure, removal, or retirement of the
Magistrate. Final action of the Council shall require a majority vote of its
members. The voting members need not personally have participated in or
attended earlier relevant proceedings before or taken by the Council as a
whole; but nonparticipants in the earlier proceedings shall have access to
the record thereof, which record may be transcribed and made available to
members upon request.



   (C)   Each member of the panel, and any special master appointed
under these rules, shall have the power to administer oaths for the taking of
the testimony. Every witness in every proceeding hereunder shall be sworn
upon oath or affirmation to tell the truth and not to disclose the existence
of the proceeding, until the proceeding is no longer confidential under the
rules.



   (D)   All notices, papers, and pleadings served upon, delivered, or
mailed to a Magistrate pursuant to these rules shall be enclosed in a
securely sealed envelope, marked “confidential”.



(Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-28-2002)



§ 34.24  RECORDS.



   All records of the panel or special master shall be maintained by the
Town Manager/Clerk. They shall be in such form as shall be determined by the
Council with good record keeping practice.



(Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-28-2002)



§ 34.25  APPLICATION OF STATE RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the state’s Rules
of Civil Procedure insofar as possible shall apply to the formal proceedings
hereunder. The state’s Rules of Evidence need not be strictly followed. The
Board will, however, admit into evidence only these documents or testimony
that is material and relevant to the issues at hand. Hearsay may be admitted
if the Board determines that it is reliable.



(Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-28-2002)



§ 34.26  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Town Council may call a meeting and designate when and
where the meeting of the panel or special master shall be held. The Town
Manager/Clerk shall then notify each member by telephone or by other means of
the time and place of such meeting.



   (B)   Panel members may communicate with each other by telephone or
other means as to any preliminary matters, but a formal hearing shall be
attended by not less than two members of the panel.



(Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-28-2002)



§ 34.27  RULES.



   The Town Council, panel, or special master may adopt such other rules
not inconsistent with these rules as deemed necessary and expedient in the
performance of their duties.



(Ord. 2003-03, passed 2-28-2002)



CHAPTER 35:  FINANCES AND TAXATION



Section




Taxation




   35.01   Adoption of Tax Code




TAXATION




§ 35.01  ADOPTION OF TAX CODE.



   The Tax Code of the town is hereby adopted by reference and made a part
of this code the same as though said code was specifically set forth in full
herein. At least three copies of said code shall be kept on file in the
office of the Town Manager/Clerk.



(1989 Code, § 9-1)



Cross-reference:



   Taxation, see TSO Table II



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   SEWER



      51.   STORM WATER



CHAPTER 50:  SEWER



Section




Sewer Service




   50.001   Definitions



   50.002   Applicability



   50.003   Application for service



   50.004   Charges, rates, and payments




Department and Consumer Responsibilities




   50.015   Town responsibilities and liabilities



   50.016   Consumer responsibility



   50.017   Interference



   50.018   Private sewage systems



   50.019   “Unit of service” defined; determination of units



   50.020   Tampering with equipment prohibited



   50.021   Permit required



   50.022   Application for taps



   50.023   Application



   50.024   Inspection and approval by town



   50.025   Records to be kept of building connections




Use of Public Sewers




   50.040   Prohibited substances



   50.041   Septic tank and scavenger waste haulers



   50.042   Interceptors required



   50.043   Wastes subject to approval; pretreatment interceptors



   50.044   Preliminary treatment




Administration




   50.055   Billing and collection



   50.056   Termination of service



   50.057   Annual notification to users




User Charge System




   50.070   Definitions



   50.071   Enforcement; penalties



   50.072   Sewer charges



   50.073   General requirements



   50.074   Specific requirements



   50.075   Confidentiality of information



   50.076   Stricter provisions to prevail



   50.077   Accidental discharges



   50.078   Pretreatment requirements




Sewer Connection Fees




   50.090   Purpose



   50.091   Definitions



   50.092   Fee schedule; collection; exemptions; disposition



 



   50.999   Penalty




SEWER SERVICE




§ 50.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five days at 20°C expressed in parts per million (p.p.m.) in weight.



   BRANCH SEWER. A sewer which receives sewage from lateral sewers from a
relatively small area.



   BUILDING SEWER or HOUSE SEWER. The extension from the building drain to
the building connection or other place of disposal.



   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.



   DEVELOPER. Any person engaged in the organizing and financing of a
sewage collecting system within an area tributing to a trunk sewer of the
town sewer system. Such may be either a subdivider or a legally constituted
improvement district.



   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial processes as
distinct from sanitary sewage.



   LATERAL SEWER. A sewer which discharges into a branch or other sewer
and has no other common sewer tributary to it.



   MAIN SEWER. A sewer which receives sewage from one or more branch
sewers as tributaries.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, or other body of
surface or ground water.



   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. Garbage that has been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-fourth
inch in any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer controlled by public authority.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments together with
such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used
for treating sewage.



   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage.



   SEWER CONNECTION. The connection to the public sewer and the extension
therefrom of the sewer to the property line at the alley or the curb line of
the street, whichever is applicable, depending on the location of the public
sewer.



   SEWER CONNECTION FEE. The initial sewer connection charge as set forth
in §§ 50.003 and 50.004, and shall apply to all sewer connections to the
public sewer.



   SEWER DEPARTMENT. Those officers and agents of the town supervising
sewer operations for the town.



   STANDARD METHODS or STANDARD LABORATORY PROCEDURE. The procedure
outlined in the latest edition of the book, Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage, published by the American Public Health
Association.



   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable
by laboratory filtering.



   TRUNK SEWER. A sewer which receives sewage from many tributary main
sewers, and serves as an outlet for a large territory.



   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs either
continuously or intermittently.



(1989 Code, § 14-1)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.002  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to any building,
structure, or property situated within the town, including that which may be
owned, leased, controlled, operated, or occupied by the United States, the
state, the county, the Tempe School District or by any public or quasi-public
agency, corporation, or association, except the town.



(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.003  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.



   No sewer connection connecting the town sanitary sewer system to any
consumer shall be made or used by any person or the town except upon written
application furnished to the town by the owner of the premises to which
sanitary sewer service is to be furnished or his or her authorized agent. An
initial sewer connection fee shall be required in addition to a rental charge
for such sanitary sewer connection according to the rates fixed by the town
until the service is discontinued by order of the Sewer Department or written
order of the owner or his or her authorized agent. The initial sewer
connection fee is non-refundable.



(1989 Code, § 14-2-1)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)  Penalty, see §
50.999



§ 50.004  CHARGES, RATES, AND PAYMENTS.



   (A)   The initial sewer connection fee and minimum charge shall be
as determined from time to time by the Council by resolution.



   (B)   It is hereby determined necessary for the protection of the
public health, safety, and welfare to conform with federal, state, and local
laws and regulations that a system of charges for sewerage service be
established which allocates the cost of providing sewerage service to each
user in such a manner that the allocated costs are proportionate to the cost
of providing sewerage service to that user insofar as those costs can
reasonably be determined. A sewer use charge is hereby established.



   (C)   Rates for each fiscal year for the sewer use charge shall be
established biennially by resolution of the Council on or before the last day
of the previous fiscal year. The rate schedule shall establish separate rates
for users in the commercial classification. Rate schedules shall be based
upon volume of waste water, discharge, and BOD and SS of the waste water
discharge. Rates shall be designed to recover the cost of rendering sewage
services for the year during which the rates shall be in effect. Rates shall
be established so as to maintain adequate fund reserves, to provide for
reasonable expected variations in the cost of providing services, as well as
variations in the demand for service. The annual review of rates shall be
conducted so as to accomplish the following:



      (1)   Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and
maintenance costs among users and user charges;



      (2)   Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total costs
necessary to the proper operation and maintenance of the sewerage system; and



      (3)   Apply excess revenue collected from a class of users to
the cost of operation and maintenance of the system attributable to that
class for the next year and adjust the rate accordingly.



   (D)   The Sewer Department shall submit annually to the Council not
later than 60 days prior to the end of the fiscal year an annual sewer
report, including a recommended rate schedule for each sewer use charge
established herein for the following fiscal year. The report shall contain
data utilized in determining said rate schedule.



   (E)   The rate schedules adopted by the Council shall be based upon
the following factors:



      (1)   The total applicable cost of salaries and benefits of
employees engaged in providing sewerage service;



      (2)   Applicable operating expenses, including parts,
materials, and services incurred in providing sewerage service;



      (3)   Applicable equipment replacement costs necessitated by
the provision of sewerage services;



      (4)   Appropriate indirect costs in rendering sewerage-related
services such as purchasing, accounting, billing, and administration;



      (5)   Other pertinent factors as determined by the Council; and



      (6)   The sewer user charge rate shall be determined according
to the following formula:



                  UC = VQ x VOM + C OM     



                             (CN) (12)




   UC      = User charge




   VQ      = Volume of waste water in millions of gallons per unit
per month



   VOM      = Unit cost of sewerage service allocable in one million
gallons of waste water



   CN      = Number of sewer customers



   COM      = Cost of sewerage service allocable by customer



   (F)   For the purposes of determining the sewer use charge, users
shall be assigned by the Sewer Department to one of the following
classifications: residential or commercial.



   (G)   A proportionate charge shall be made to all users that
discharge waste water, either directly or indirectly, into the town sewerage
system. Such charges shall be based on the rate schedules issued pursuant to
division (C) above and the cost factors listed in division (E) above.



   (H)   Any user who fails or refuses to install a water meter to any
source of water supply used, within 30 days after written notice by the
Director of sewers to do so, shall be charged on water usage estimated by the
Sewer Department.



   (I)   A sewer bill shall be rendered monthly.



   (J)   There shall be established a Sewerage Operations, Maintenance,
and Replacement Fund. All sewer user charge revenues shall be allocated to
the Sewerage System Operation, Maintenance, and Replacement Fund, and such
Fund shall be utilized.



(1989 Code, § 14-2-2)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)




DEPARTMENT AND CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITIES




§ 50.015  TOWN RESPONSIBILITIES AND LIABILITIES.



   (A)   The Sewer Department shall not be responsible for the
installation, maintenance, or inspection of the consumer’s service line,
piping, or apparatus or for any defects therein.



   (B)   The Sewer Department shall have the right to refuse service,
unless the consumer’s lines or piping are installed in such manner as to
prevent cross-connections or backflow.



   (C)   Under normal conditions, the consumer shall be notified of any
anticipated interruption of service.



   (D)   The Sewer Department shall not be responsible for the
negligence of third persons or forces beyond the control of the Department
resulting in any interruption of service or damage to the property of the
consumer.



   (E)   The Sewer Department may refuse service to any prospective
consumer when the capacity of the sewer system will not permit additional
loads being placed thereon.



(1989 Code, § 14-3-1)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.016  CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Building or house sewer connections on the consumer’s
premises shall be so arranged as to provide service to one lot. If additional
service is required, it will be considered as a separate and individual
account.



   (B)   The consumer’s house or building service line, sewer
connection, and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer,
at the consumer’s expense, in a safe and efficient manner and in accordance
with the town’s rules and regulations and in full compliance with the
regulations of the State Department of Health Services.



   (C)   The consumer shall safeguard the town’s property placed on
the consumer’s premises and shall permit access to it only by the
authorized representatives of the town.



   (D)   In the event that any loss or damage to the property of the
town or any accident or injury to persons or property is caused by or results
from the negligence or wrongful act of the consumer, his or her agents or
employees, the cost of necessary repairs or replacements shall be paid by the
consumer to the town and any liability otherwise resulting shall be assumed
by the consumer. The amount of such loss or damage or the cost of repairs may
be added to the consumer’s bill, and, if not paid, service may be
discontinued after providing notice and an opportunity for a hearing.



   (E)   The town may discontinue sewer service for the following
additional reasons:



      (1)   To prevent fraud or abuse; or



      (2)   The consumer’s willful disregard of or refusal to
comply with this chapter or other rules as may be adopted by the Council.



   (F)   When service to a consumer shall require the laying of any
town sewer lines or the installation of any other town property on, under,
across, or over the consumer’s property, the consumer will grant to the
town an easement, right-of-way, or license for such installation.



(1989 Code, § 14-3-2)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.017  INTERFERENCE.



   It is unlawful for any person:



   (A)   To interfere in any way with the officers of the Water
Department, Sewer Department, or building inspector in the discharge of any
of their duties, either in the tapping of any sewer pipe, main, or lateral
belonging to the town or in the laying or connecting of such pipe, main, or
lateral;



   (B)   To dig up or cause to be dug up any street or alley in the
town for the purpose of connection with the sewer system of the town without
first obtaining a permit from the Sewer Department; or



   (C)   To dig up, after obtaining a permit, any portion of any street
or alley of the town for the purpose of connecting with the sewer system and
fail or neglect to place the street or alley in its original condition under
the supervision of the Sewer Department and as required by the town.



(1989 Code, § 14-3-3)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)  Penalty, see §
50.999



§ 50.018  PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Compliance with subchapter. Except as provided in this
subchapter, it is unlawful to construct where sewer service is available
within the town any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except replacement of
present system is allowed.



   (B)   When permitted; sanitation. Where a public sanitary or
combined sewer is not available within the town or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the town, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system, which complies with the regulations of the State
Department of Health Services. Such private sewage disposal system shall be
constructed, maintained, and operated at all times in a sanitary manner.



(1989 Code, § 14-3-4)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)  Penalty, see §
50.999



§ 50.019  “UNIT OF SERVICE” DEFINED; DETERMINATION OF UNITS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, UNIT OF SERVICE shall be each
separate occupancy, house, store, or building so situated upon any lot within
the town that is served by the town sewer system, or in the opinion of the
Town Manager could be served separately from any other occupancy, residence,
house, store, or building upon the same lot, irrespective of the number of
residences, houses, stores, or buildings upon such lot, even though two or
more of such occupancies, residences, houses, stores, or buildings are held
or owned by the same person. The determination of the Town Manager as to
whether any house, occupancy, residence, store, or building comes within the
meaning of this section so as to require a separate sewer connection shall be
final; provided, that the owner or occupant of such premises shall have the
right to appeal from such decision of the Town Manager to the Town Council at
its next regular meeting, and in the event of any such appeal being taken,
the determination of the Town Council shall be final.



(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.020  TAMPERING WITH EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED.



   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the town sewage system.



(1989 Code, § 14-3-5)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)  Penalty, see §
50.999



§ 50.021  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections
with, or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Sewer
Department.



   (B)   The sewer service customers shall maintain the building
connection or house connection at his or her sole expense.



   (C)   When required by the Public Works Director, the owner of any
property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install
a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation
and sampling of the wastes. Such manholes when required shall be accessible
and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved
by the Director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her
expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.



(1989 Code, § 14-3-6)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)  Penalty, see §
50.999



§ 50.022  APPLICATION FOR TAPS.



   (A)   Before any sewer tap is made, the sewer connection fee
computed in accordance with § 50.092 (and all amendments thereto) of the
code shall be paid to the town.



   (B)   Sewer taps and sewer stubs will be the responsibility of the
person requiring such connections. This includes excavation, installation,
backfill, and asphalt repair subject to town specifications.



   (C)   Any person desiring to make a sewer tap shall notify the
Public Works Director at least 24 hours prior to making the tap.



   (D)   All sewer taps shall be inspected and approved by the town.



(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989; Ord. 2006-03, passed 3-23-2006)



§ 50.023  APPLICATION.



   Upon issuance of a required permit to any person, each and every permit
issued shall be presented by the person to the Sewer Department and
application made for the building connection.



(1989 Code, § 14-3-7)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.024  INSPECTION AND APPROVAL BY TOWN.



   (A)   Inspectors.



      (1)   Inspections of every facility that is involved, either
directly or indirectly, with the discharge of waste water to the town’s
sewage system may be made by the Town Manager, or his or her designee, as he
or she deems necessary.



      (2)   These facilities shall include, but not be limited to:
sewers; sewage pumping plants; pollution control plants; all industrial
processes; industrial waste water generation, conveyance, and pretreatment
facilities; devices and connection sewers and all similar sewage facilities.
Inspections may be made to determine that such facilities are maintained and
operated properly and are adequate to meet the provisions of this chapter.



      (3)   Access to all of the above facilities or to other
facilities directly or indirectly connected to the town’s sewage system
shall be given to authorized personnel of the town at all reasonable times
including those occasioned by emergency conditions. Any permanent or
temporary obstruction to easy access to the sewage facility to be inspected
shall promptly be removed by the facility user or owner at the written or
verbal request of the Town Manager, or his or her designee, and shall not be
replaced.



      (4)   No person shall interfere with, delay, resist, or refuse
entrance to an authorized town inspector attempting to inspect any waste
water generation, conveyance, or treatment facility connected directly or
indirectly to the town’s sewage system.



   (B)   Construction inspections.



      (1)   All sewers to be attached directly or indirectly to a
town sewer shall be inspected by personnel of the town during construction.
At least 48 hours prior to cutting into the town’s sewer, the town shall be
notified.



      (2)   In making a connection to a town sewer, no physical
alteration on the town’s facilities shall commence until an inspector is
present. No waste water shall be discharged into any sewage facility
tributary to a town facility prior to obtaining inspections and approval of
sewage construction by the town.



      (3)   Following satisfactory completion of construction, the
town will issue a construction inspection certificate upon request.



(1989 Code, § 14-3-8)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.025  RECORDS TO BE KEPT OF BUILDING CONNECTIONS.



   The Sewer Department shall keep a record of all building connections
made, the purpose for which they are to be used, together with the name of
the owner of the property, his or her agent or representative.



(1989 Code, § 14-3-9)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)




USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS




§ 50.040  PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   Prohibited substances. It shall be unlawful for any person to
discharge or cause to be discharged to the sanitary sewers:



      (1)   Any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof
runoff, surface drainage, cooling water, or unpolluted process waters that
may constitute inflow as defined in this chapter;



      (2)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard to
the system or treatment plant;



      (3)   Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts that will cause
obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference or damage with the
system or treatment plant;



      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic, radioactive,
poisonous, or other substances in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere
with any sewage treatment process, cause corrosive structural damage,
constitute a hazard to humans, or create any hazard to the sewerage system or
in receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;



      (5)   Any waters with a pH of less than 5 or greater than 9.5;



      (6)   Any waters with a temperature greater than 150°F
(66°C); and/or



      (7)   Any water or waste greater than the following parameters
(mg/l) ;

 


Substance

 

Milligrams Per Liter





Arsenic
 

0.1



Barium
 

10.0



Boron
 

10.0



Cadmium
 

0.1



Chromium VI
 

0.5



Copper
 

10.0



Cyanide (includes cyanates)
 

0.1



Dissolved sulfides
 

0.5



Lead
 

0.5



Manganese
 

0.5



Mercury
 

0.05



Selenium
 

0.1



Silver
 

0.5



Total grease, oil, etc
 

100.0



Zinc
 

50.0





 



   (B)   Enforcement. The Public Works Director shall issue and
enforce, through the issuance of industrial waste water permits, other
prohibitions and limitations required by state or federal law, or as the
Director determines necessary.



   (C)   No new connections. There shall be no new connections from
inflow sources as defined in this chapter into the town sewerage system.



   (D)   Discharge of certain wastes prohibited. Except as provided in
this chapter, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes into any public sewer:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F;



      (2)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts
per million by weight of fat, oil, or grease;



      (3)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas;



      (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;



      (5)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, grits such as
brick, cement, onyx, carbide, or any other solid or viscous substance capable
of causing obstruction to the flow of sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works;



      (6)   Any waters or wastes having pH lower than 5 or higher
than 9.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works;



      (7)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic, radioactive, or
poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;



      (8)   Any waters or wastes containing dissolved or suspended
solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant;



      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of
creating a public nuisance;



      (10)   Any water or waste that has in any way been diluted as
a substitute for pretreatment for the purpose of obtaining compliance with
any categorical standard or pretreatment requirement imposed by this chapter,
except where dilution is expressly authorized by an categorical standard;



      (11)   Any water or waste that could cause a violation of any
categorical standard or pretreatment requirement; and/or



      (12)   Any water or waste that is transported from the point
of discharge to the POTW by any septic tank pumper, chemical waste hauler, or
similar transporter unless the transporter has first:



         (a)   Disclosed to the Director the origin, nature,
concentration, and volume of all pollutants to be discharged; and



         (b)   Obtained the consent of the Director to discharge.



(1989 Code, § 14-4-1)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)  Penalty, see §
50.999



§ 50.041  SEPTIC TANK AND SCAVENGER WASTE HAULERS.



   (A)   All persons or companies wishing to discharge scavenger wastes
into the sewerage system must first obtain a scavenger waste discharge permit
from the Public Works Director. Permit applications shall include information
on company ownership, identification, and license number of all trucks to be
used for delivery of waste to town sewerage facilities. It shall also include
truck capacity and other information pertinent to discharge to the sewerage
system. Permit applications shall be signed by a responsible owner or manager
of the company applying for permission to discharge. All waste-hauling
equipment operated by companies with permits shall be registered with the
Public Works Department and shall be identifiable by display of an assigned
registration number and the truck capacity in gallons.



      (1)   The permit provided for in this section shall be issued
by the Public Works Director to all applicants who comply with the terms and
conditions set forth in this section, upon the payment of a permit fee
established by resolution of the Town Council.



      (2)   The permit issued as provided for in this section shall
expire one year after the date of issue.



      (3)   Noncompliance with any part of this section or
subsequent regulations shall subject the permit holder to revocation of its
permit to utilize the services of the town sewerage system for disposal of
scavenger wastes. Reissuance of a permit to discharge after revocation shall
be at the discretion of the Public Works Director and may be made subject to
such conditions as he or she deems appropriate.



   (B)   The Director may establish such regulations as he or she deems
necessary to control the discharge of scavenger wastes to the town sewerage
system.



   (C)   Normal wastes from septic tanks, sewage treatment plants, and
the like, may be discharged routinely. Permission to discharge other wastes
that are not readily biodegradable or are not known to be compatible to the
operation of waste water treatment plants shall be refused. Special request
must be made to the Public Works Department prior to discharge of any
materials of questionable acceptability. Some specific reasons for refusal of
service shall include:



      (1)   Material deleterious to treatment plant operations or
operators, such as oils, greases, gasoline, toxics, volatile solvents, sand,
metallic particles, or paints;



      (2)   Materials which cause unusual expense in handling and
treatment, unless prior arrangements have been made for the payment of
additional cost of service; and



      (3)   Materials which would inhibit the performance of the
treatment plant, such as acids, plating wastes, or toxic materials.



   (D)   The discharge of scavenger wastes shall be permitted only at
locations and during such hours as shall be established by the Public Works
Director. The discharge of scavenger wastes to the sewerage system at any
other location is forbidden.



   (E)   (1)   Fees and charges for treatment of normal scavenger
wastes shall be based on the costs of providing such services and on the
expected overall average characteristics of such discharges, as determined by
the Public Works Director.



      (2)   The Director also may designate characteristics on which
to base charges in special situations, such as discharges from sewage holding
tanks, on submission of proof that waste discharges have other-than-expected
overall average concentrations and with provisions of positive identification
procedures.



      (3)   Charges may be billed at monthly intervals or at the
discretion of the Director, and shall be considered delinquent if not paid
within 30 days of the billing date. Delinquency in payment shall be a basis
for revocation of the permit. The fees shall be established by resolution of
the Town Council.



(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.042  INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Public Works Department, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes, sand, and other excessive amounts or any flammable
wastes and other harmful ingredients except that such interceptors shall not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.



   (B)   Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.
They shall be of substantial construction, water-tight and equipped with
easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gas-tight and
water-tight.



   (C)   Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall
be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.



(1989 Code, § 14-4-2)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.043  WASTES SUBJECT TO APPROVAL; PRETREATMENT INTERCEPTORS.



   (A)   The admission into the town sewerage system of any waters or
wastes having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per
million by weight of suspended solids, containing any quantity of substances
having the characteristics described above, or having an average daily flow
of greater than 25,000 gallons shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Public Works Director.



   (B)   (1)   If necessary, the Public Works Director may require
an owner to provide, at his or her sole expense, such preliminary treatment
of wastes as may be necessary to reduce the BOD to 300 parts per million and
the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight, reduce the
objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits
provided in this section, or control the quantities and rates of discharge of
such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be
submitted for approval of the Public Works Director and the Engineering
Division of the State Board of Health. No construction of such facilities
shall be commenced until approved by the Director in writing.



      (2)   Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his or her own expense. The owner
shall submit compliance reports from a qualified testing laboratory when
required by the Director.



   (C)   If necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease or oil in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand,
or other harmful ingredients, the Public Works Director may require the owner
to provide, at his or her sole expense, grease, oil, and sand interceptors;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Director and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be
constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and
extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction,
water-tight, and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in
place, shall be gas-tight and water-tight.



(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.044  PRELIMINARY TREATMENT.



   (A)   Required. Where necessary in the opinion of the Sewer
Department, the owner shall provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary
treatment as may be necessary to:



      (1)   Reduce the BOD to 300 parts per million and the
suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight;



      (2)   Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to
within the maximum limits provided for in § 50.040; or



      (3)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such
waters or wastes.



   (B)   Approval. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be
submitted for approval of the Sewer Department and the state’s Department
of Health Services. No construction of such facilities shall be commenced
until such approvals are obtained in writing.



   (C)   Maintenance of facilities. Where preliminary treatment
facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or
her expense.



   (D)   Enforcement. The Sewer Department shall also enforce federal
preliminary treatment as set forth by 40 C.F.R. part 403.



(1989 Code, § 14-4-4)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)




ADMINISTRATION




§ 50.055  BILLING AND COLLECTION.



   For purposes of billing, collection, and enforcement, the Town Manager
has the authority to delegate said duties to another agency, city, or
municipality.



(1989 Code, § 14-5-1)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.056  TERMINATION OF SERVICE.



   (A)   It is the policy of the town that sewer or water services will
not be cut off without allowing the consumer the right to have ten days
written notice of such cut-off. If the consumer within ten days requests a
hearing, said hearing shall be held by the Town Manager, at which time the
consumer has a right to be represented by counsel.



   (B)   It is the intent of this section that the consumer shall be
afforded complete due process before sewer or water services are cut-off.



   (C)   The above stated policy will only be in effect if the Town
Manager himself or herself is handling this phase of sewer management. If,
pursuant to § 50.055, another town or municipality has been delegated for
billing collection and enforcement, then the town incorporates by reference
that town or municipality’s policy for sewer and water service cut-off.



(1989 Code, § 14-5-2)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.057  ANNUAL NOTIFICATION TO USERS.



   Each user will be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a
regular bill, of the sewer user charge rate and that proportion of the total
bill attributable to operations, maintenance, and replacement costs for sewer
service.



(1989 Code, § 14-5-3)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)




USER CHARGE SYSTEM




§ 50.070  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVED LABORATORY PROCEDURES.  The measurements, tests and analyses
of the characteristics of water and wastes in accordance with analytical
procedures determined acceptable by federal guidelines as established in 40
C.F.R. part 136, or as approved by the regional administrator, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.



   AVERAGE QUALITY.  The arithmetic average (weighted by flow value) of
all the daily determinations of concentration, as that term is defined in
this section made during a calendar month.



   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
conditions for five days at a temperature of 20º C., reported in milligrams
per liter (mg/l).



   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS.  Federal categorical pretreatment standards
issued in accordance with section 307 of the Clean Water Act.



   COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  The quantity of oxygen consumed from a
chemical oxidation of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or
waste water, expressed in mg/l.



   COOLING WATER.  The clean waste water discharged from any heat
transfer system, such as condensation, air condition, cooling or
refrigeration.



   DAILY COMPOSITE SAMPLE.  A sample of effluent continuously collected
over a normal operating day.



   DAILY COMPOSITE SAMPLE QUALITY.  The concentration of some parameter
tested in a daily composite sample, as that term is defined in this section,
and reported proportional to flow.



   DAILY DETERMINATION OF CONCENTRATION. For composite samples, DAILY
DETERMINATION OF CONCENTRATION shall be the same as daily composite sample
quality, as that term is defined in this section. For grab samples, the DAILY
DETERMINATION OF CONCENTRATION shall be the arithmetic average (weighted by
flow value) of all grab sample qualities as that term is defined in this
section, determined for any calendar day.



   DEPARTMENT. Those officers, agents or designees of the Town Manager who
supervise public works operations and are responsible for the public works of
the town.



   DISCHARGED. The disposal of sewage, water, or any liquid from any sewer
user into the sewerage system.



   DOMESTIC WASTE. A typical residential-type waste which requires no
pretreatment under the provisions of this chapter before discharging into the
sanitary sewer system excluding all commercial, manufacturing, and industrial
wastes.



   ESTABLISHMENT OR PLANT. Any establishment or plant producing liquid
waste, with or without suspended solids, required to be discharged into the
town sewer system.



   GRAB SAMPLE. The concentration of some parameter tested in a grab
sample, as that term is defined in this section.



   INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE (WASTE). Any introduction into the POTW of a
nondomestic pollutant which:



      (1)   Is produced by a source which would be subject to any
categorical standards or pretreatment requirements if such source were to be
discharged to the POTW; and



      (2)   Contains any substance or pollutant for which a
discharge limitation or prohibition has been established by any categorical
standard or pretreatment requirement.



   INDUSTRIAL USER PERMIT. The permit granted by the town which each
industrial user must first obtain prior to causing or allowing any industrial
discharge to the POTW.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Includes:



      (1)   Any nonresidential user of the sewer system who causes
an industrial discharge;



      (2)   Any nonresidential user of the sewer system which either
discharges or produces a waste which potentially could be discharged to the
POTW which would be subject to any categorical standard or pretreatment
requirement;



      (3)   Has control over the disposal of waste as described in
divisions (1) or (2) above; or



      (4)   Has the right of possession and control over any
property which produces a waste as described in divisions (1), (2), or (3)
above.



   INFLOW. Water other than waste water that enters a sewerage system
(including sewer service connections) from sources such as roof leaders,
cellar drains, foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy areas,
manhole covers, cross-connections between storm sewers and sanitary sewers,
catch basins, cooling towers, storm waters, surface runoff, street-wash
waters, or drainage.



   INTERFERENCE. Inhibition or disruption of the sewer system treatment
process or operations as the result of the discharge of any pollutant capable
of causing or significantly contributing to the:



      (1)   Violation of any NPDES permit standard which has been
imposed on the town;



      (2)   Town’s inability to reasonably allow the maximum
benefit reuse of POTW residuals; or



      (3)   Town’s inability to reasonably provide the least
expensive method of disposal for POTW residuals.



   MAINTENANCE. Keeping the treatment works in a state of repair,
including expenditures necessary to maintain the capacity (capability) for
which the works were designed and constructed.



   NPDES PERMIT. A National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit,
issued to the town by the EPA which imposes federal standards governing the
quality of the treatment effluent discharge from the POTW.



   PERMITTEE OR PERMIT HOLDER. Any person, firm, association, corporation,
or trust which owns, operates, processes, or controls an establishment or
plant being operated under a valid industrial waste permit to discharge waste
into the town sewer system.



   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural wastes.



   POTW. Publicly owned treatment works and connecting sewer collection
system which are owned and/or operated, in whole or in part, by the town and
which provide the town with waste water collection and disposal service.



   POTW RESIDUALS. All POTW effluent and/or solids, including sludge,
scum, screenings, and grit, which are the byproduct of waste water treatment
operations and which must be discharged to the environment for ultimate
disposal and/or reuse.



   PRETREATMENT. The physical, chemical, biological, or other treatment of
any industrial discharge, prior to discharge to the POTW, for the purpose of:



      (1)   Reducing the amount of concentration of any pollutant;



      (2)   Eliminating the discharge of any pollutant; or



      (3)   Altering the nature of any pollutant characteristic to a
less harmful state.



   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. All of the duties or responsibilities
imposed upon the POTW users by this chapter.



   PRODUCER. Any person, firm, association, corporation, or trust which
owns, operates, processes, or controls an establishment or plant, whether or
not a permittee.



   REPLACEMENT. Those expenditures made for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories, and/or appurtenances during the useful life of the
treatment works which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance
of the treatment works for which they were designed and constructed.



   SLUG LOAD. Any pollutant discharged to the POTW in such volume or
strength as to cause interference. In particular, any pollutant
concentration, quantity, or flow rate which, during any period of 15 minutes
or more, is greater than five times the average 24-hour concentration,
quantity, or flow rate for such pollutant during normal operation.



   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION. A coded classification of
industries based upon economic activity developed by the U.S. Department of
Commerce, as published in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual,
1987, Office of Management and Budget.



   STANDARD METHODS. The procedure as described in the most current
edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Waste Water,
published by the American Health Association, or the most current edition of
Manual of Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes, published by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids measured in milligrams per liter that
either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, waste water, or
other liquids and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration
device, as defined in the standard methods as defined in this section.



   SYSTEM DESIGN CAPACITY. The design capacity for normal domestic waste
water as established by accepted engineering standards.



   TOTAL ORGANIC CARBON (TOC). The total of all organic compounds
expressed in milligrams per liter as determined by the combustion infrared
method prescribed by approved laboratory procedures.



   TREATMENT PARAMETER. A fundamental characteristic of sewage around
which treatment is designed, such as, but not limited to, flow, BOD,
suspended solids, and phosphorus.



   USER. Any person, lot, parcel of land, building, premises, municipal
corporation, or other political subdivision that discharges, causes, or
permits the discharge of waste water into the town sewerage system.



   WASTE WATER. Any liquid or water-carried pollutant, including any
industrial discharge, which is introduced into the POTW from any dwelling,
commercial building, industrial facility, or institution.



(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.071  ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES.



   (A)   Charges levied pursuant to this subchapter shall be collected
by the Public Works Department. The Public Works Director shall make and
enforce such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary for the safe,
economical, and efficient management and protection of the town’s sewerage
system and for the construction and use of the sewers and connections to the
sewerage system. Sewer design and construction and infiltration and
exfiltration test shall conform to Maricopa Association of Governments
specifications, as same may be amended from time to time. The regulation,
collection, rebating, and refunding of such sewer charges shall be the
responsibility of the Management Services Department. The Public Works
Director shall have the authority to deny or condition new sources of sewage
or increases from existing sources to the sewerage system.



   (B)   The Director shall have the authority to regulate the volume
and flow rate of discharge to the sewage works, and to establish permissible
limits of concentration for various specific substances, materials, waters,
or wastes that are prohibited from entering the sewage works.



   (C)   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or waste
having:



      (1)   A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300
milligrams per liter by weight;



      (2)   Containing more than 350 milligrams per liter by weight
of suspended solids;



      (3)   Containing any quantity of substances having the
characteristics described in § 50.040; or



      (4)   Having an average daily flow of greater than 25,000
gallons shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director.



   (D)   The Director shall impose charges on any user of the town’s
sewage works who discharges wastes having a strength greater than normal
sewage or containing nonpermissible quantities or prohibited substances into
the public sewer system. The charges so imposed shall be based on the extra
costs incurred by the town in surveillance, sampling and testing of the
discharges, for additional operating and maintenance expenses, or for any
other action required to identify, handle, process, or supplement normal
activities due to the unauthorized discharge of excessive strength or unusual
character wastes, plus overhead charges. Failure by a user so charged to pay
the charges and to provide such corrective measures as may be required to
prevent further unauthorized discharges, after due notice by the Director and
being given a reasonable time to comply, shall be sufficient cause to
discontinue sewer service to the premises.



   (E)   (1)   Inspections of every facility that is involved,
either directly or indirectly, with the discharge of waste water to the
town’s sewage system may be made by the Public Works Director or his or her
designate as he or she deems necessary.



      (2)   These facilities shall include, but not be limited to,
sewers; sewage pumping plants; pollution control plants; all industrial
processes; industrial waste water generation, conveyance, and pretreatment
facilities; devices and connecting sewers; and all similar sewage facilities.
Inspections may be made to determine that such facilities are maintained and
operated properly and are adequate to meet the provisions of this subchapter.



      (3)   Access to all of the above facilities or to other
facilities directly or indirectly connected to the town’s sewage systems
shall be to authorized personnel of the town at all reasonable times,
including those occasioned by emergency conditions. Any permanent or
temporary obstruction to easy access to the sewage facility to be inspected
shall promptly be removed by the facility user or owner at the written or
verbal request of the Director or his or her designate, and shall not be
replaced.



      (4)   If consent to inspect has been sought and refused, or if
facts or circumstances reasonably justify a failure to seek such consent, the
Director shall follow the procedures to obtain a search warrant.



   (F)   The Director shall issue or amend as applicable industrial
user permits within 60 days of receiving the application for such permit or
amended permit. Once issued, a permit:



      (1)   Will be for a period of time not to exceed two years. A
permit may be terminated by revocation by the Director or upon voluntary
surrender of the permit by the permittee at an earlier date;



      (2)   Is not transferable by the permittee; and



      (3)   Will specifically identify all applicable discharge
prohibitions and limitations which the Director will enforce.



   (G)   The Director shall receive and analyze all self-monitoring
reports and notices submitted by industrial users.



   (H)   The Director shall randomly sample and analyze effluent from
POTW users and conduct those surveillance and inspection activities needed to
identify, independently of any information supplied by users, occasional or
continuing noncompliance with any categorical standard or pretreatment
required.



   (I)   The Director shall investigate instances of noncompliance with
any categorical standard of pretreatment requirement when notice of any
actual or probable noncompliance has been received by the Director or any
representative of the Director.



   (J)   The Director shall notify POTW users of noncompliance with
categorical standards or pretreatment requirements discovered by the
Director. Such notice shall also contain a demand for any appropriate
corrective action, which is necessary to meet the applicable requirements of
this subchapter. Any POTW user will be allowed opportunity to respond to an
order of the Director before any enforcement action against such user is
initiated. Where there is endangerment of the health and welfare of persons,
however, the Director may halt or prevent a discharge without providing
opportunity to respond to any such order.



   (K)   The Director shall comply with the public participation
requirements of 40 C.F.R. part 105 in connection with the town’s
enforcement of any categorical standard.



   (L)   The Director shall impose appropriate penalties for
noncompliance with any of the requirements of this subchapter. Such penalties
may include any or all of the following:



      (1)   Suspension or revocation of any industrial user permit
for the failure of an industrial user to comply with the pertinent
requirements of such permit;



      (2)   Termination of POTW services;



      (3)   Restricting or otherwise limiting allowable discharges;
and/or



      (4)   Requesting that the Town Attorney commence criminal
and/or civil action against any user violating any requirement of this
subchapter.



   (M)   The Director shall:



      (1)   Determine which actual or threatened discharge to the
POTW will cause interference with the POTW or will present, or may present,
an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of any
person and/or the environment;



      (2)   Abate any actual or threatened discharge which would
violate any categorical standard or pretreatment requirement imposed by this
subchapter. In the minimum, the Director will be able to promptly plug or
disconnect any sewer service connected to the POTW; and



      (3)   Correct or mitigate any injury to the environment, the
POTW, or to any other property as a result of any discharge in violation of a
categorical standard or pretreatment requirement imposed by this subchapter.



   (N)   The Director shall annually publish, in the largest daily
newspaper published in the town, public notice of all industrial users who at
least once during the preceding 12-month period were not in substantial
compliance with any categorical standard or pretreatment requirement imposed
by this subchapter. This same notice shall also summarize all enforcement
actions taken by the town during the same 12-month period.



   (O)   The Director shall provide all POTW users with notice of:



      (1)   Applicable changes in federal and state law governing
the disposal/reuse of pollutants produced by any industrial user, regardless
of whether or not such pollutants are disposed of by discharge to the POTW;
and



      (2)   The adoption of, and any substantial amendment of, this
subchapter. In addition, the Director shall file with the Town Manager/Clerk
three copies of all federal statutes and regulations cited by this subchapter
in order to allow regulated users adequate opportunity to be informed of the
applicable federal requirements incorporated in this subchapter by reference.



(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.072  SEWER CHARGES.



   (A)   It is hereby determined necessary for the protection of the
public health, safety, and welfare and to conform with federal, state, and
local laws and regulations that a system of charges for sewer service be
established with allocates the cost of providing sewerage service to each
user in such a manner that the allocated costs are proportionate to the cost
of providing sewerage service to that user insofar as those costs can
reasonably be determined. A proportionate charge shall be made to all users
that discharge waste water, either directly or indirectly, in the town
sewerage system. Such charges shall be based on the rates established
pursuant to divisions (D) and (E) below. In addition, each user which
discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of
managing the effluent or the sludge of the sewage treatment works shall pay
for such increased costs.



   (B)   There are hereby established the following sewer charges which
shall be in lieu of any other town sanitary sewer service charges:



      (1)   Sewer use charge; and



      (2)   Sewerage system capacity charge.



   (C)   For the purpose of determining the sewer use charge, users
shall be assigned by the Public Works Department to subcategories of user
classifications as required.



   (D)   (1)   A rate schedule for the sewer use charge shall
establish separate rates for each subcategory of user classification
established by the Public Works Director as required in division (C) above.
Rates shall be designed to recover the cost of rendering sewerage services
for the year during which the rates shall be in effect. Rates shall be
established maintaining adequate fund reserves to provide for reasonably
expected variations in the cost of providing services, as well as variations
in the demand for service.



      (2)   The Public Works Director shall submit annually to the
Town Council not later than 60 days prior to the end of the fiscal year an
annual sewer report, including a recommended rate schedule for each category
of user classification for the following fiscal year. The report shall
contain data utilized in determining the rate schedule. The rate schedule
shall be in the form of a resolution adopted by the Town Council. The sewer
use charge for each user classification will be determined according to the
following rate calculation formula:




User charge = (users contribution, MG x $/MG) +





Users BOD loading x $/lb. + Users SS loading x $/lb.




                     1000 lb.         1000 lb.




Fixed O & M + *Cost of monitoring/testing




                    # of customers     # of
indust./commercial customers




*Applies only to industrial/commercial users.




      (4)   Operating and maintenance costs consist of:



         (a)   Salaries and benefits of employees engaged in
providing sewerage service;



         (b)   Operating expenses, including parts, materials,
and services, incurred in providing sewerage service;



         (c)   Applicable equipment and/or appurtenances
replacement costs necessitated by the provision of sewerage services; and



         (d)   Appropriate indirect costs of the Public Works
Department and other town departments in rendering sewerage-related services
such as purchasing, accounting, billing, and administration.



   (E)   (1)   The sewerage system capacity charge is established
for the purpose of providing revenue to help finance and to more equitably
distribute the cost of the construction of necessary additions to both the
sewer system and sewer treatment facilities.



      (2)   The funds received from the collection of such charges
shall be deposited daily by the Finance Director who shall credit them to a
special fund from which the Town Council may authorize the payment of the
cost and expense of the construction of the sanitary sewerage system,
regulator chambers, storm standby tanks, pumping stations and sewage
treatment works, and for the payment of the cost and expense of extensions to
or the enlargement of same.



      (3)   The charge so exacted shall be set annually by
resolution of the Town Council. Cost factors to be considered in establishing
this charge shall include annual department service requirements for the
retirement of sanitary sewer bonds and/or long-term construction contracts,
annual depreciation costs, and other pertinent factors as determined by the
Town Council.



   (F)   A sewer bill bay be rendered on a monthly, quarterly, or
annual basis. The bill shall distinguish between the sewer use charge and the
sewerage system capacity charge.



   (G)   Sewer user charge rates shall be reviewed by the Town Council
at least biennially. Such reviews shall result in revision of user charges to
accomplish the following:



      (1)   Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and
maintenance costs among users and user classes;



      (2)   Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total costs
necessary to the proper operation and maintenance of the sewage system; and



      (3)   Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to
the costs of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the
next year and adjust the rate accordingly.



   (H)   Each user will be notified at least annually, in conjunction
with a regular bill, of the sewer use charge rate and that portion of the
total bill attributable to operations, maintenance, and replacement costs for
sewer service.



   (I)   The sewer user charge system as set forth in this subchapter
shall take precedence over any terms or conditions of agreements or contracts
between the town users which are inconsistent with the requirements of 33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. and federal regulations issued pursuant thereto.



   (J)   Each sewer charge rendered under or pursuant to this chapter
is hereby made a lien upon the corresponding lot, parcel of land, building,
or premises served by a connection to the sanitary sewerage system of the
town.



   (K)   (1)   There shall be established the following funds or
accounts into which the sewer charges levied in this section shall be
distributed:



         (a)   Sewerage system operations, maintenance, and
replacement;



         (b)   Sewerage system debt service; and



         (c)   Sewerage system construction and expansion.



      (2)   The distribution of sewer charges shall be as follows:



         (a)   Sewer use charge revenues shall be allocated to
the sewerage system operations, maintenance, and replacement fund or account;
and



         (b)   Sewerage system capacity charge revenues shall be
allocated as follows:



            1.   The portion of the charge levied to service
the debt of sanitary sewer bonds or long-term construction contracts shall be
allocated to the sewerage system debt service fund or account; and



            2.   The remainder of the charge shall be
allocated to the sewerage system construction and expansion fund or account.



      (3)   The utilization of the fund or accounts shall be as
follows.



         (a)   Sewerage System Operations, Maintenance, and
Replacement Fund or Account shall be utilized for personal services,
operational expenses, and equipment replacement expenses associated with the
provision of sewerage system service.



         (b)   Sewerage System Debt Service Fund or Account shall
be utilized in servicing the debt retirement of sanitary sewer bonds or
long-term construction contracts.



         (c)   Sewerage System Construction or Expansion Fund or
Account shall be utilized for the construction or expansion costs associated
with the sewer system and the sewage treatment facilities.



   (L)   Determination of waste water quality.



      (1)   For industrial users with installed water meters, the
charges established in this section shall become effective from and after
each user’s first regular meter reading after the issuance of the
industrial waste permit.



      (2)   Any user who fails or refuses to install a water meter
to any source of water supply used, within 30 days after written notice by
the Public Works Director to do so, shall be charged on water usage estimated
by the Director.



      (3)   If a user discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes,
water, or other liquids into the town sewage system, either directly or
indirectly, and it can be shown by such party to the satisfaction of the
Director that a portion of the water as measured by the water meter or meters
does not and cannot enter the sewerage system, the Director may determine in
such manner and by such method as he or she may find practicable the
percentage of metered water entering the sewerage system. The quantity of
water used to determine the sewer charge shall be that percentage, so
determined, of the water measured by the water meter or meters; or the
Director may require or permit the installation of acceptable additional
water or sewer meters at such party’s expense and in such a manner as to
determine the quantity of water actually entering the sewerage system as so
determined. If such additional water or sewer meters are installed, an
additional charge shall be made to cover the cost of reading and computing
the flow of each such meter and such additional charge shall be added to each
sewer charge bill rendered.



      (4)   After the installation of the measuring equipment is
approved by the Public Works Director, it shall be the obligation of such
industrial user to conduct a test on such measuring equipment at least once
every 12 months to determine its accuracy and the results thereof shall be
furnished in writing to the Director. Those users seeking renewal of an
industrial waste water discharge permit or an interim industrial waste water
discharge permit shall file the results as part of the report required by §
50.074. It shall also be the industrial user’s responsibility to notify the
Public Works Department within a reasonable time in advance so that the
Department may, if it chooses, have a witness present during such test. If
upon any such test the percentage of accuracy is found to be within the
accuracy tolerance as established by the manufacturer’s specifications,
such measuring equipment shall be determined to have correctly measured the
quantity delivered to the sewer system. If, however, upon any such test the
percentage of accuracy is found to be in excess of the accuracy tolerance
specified by the manufacturer’s specifications, then such measuring
equipment shall be immediately adjusted to register correctly the quantity
delivered to the sewer system. The billings to such industrial user shall be
adjusted for a period extending back to the time when the inaccuracy began,
if such time is ascertainable, or for a period extending back one-half of the
time elapsed since the date of the last test or the date of the last
adjustment, if the time is not ascertainable.



      (5)   All users for which the water supply is from other
suppliers of water shall furnish to the town either a certified meter reading
of water delivered to its plant or company or a copy of the billing from the
water supplier. In this event, the user’s charges will be calculated and
the same conditions will apply as if the town were supplier of water to the
user.



      (6)   For residential and commercial users with installed
water meters, the charges established in this section shall become effective
from and after each user’s first regular meter reading.



   (M)   Determination of waste water quality.



      (1)   Testing by direct sampling, utilizing recognized field
techniques, equipment, and procedures, will be used for all industrial users.
The BOD (5) test shall be considered the standard test, however, COD or TOC
tests may be substituted in cases where it has been determined by the Public
Works Director that the BOD (5) test is not representative of actual waste
water loading. Waste water characteristics shall be determined by the Public
Works Department on the basis of monitored waste water discharged, a
certified statement from the user, or on the best available date as to the
characteristics of such discharges.



      (2)   Any change in the ongoing processes employed by a user
contributing industrial waste which results in a variation of more than 25%
of one or more of the effluent loading concentrations shall be reported to
the Public Works Department within 30 days of such change.



      (3)   If it is determined through testing that a significant
variation exists between the user’s certified data and the discharge
characteristics monitored by the Public Works Department, the town may adjust
the sewer use charge based on the monitored data from the original date of
certification, unless written communication has occurred notifying the
Department of changes in loading and giving specific dates of changes.



      (4)   Where sampling and gauging of a specific user is not
practical for physical, economic, safety, or other reasons, the Public Works
Director may designate values for concentrations of the wastes discharged
into the sewerage system for all users in the same standard industrial
classification or subclassification.



(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.073  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All industrial users shall:



   (A)   Comply with the categorical standards, pretreatment
requirements, and all other requirements imposed by this subchapter upon POTW
users;



   (B)   Comply with the orders of the Director;



   (C)   Prior to the discharge of waste water to the POTW by any new
user thereafter, file a written notice with the Director which identifies the:



      (1)   Name and address of the existing or prospective user;



      (2)   Business location(s) served or to be served by the POTW;



      (3)   Nature, concentration, and amounts of any substance
present at, or intended to be present at, such business location(s) which, if
discharged to the POTW, could constitute an industrial discharge; and



      (4)   Nature and concentration of all pollutants currently
discharged to the POTW from such business location(s).



   (D)   File an annual PPTW user report with the Director by the first
of January of each year commencing January 1, 1985. This reporting
requirement does not apply to industrial users operating pursuant to an
industrial user permit;



   (E)   Carry out and maintain an adequate record of all
self-inspection and self-monitoring activities necessary for the user to know
at all times whether or not such user is introducing any industrial discharge
to the POTW;



   (F)   Assist the Director to determine the exact nature,
concentration, and volume of any pollutant intended for discharge to the
POTW. Therefore, upon request, any user or industrial user shall promptly:



      (1)   Allow the examination and copying of all relevant
records or documents available to the user;



      (2)   Allow the inspecting of all business locations served by
the POTW, including all pretreatment equipment, methods, and activities
utilized by the user at such locations;



      (3)   Install and maintain, at the user’s expense,
convenient and adequate monitoring and/or sampling point(s) needed by the
Director for monitoring and/or sampling purposes;



      (4)   Allow the taking and removal of samples from any waste
water discharged or intended for discharge to the POTW; and



      (5)   Provide the Director with any other information,
including, but not limited to, chemical analyses of waste water and
architectural or engineering design data, drawings, and the like, which are
reasonably needed by the Director for the purpose of determining such
user’s compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.



   (G)   Not cause an industrial discharge without having first
obtained, or applied for, an industrial user permit pursuant to this
subchapter;



   (H)   Comply with the demand of the Director to immediately halt any
actual or threatened discharge to the POTW when the Director has given notice
that such actual or threatened discharge:



      (1)   Presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of any person or to the environment; or



      (2)   Will cause interference with POTW operations.



   (I)   Immediately give notice to the Director of any discharge,
including an accidental discharge, which is in violation of any categorical
standard, pretreatment requirement, or permit condition imposed by this
subchapter. Such notice shall also describe the:



      (1)   Location of the discharge;



      (2)   Known or estimated nature, concentration, and volume of
the discharged pollutant(s);



      (3)   Type of assistance desired by the town; and



      (4)   Corrective action(s) undertaken, being undertaken,
and/or to be undertaken by the user.  Any user causing such a discharge
shall also initiate all appropriate corrective action(s) required by the
Director which are needed to:



         (a)   Prevent injury to human health or safety, or to
the environment, the POTW and/or any other property;



         (b)   Promptly repair all or part of any injury or
damage caused by such discharge; and



         (c)   Ensure that such a discharge does not occur again.



   (J)   Pay all sewer fees charged by the town for the waste water
collection and disposal services provided by the POTW pursuant to the
requirements of any town ordinance. Such service fees will apply equally to
all POTW users and will be determined by each user’s proportionate share of
the POTW operating and maintenance costs. In turn, the proportionate share
will be based on such factors as the strength, volume, and flow rate of the
waste water discharged to the POTW by each user;



   (K)   Reimburse the town for all extraordinary expenses reasonably
incurred by the Department in ensuring such POTW user’s compliance with the
applicable requirements of this subchapter. An extraordinary expense is any
cost not otherwise reimbursed from the normal collection of sewer fees.
Therefore, extraordinary expenses include, but are not limited to, the costs
in:



      (1)   Issuing permits;



      (2)   Conducting inspections, surveillance, and monitoring
activities;



      (3)   Obtaining laboratory analyses of waste samples;



      (4)   Taking enforcement actions against users not in
compliance with the requirements of this subchapter; and



      (5)   Carrying out any measure needed for the protection of
human health or safety, the environment, the POTW, or any other property in
order to correct or mitigate any harm caused by the violation of any
categorical standard or pretreatment requirement.



   (L)   Be financially responsible for all injury, damage, and/or loss
suffered by any person as a result of any industrial discharge by such user
which violates any categorical standard, pretreatment requirement, or permit
condition enforced pursuant to this subchapter. In particular, such user
shall be liable for the:



      (1)   Personal injury suffered by any person as a result of
such discharge;



      (2)   Costs reasonably incurred by any person in correcting or
otherwise mitigating any adverse environmental impact which resulted from
such discharge; and



      (3)   Economic loss and property damage suffered by any person
as a result of such discharge.



   (M)   Existing industrial users shall certify compliance with this
subchapter within 90 days of its effective date, or submit application for a
new permit.



(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.074  SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.



   In addition to all other requirements, each industrial user who
discharges an industrial discharge into the sewer system shall also:



   (A)   Obtain an industrial discharge permit from the Director. Any
person intending to commence any new industrial discharge(s), or any
additional industrial discharge(s) not already allowed pursuant to an
existing permit, shall first obtain a new or an amended industrial discharge
permit, as applicable, from the Director prior to initiating such
discharge(s);



   (B)   Comply fully with all requirements and conditions of any
industrial user permit. Once a permit is issued, no industrial user shall:



      (1)   Make any new or increased industrial discharge; or



      (2)   Otherwise make any change in the nature of its
industrial discharge(s) if such change will cause any new or increased
industrial discharge.



   (C)   Provide all of the pretreatment necessary to comply with the
categorical standards and pretreatment requirements imposed by this
subchapter;



   (D)   Maintain a continuous discharge record which clearly
identifies the:



      (1)   Dates and times of all industrial discharge(s); and



      (2)   Nature, concentration(s), and volume(s) of all such
discharges.



   (E)   Provide the Director with all the same self-monitoring reports
and notices which the industrial user is required to submit to the POTW or to
any other authority in accordance with the provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12.
In particular, the industrial user shall meet the requirements of:



      (1)   Notices which must be filed with the Director within 180
days of the adoption of any categorical standard, including a compliance
schedule;



      (2)   Notices which must be filed with the Director within 90
days of any final compliance date;



      (3)   Reports which must be filed with the Director by the
industrial user in June and December of each year;



      (4)   The immediate notice which must be given to the Director
after a slug load release of any industrial discharge; and



      (5)   The sampling and analysis of pollutants discharged to
the POTW.



(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.075  CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit application, permits and monitoring programs, and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency
without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the town that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes,



or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
To claim this trade secret protection, the user must specify at the time of
submitting his or her reports or information that part he or she desires to
protect.



   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions
of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this subchapter, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit, and/or the pretreatment
program; provided, however that such portion of a report shall be available
for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Waste water
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information.



(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.076  STRICTER PROVISIONS TO PREVAIL.



   Upon the effective date of any federal categorical pretreatment
standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if
more stringent than limitations imposed under this subchapter, shall
immediately supersede these limitations.



(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.077  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Each permittee shall provide protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this
subchapter.



   (B)   For countermeasures to be taken by the town to minimize damage
to the sanitary sewer system and/or degradation of the receiving waters, a
permittee shall notify the town immediately upon accidentally discharging
wastes in violation of this subchapter. This notification shall be followed
within 15 days of the date of occurrence by a detailed written statement
describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being
taken to prevent future occurrences. Such notification will not relieve the
permittee of liability for any expense, loss, or damage to the sanitary sewer
system, or for any fines imposed on the town on account thereof and/or for
any enforcement action pursuant to this occurrence.



   (C)   In order that officers, agents, and employees of permittees
will be informed of the town’s requirements, permittees shall make
available to their employees copies of this subchapter together with such
other waste water information and notices which may be furnished by the town
from time to time for the purpose of improving and making more effective
water pollution control. A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted
on the permittee’s bulletin board advising officers, agents, and employees
whom to call in case of an accidental discharge in excess of the limits
authorized by the permit.



   (D)   Any possible connection or entry point for a hazardous and/or
prohibited substance to the permittee’s plumbing or drainage system shall
be appropriately labeled to warn operating personnel against discharge of
such substance in violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.078  PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   Pretreatment will be required in the following
instances, and the Public Works Director shall submit to the applicant the
pretreatment levels which must be obtained:



         (a)   If the Director determines upon the initial
application for a permit under this subchapter that the proposed industrial
waste must be pretreated by the applicant to lower the level of any of the
components of the industrial waste before discharge to the town sewer;



         (b)   If the town must improve the discharge from its
waste water treatment plant to the receiving stream as a result of directives
from federal or state regulatory agencies, orders, or judgments from courts
of competent jurisdiction, or changes in the discharge permit for the
town’s waste water treatment plant or plants, then and in that event the
Director will require that a permit holder install or enlarge pretreatment
facilities to lower the affected component of the permittee’s industrial
waste discharge;



         (c)   If any waste water prohibited under the conditions
of this subchapter is produced, such producer shall pretreat the waste water
to the extent required to comply with the standards established in this
subchapter before discharging to any town sewer; or



         (d)   If the Director determines that a permittee,
because of plant expansion and/or changes in plant operations, has increased
either the strength or volume of the discharge, the Director may require
additional pretreatment to lower the level of the volume and/or any
components of the industrial waste before discharge, unless such permittee
has previously made industrial cost recovery payments for reservation of
additional industrial capacity.



      (2)   Pretreatment facilities required under the foregoing
subsections of this section shall be provided, operated, and maintained at
the permit holder’s expense.



   (B)   Any sludge or other material removed from the industrial waste
by the pretreatment facility shall be disposed of in accordance with
applicable federal, state, and local laws.



   (C)   (1)   Dilution of waste discharged to the town sanitary
sewer system is prohibited, whether accomplished by the combination of two or
more waste streams by a producer or producers or by the addition of other
liquids solely for the purpose of diluting the quality of the waste discharge.



      (2)   One or more producers may, upon application and approval
by the Public Works Director, combine industrial waste streams prior to
discharge to the town sanitary sewer system if, and only if, such combination
of industrial waste streams produces a combined discharge of better quality
than the two industrial waste streams would have been if discharged
separately. However, if one or more producers are allowed to mix industrial
waste streams to produce a better discharge, the user charge established in
this subchapter based on the quality of its industrial waste streams prior to
combination shall be paid to the town.



   (D)   (1)   Detailed plans showing any pretreatment facilities
shall be submitted to the Director for approval before construction of the
facilities. The review of such plans will in no way relieve such permit
holders from the responsibility of modifying and operating the facilities to
produce an effluent complying with the established conditions of the permit.



      (2)   Any subsequent, significant changes in the approved
facilities or method of operation shall be reported to the Director and the
Director of the Department of Public Health, and must be reviewed and
approved by the Director as complying with the provisions established in this
subchapter.



   (E)   After the construction plans for such pretreatment plants have
been approved and a permit issued, the plans shall be placed on file in
permanent, reproducible form with the Director, without cost to the town,
before a building permit will be issued.



   (F)   The town will enforce federal pretreatment regulations as set
forth in 40 C.F.R. part 403.



(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)




SEWER CONNECTION FEES




§ 50.090  PURPOSE.



   Due to the increasing costs associated with the expansion of the
town’s sewer system, it is now necessary to implement a method of direct
cost recovery from persons, firms, or corporations responsible for new
physical development within the town to provide a source of funding for the
city’s continued capital investment in the system.



(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.091  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL USER. Any user or establishment not defined as a
dwelling unit.



   DETACHED DWELLING UNIT. Any dwelling unit located on its own lot and
not sharing a common wall with or not having adjoining walls with another
dwelling unit.



   DEVELOPER. The individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
syndication, trust, or other legal entity that is responsible for new
physical development within the town and creating a demand for town sewer
service.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any improvement which creates a demand for town sewer
service.



   DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms within a building containing
cooking accommodations. An apartment, mobile home, and recreational vehicle
shall be considered a DWELLING UNIT.



   TOWNHOUSE. Any dwelling unit located on its own lot and sharing a
common wall with or having adjoining walls with another dwelling unit.



(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)



§ 50.092  FEE SCHEDULE; COLLECTION; EXEMPTIONS; DISPOSITION.



   (A)   The sewer connection fee to be charged by the town is
established in accordance with the following schedule:



 


Sewer Connection Fee




User Classification

 

Fee





Detached unit:
 




Detached dwelling unit per unit, including mobile manufactured homes
 

$750



Townhouses, per unit
 

$750



Condominiums, multi-family dwellings, and recreational vehicles, per unit
 

$750



Commercial/industrial user:
 




Water meter size inches
 





5/8

 

$750




3/4

 

$1,090




1

 

$1,730




1-1/2

 

$3,384




2

 

$5,285




3

 

$10,435




4

 

$17,305




6

 

$34, 070





 



   (B)   (1)   The fee imposed by this subchapter shall be collected
by the Building Department, who shall be charged with the administration of
this subchapter.



      (2)   The fee for each dwelling unit or, in the case of
commercial and industrial construction, the fee for connection shall be
collected by the Building Safety Director prior to the issuance of a building
permit, and the fee with respect to any mobile home or recreation vehicle
space shall be collected prior to the issuance of a construction permit for
the development of a mobile home or recreation vehicle park. The Building
Safety Director shall not issue a building permit or construction permit
until the fees required by this subchapter have been paid.



   (C)   Any separate water meter installed for irrigation purposes
only will not be included in the calculation of the sewer development fee. In
addition, no sewer development fee will be collected for the installation of
fire lines, provided such line is not served by a water meter.



   (D)   All revenue received from the sewer development fee shall be
deposited in a utility revenue account to be used for capital expansion and
enlargement of the town sewer system and/or for the retirement of debt
service, both principal and interest, related to sewer system development.




(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)




§ 50.999  PENALTY.




   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 if this code
of ordinances.





   (B)   (1)   There shall be a penalty imposed if any user shall:





         (a)   Exceed quantity discharge limitations as set forth
in §§ 50.070 through 50.078 or as made part of an industrial waste water
permit;





         (b)   Permit the discharge of excessive concentrations
of substances limited by §§ 50.070 through 50.078 or by any industrial
waste water permit issued pursuant to this chapter;





         (c)   Permit the discharge of any substance prohibited
by this §§ 50.070 through 50.078 or by a permit issued pursuant to §§
50.070 through 50.078;





         (d)   Fail to pay any applicable sewer charge
established by §§ 50.070 through 50.078; or





         (e)   Knowingly misrepresent or omit any pertinent
information from application permits or reports required by §§ 50.070
through 50.078.





      (2)   Any violation of §§ 50.070 through 50.078 shall
constitute a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable as set forth in Class 1
Arizona Revised Statutes.





      (3)   Fines imposed for violation of §§ 50.070 through
50.078 shall approximate the economic benefit derived by the offender, or the
maximum fine permitted by law, whichever is greater.





      (4)   In addition to the penalties set forth in divisions
(B)(2) and (B)(3) above, the Public Works Director may discontinue water,
sewer, and/or refuse services to a noncomplying user who has violated any of
the provisions of §§ 50.070 through 50.078. Discontinuance of water, sewer,
and/or refuse services will not occur until the noncomplying user has been
notified that he or she is not in compliance with the terms and provisions of
§§ 50.070 through 50.078 and has been given reasonable time in which to
come into compliance. The Public Works Director may assess the reasonable
cost incurred by the town in disconnecting and/or reconnecting such water,
sewer, and/or refuse service.





(Ord. 89-07, passed 8-24-1989)




CHAPTER 51:  STORM WATER





Section





   51.01   Purpose





   51.02   Definitions





   51.03   Delegation of authority for administration and enforcement





   51.04   Prohibition of non-storm water discharge to the public storm
drain system; exemptions





   51.05   Operating facilities or activities





   51.06   Construction sites





   51.07   Post-construction





   51.08   Cleanup and notification requirements





   51.09   Inspections





   51.10   Enforcement










   51.99   Penalty




Cross-reference:



   Subdivision regulations, see Ch. 152



   Zoning, see Ch. 154



§ 51.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter sets forth the requirements for the control of pollutants
that are or may be discharged to the public storm drain system. The purpose
of this chapter is to enable the town to comply with all applicable state and
federal laws related to storm water management, including, but not limited
to; the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.), the national pollutant
discharge elimination system regulations (40 C.F.R. part 122), and the
Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (AZPDES) permit (AAC
R18-19-A902).



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-8-2016)



§ 51.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ARIZONA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY (ADEQ). The state agency
charged with enforcement of environmental laws and regulations.



   ARIZONA POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (AZPDES). Storm water
permit means a permit issued by ADEQ which authorizes the discharge of storm
water pursuant to AAC R18-9-A902, which incorporates 40 C.F.R. § 122.32.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to storm water. BMPs also
include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to
control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from outdoor storage areas.



   CLEAN WATER ACT. The federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended
(33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.).



   DIRECTOR. The Town Manager or his or her designee.



   DISCHARGE. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
injecting, placing, releasing, leaching, dumping, or disposing into or on any
land in a manner that may cause pollution.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA). The federal agency charged with
enforcement of environmental laws and regulations.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA which authorizes the discharge of storm water
pursuant to the Clean Water Act § 402 (33 U.S.C. § 1342).



   NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI). A form submitted to ADEQ notifying of
person’s intent to be covered under a separate AZPDES storm water permit,
as required by federal and state law.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, limited liability company, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns.



   POLLUTANT. The same meaning as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.2, and
includes but is not limited to any solid, liquid, gas, or other substance
that can alter the physical or chemical properties of water including, but
not limited to, fertilizers, solvents, sludge, petroleum and petroleum
products, solid waste, garbage, biological materials, radioactive materials,
sand, dirt, animal waste, acids, and bases.



   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land or portion of
land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.



   PUBLIC STORM DRAIN SYSTEM. All or any part of the publicly-owned and
maintained roads, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made
channels, storm drains, and dry wells located within public easements,
right-of-way, parks, common areas, retention areas, or other publicly-owned
or maintained real property designed or used for collecting, holding, or
conveying storm water.



   STORM WATER. Storm water runoff, surface runoff, and drainage.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-8-2016)



§ 51.03  DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY FOR ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   The Town Manager is delegated the authority to exercise the powers and
perform the duties set forth in this chapter and to administer and enforce
provisions of this chapter. The Town Manager may designate other employees to
exercise such powers and perform such duties as he or she deems appropriate.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-8-2016)



§ 51.04  PROHIBITION OF NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE TO THE PUBLIC STORM DRAIN
SYSTEM; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Unless expressly authorized or exempted by this chapter, no
person shall cause or allow the discharge to a public right-of-way or public
storm drain system of any substance that is not composed entirely of storm
water.



   (B)   Unless expressly authorized or exempted by this chapter, no
person shall use, store, spill, dump, or dispose of materials in a manner
that those materials could cause or contribute to the addition of pollutants
to storm water.



   (C)   The following discharges are exempt from the prohibitions set
forth in divisions (A) and (B) above.



      (1)   Discharges authorized by a separate NPDES or AZPDES
permit.



      (2)   The following categories of non-storm water discharges
are permissible unless otherwise prohibited under divisions (C)(3), (C)(4),
or (C)(5) below:



         (a)   Water line flushing;



         (b)   Landscaping irrigation;



         (c)   Diverted stream flows;



         (d)   Rising ground waters;



         (e)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 35.2005(20);



         (f)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;



         (g)   Discharges from potable water sources;



         (h)   Foundation drains;



         (i)   Air conditioning condensation;



         (j)   Irrigation water;



         (k)   Springs;



         (1)   Water from crawl space pumps;



         (m)   Footing drains;



         (n)   Lawn watering;



         (o)   Individual residential car washing;



         (p)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;



         (q)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;



         (r)   Street wash water;



         (s)   Discharges from emergency fire fighting activity;



         (t)   Dust control watering; or



         (u)   Any other activity that the Director identifies is
not a significant contributor of pollutants during the town’s AZPDES storm
water permit term. (40 C.F.R. § 122.34(b)(3)(iii)).



      (3)   No person shall discharge to the public storm drain
system any exempted discharge under this subsection if the Director or
assigned designee identifies and provides written notice to the person that
the discharge has the potential to be a source of pollutants to receiving
waters, waterways, or ground water.



      (4)   No person shall discharge to the public storm drain
system that would result in or contribute to a violation of the AZPDES storm
water permit issued to the town. Liability for any such discharge shall be
the responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the discharge.



      (5)   No person shall establish, use, maintain, or continue
any connection to the public storm drain system, which has caused or is
likely to cause a violation of this section. This prohibition is retroactive
and shall apply to any connection that was made in the past, regardless of
whether it was made under permit or other authorization, or whether it was
permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of the connection.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-8-2016)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.05  OPERATING FACILITIES OR ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   All persons owning or operating premises or engaged in
activities who are required by federal or state law to submit to EPA and/or
ADEQ a notice of intent (NOI) to comply with an NPDES or AZPDES storm water
permit shall provide a copy of such notice to the Director upon request.
Facilities required to apply for a storm water permit are identified in 40
C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).



   (B)   All persons engaged in activities which will or may reasonably
be expected to result in pollutants entering the public storm drain system
shall institute best management practices (BMPs) to minimize such pollutants,
shall provide protection from accidental discharge of pollutants to the
public storm drain system and comply with the cleanup and notification
requirements of this chapter. Such measures shall include the requirements
imposed by federal, state, county, or local authorities. BMPs are
site-specific and are described in the document “Storm Water Management for
Industrial Activities: Developing Pollution Prevention plans and Best
Management Practices” (EPA 832-r-92-006) or other guidance documents
available from EPA and/or ADEQ.



   (C)   If a best management practice is required by ADEQ’s
standards to prevent a pollutant from entering the public storm drain system,
the person receiving the notice of such a requirement may petition the
Director to reconsider the application of the BMP to the premises or
activity. The written petition must be received within ten working days
setting forth any reasons and proposed alternatives. The Director will act
within 30 days of the petition, but during the time a final decision is made,
the applicant shall:



      (1)   Fully observe the aforementioned BMP; or



      (2)   Abstain from the pollutant-producing activity in
question.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-8-2016)



§ 51.06  CONSTRUCTION SITES.



   (A)   All persons engaged in construction activities who are
required by federal or state law to submit to EPA and/or ADEQ a notice of
intent to comply with an NPDES or AZPDES storm water permit, shall provide
the town with copies of the NOI and the NPDES storm water permit issued by
ADEQ as one of the pre-conditions for permitting. Construction activities
that will disturb one acre or more of land area or smaller land areas if they
are part of a larger common plan of development or sale are required to apply
for a storm water permit (40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(15)).



   (B)   (1)   Any person performing construction shall not cause or
contribute to a violation of the AZPDES storm water permit issued to the
town. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the
person causing or responsible for the discharge.



      (2)   Any person performing construction shall undertake best
management practices to minimize pollutants (including sediments) from
leaving the construction site, shall provide protection from accidental
discharge of pollutants to the public storm drain system, and comply with the
cleanup and notification requirements of this chapter. Site operator shall
ensure erosion and sediment control and control waste and properly dispose of
wastes, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout,
chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause
adverse impacts to water quality. Such measures shall include the
requirements imposed by federal, state, county, or local authorities.



      (3)   BMPs are site-specific and are described in the document
“Storm Water Management for Construction Activities: Developing Pollution
Prevention Plans and Best Management Practices” (EPA 832-r-92-005) or other
guidance documents available from EPA and/or ADEQ.



   (C)   If a best management practice is required by the Director to
prevent a pollutant from entering the public storm drain system, the person
receiving the notice of such a requirement may petition the Director to
reconsider the application of the BMP to the premises or activity. The
written petition must be received within ten working days setting forth any
reasons and proposed alternatives, the Director will act within 30 days of
receipt of the petition, but during the time a final decision is made, the
applicant shall:



      (1)   Fully observe the aforementioned BMP; and



      (2)   Abstain from the pollutant-producing activity in
question.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-8-2016)



§ 51.07  POST-CONSTRUCTION.



   Property owners or operators shall ensure long-term operation and
maintenance of post-construction storm water runoff control mechanisms, such
as retention basins, dry wells, and other measures described in 40 C.F.R. §
122.34(b)(5)(iii).



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-8-2016)



§ 51.08  CLEANUP AND NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   As soon as any owner or operator has actual or constructive
knowledge of any discharge which may result in pollutants entering the public
storm drain system, such person shall promptly take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery of the source and the extent and proceed with
containment and cleanup of such discharge.



   (B)   The owner or operator shall notify the Director of the
discharge in both of the following manners:



      (1)   By telephone as soon as practical but no later than 24
hours after discovery if non-hazardous materials are involved or by calling
9-1-1 immediately upon discovery if hazardous materials are involved; and



      (2)   By written report within ten days after the initial
notice identifying the discharge source, extent, pollutant, measures taken to
mitigate the discharge, and preventative measures put in place to prevent a
subsequent discharge.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-8-2016)



§ 51.09  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Authority to inspect. Upon presentation of credentials and at
all reasonable or necessary hours, all authorized employees of the town shall
have access to all premises and to all records pertaining to those premises
for purposes of ensuring compliance with this chapter. Inspection,
interviewing, copying, sampling, photographing, and other activities
conducted on the premises shall be limited to those which are reasonably
needed by the town in determining compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. All persons shall allow such activities under safe and non-hazardous
conditions with a minimum of delay.



   (B)   Monitoring activities. The Director may order any person
engaged in any activity or owning or operating on any premises which may
cause or contribute to discharges of pollutants to the public storm drain
system in violation of this chapter or any applicable NPDES or AZPDES storm
water permit condition to undertake such monitoring activities and analyses
and furnish such reports as the Director reasonably may specify. The costs of
such activities, analyses, and reports shall be borne by the recipient of the
order.



   (C)   Access refusal. If an authorized employee of the town has been
refused access to any premises, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a
need to inspect, interview, copy, photograph, or sample as part of an
inspection and sampling procedure of the town to determine compliance with
the requirements of this chapter or any related laws or regulations, or to
protect the environment and the public health, safety, and welfare of the
community, then the Director may seek issuance of a search warrant from the
town municipal court.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-8-2016)



§ 51.10  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Charges levied pursuant to this chapter shall be collected by
the Director. The Director shall make and enforce economic and efficient
protection of the town’s storm drain system.



   (B)   Owner of record. The owner of record of the property upon
which a violation of this chapter occurs shall be presumed to be a person
having lawful control over the activity or premises unless it is demonstrated
that another person has knowingly and in good faith accepted responsibility
for the activity at issue. If more than one person is identified as the
owner, such persons shall be presumed to be jointly and severally in lawful
possession and control of the activity or premises.



   (C)   Change in ownership or control. Should there be a change of
ownership or control of any property subject to this chapter, the previous
owner or person or entity having previously had control of said property
shall promptly file a notice with the Director stating the ownership or
control of said property has changed, and provide complete contact
information for the new owner and/or person or entity having control. The new
owner and/or person or entity in control of property shall, within ten days
of acquiring ownership or control, file with the Director a sworn statement
which provides full contact information and acknowledges the location of all
facilities and equipment, including but not limited to dry wells, storm
piping, and other infrastructure, required by the storm water ordinance and
this chapter. In addition to the foregoing, the sworn statement shall state
that the new owner or person or entity in control will continue with their
operation and maintenance. Failure to provide the notices and/or sworn
statements required by this chapter shall subject the violator to civil and
criminal penalties as set forth hereafter.



   (D)   Notice of violation. The Director may issue a written notice
of violation to any person who has violated or is in violation of this
chapter. Failure to comply with any act required in the notice of violation
shall be a separate violation for each day beyond the thirtieth day following
the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of
the Director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. In
appropriate situations the Director may notify the person orally either in
person or by telephone prior to, and in some cases in lieu of, written
notification.



   (E)   Consent orders. The Director may enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, negotiated settlement agreements, or
other similar documents establishing an agreement with any person responsible
for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by
the person to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the
document, including an identification and description of the best management
practices and measures to utilize in implementing the order. Such documents
shall have the same force and effect as any other orders issued under this
chapter and shall be judicially enforceable.



   (F)   Cease and desist orders. When the Director finds that a person
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or any
related laws, or regulations, or that the person’s past violations are
likely to recur, the Director may issue an order to the person directing them
to cease and desist all such violations and direct the person to immediately
comply with all requirements; and take such appropriate remedial or
preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or
threatened violation. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the person. A
person’s failure to comply with an order of the Director issued pursuant to
this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-8-2016)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Civil penalties. In addition to any other enforcement
authority contained in this chapter, the Director may issue a civil citation
to any person who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this chapter or any related laws or regulations. A person who violates any
requirement of this chapter or any applicable NPDES or AZPDES storm water
permit condition shall be civilly liable to the town for a sum not to exceed
$500 per day for each violation.



   (B)   Criminal penalties. A person who willfully or negligently
violates any provision of this chapter or any related laws or regulations
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punished by a fine
not to exceed $2,500 per day for each violation and/or by imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months.



   (C)   Criminal prosecution. Some intentional violations may
constitute criminal violations of federal, state, and town law, and that
under such circumstances, the Director may seek the assistance of the EPA,
the state, or the town prosecutor to commence civil and/or criminal action
against any person who violates any requirement of this chapter or any
applicable NPDES or AZPDES storm water permit condition.



   (D)   Revoking or withholding of permit. In addition to or in lieu
of all other available penalties, the town may revoke or withhold any permit,
approval, or license to construct improvements to real property or operate a
business in the town if the holder of such permit, approval, or license is in
violation of any requirement of this chapter or any applicable NPDES or
AZPDES storm water permit condition.



   (E)   Liability for costs. The Director may assess liability for
costs to any person in violation of this chapter for all actual costs
incurred by the town in surveillance, sampling and testing, abatement, and
remediation associated with a discharge. Additionally, the Director may
assess liability for costs to any person whose discharge resulted in a
violation of the town’s AZPDES storm water permit.



(Ord. 2016-02, passed 9-8-2016)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   ADMINISTRATION



      71.   TRAFFIC CONTROL



      72.   PARKING



      73.   HEAVY TRUCK TRAFFIC



      74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  ADMINISTRATION



Section



   70.01   Duty of Police Department



   70.02   Records of traffic violations



   70.03   Police Department to investigate accidents



   70.04   Traffic accident studies



   70.05   Traffic accident reports



§ 70.01  DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Police Department, under the
direction of the Police Chief, to provide for the enforcement of the street
traffic regulations of the town and all of the state vehicle laws applicable
to street traffic in the town, to make arrests for traffic violations, to
investigate accidents and to assist in developing ways and means to improve
traffic conditions, and to carry out all duties specially imposed by this
chapter.



   (B)   Any peace officer of the town may stop and detain a person as
is reasonably necessary to investigate an actual or suspected violation of
this chapter and to serve a copy of the traffic complaint for any alleged
civil or criminal violation of this chapter.



   (C)   The duties imposed on the Police Department by this chapter
may be performed by a police agency under contract with and authorized by the
town.



(1989 Code, § 13-1-1)



§ 70.02  RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The Police Department, under the direction of the Police
Chief, shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic laws of the town
or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together
with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such
record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time
on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent
five-year period.



   (B)   All forms for records of violations and notices shall be
serially numbered. For each month and year, a written record shall be kept
available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms.



   (C)   All records and reports shall be public records.



(1989 Code, § 13-1-2)



§ 70.03  POLICE DEPARTMENT TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS.



   It shall be the duty of the Police Department, under the direction of
the Police Chief, to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and assist
in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or
contributing to such accidents.



(1989 Code, § 13-1-3)



§ 70.04  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.



   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the
Police Chief shall conduct studies of such accidents and determine remedial
measures.



(1989 Code, § 13-1-4)



§ 70.05  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   (A)   The Police Department, under the direction of the Police
Chief, shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports.
Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by
location.



   (B)   The Police Department, under the direction of the Police
Chief, shall receive and properly file all accident reports made to it under
state law or under any law of the town. All such accident reports made by
drivers shall be for the confidential use of the town. No such report shall
be admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding, other than upon request of
any person making such report or upon request of the court having
jurisdiction, to prove compliance with the laws requiring the making of any
such report.



(1989 Code, § 13-1-5)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC CONTROL



Section



   71.01   Directing traffic



   71.02   Obedience to traffic regulations



   71.03   Use of coasters, roller skates, and similar devices
restricted



   71.04   Traffic-control devices



   71.05   Authority to designate crosswalks, establish safety zones,
and mark traffic lanes



   71.06   Authority concerning turning markers



   71.07   Authority concerning turn signs



   71.08   Limitations on turning around



   71.09   One-way streets and alleys



   71.10   Regulation of traffic intersections



   71.11   Drivers to obey signs



   71.12   Processions



   71.13   Speed limits



   71.14   Alley usage



   71.15   Traffic-control markings and devices



 



   71.99   Penalty



Cross-references:



   Abandoned vehicles on private property, see Ch. 96



   Heavy truck traffic, see Ch. 73



   Operation of vehicles on public and private property, see § 93.05



   Police and Fire Departments, see Ch. 33



   Traffic schedules, see Ch. 74



   Vehicles on park grounds, see § 97.03



   Vehicles parking and use on vacant lots, see § 93.04



§ 71.01  DIRECTING TRAFFIC.



   (A)   The police officers are hereby authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand, or signal.



   (B)   Firefighters, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or
assist a police officer in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.



(1989 Code, § 13-2-1)



§ 71.02  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   It is unlawful, except as otherwise provided in this code, for any
person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this
chapter or willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer or of any Fire Department official.



(1989 Code, § 13-2-2)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.03  USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.



   No person upon roller skates or riding any coaster, toy vehicle, or
similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a
crosswalk, and, when crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.



(1989 Code, § 13-2-3)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.04  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   The Police Chief, with the approval of the Council, shall
place and maintain traffic-control devices, signs, and signals when and as
required under the traffic regulations of the town to make effective the
provisions of said regulations, and may place and maintain such additional
traffic-control devices as he or she may deem necessary to regulate traffic
under the traffic laws of the town or under state law or to guide or warn
traffic.



   (B)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any
official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with
the traffic regulations of the town unless otherwise directed by a police
officer, subject to the exceptions granted in this chapter or by state law.



(1989 Code, § 13-2-4)



§ 71.05  AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS, ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES, AND
MARK TRAFFIC LANES.



   The Police Chief is hereby authorized, on approval by the Council:



   (A)   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or
lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in
his or her opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the
roadway, and at such other places as he or she may deem necessary;



   (B)   To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at
such places as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of
pedestrians; and



   (C)   To mark lanes for traffic on street pavement at such places as
he or she may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic laws of the town.



(1989 Code, § 13-2-5)



§ 71.06  AUTHORITY CONCERNING TURNING MARKERS.



   (A)   The Police Chief is authorized to place markers, buttons, or
signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be
traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.



   (B)   When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are
placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions
of such indications.



(1989 Code, § 13-2-6)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.07  AUTHORITY CONCERNING TURN SIGNS.



   (A)   (1)   The Police Chief, on approval by the Council, is
hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of
vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn and shall place proper signs
at such intersections.



      (2)   The making of such turns may be prohibited between
certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the
same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or such signs may be removed
when such turns are permitted.



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right
or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of any such sign.



(1989 Code, § 13-2-7)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.08  LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.



   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district, nor shall a
driver upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be
made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.



(1989 Code, § 13-2-8)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.09  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   The Council shall by resolution designate any streets or
alleys which are to be limited to one-way traffic.



   (B)   (1)   When any resolution of the Council designates any
one-way street or alley, the Police Chief shall place and maintain signs
giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such
signs are in place.



      (2)   Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic
movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in
the opposite direction is prohibited.



(1989 Code, § 13-2-9)



§ 71.10  REGULATION OF TRAFFIC INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   The Council shall by resolution designate through streets,
intersections where stops are required, and intersections where vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way.



   (B)   When any resolution of the Council shall designate any through
street or intersection where vehicles are to stop or yield the right-of-way,
the Police Chief shall erect and maintain the appropriate signs at every
location where a vehicle must stop or yield the right-of-way.



(1989 Code, § 13-2-10)



§ 71.11  DRIVERS TO OBEY SIGNS.



   (A)   Whenever traffic signs are erected as provided in this
chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall obey such signs unless directed to
proceed by a police officer or a traffic-control signal.



   (B)   No driver shall drive upon or through any private property
such as an oil station, vacant lot, or similar property to avoid obedience to
any regulation included in this chapter.



(1989 Code, § 13-2-11)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.12  PROCESSIONS.



   (A)   No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be
held without first securing a permit from the Police Chief, and all such
requests for permits shall state the time, place of formation, proposed line
of march, destination, and such other information as the Police Chief may
request.



   (B)   A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles
shall be identified by such methods as may be determined and designated by
the Police Chief.



   (C)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles
comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion
and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals
or a police officer.



   (D)   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as
near to the right hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the
vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.



(1989 Code, § 13-2-12)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.13  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle on any street within the town
limits except as designated in Chapter 74 at a speed in excess of 25 mph, and
any speed in excess of this speed shall be prima facie evidence that the
speed is too great and therefore unreasonable and unlawful.



   (B)   The maximum lawful speed as provided in this section shall be
reduced to that which is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and
having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing as per A.R.S.
§ 28-701D.



   (C)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed that is less
than that which is reasonable and prudent under existing conditions.



(1989 Code, § 13-2-13)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.14  ALLEY USAGE.



   (A)   ALLEY is hereby defined as a town right-of-way which primarily
provides public safety access to the rear of buildings or lots and is not
intended for general use by members of the public who do not own or reside on
property which abuts the alley. Alleys are also used for public utility
easements. An alley is contrasted with a street which is a town right-of-way
that is intended for general use of the public whether or not they own or
reside in property that abuts the street. Generally, a street provides access
to the front or side of a lot.



   (B)   The Town Manager is hereby authorized to post appropriate
“no trespassing” signs in any alley identified by resolution of the Town
Council. Such signs shall advise the public that trespassing in the alley
shall result in criminal prosecution and penalties as set forth hereafter
(see Resolution 1999-21).



   (C)   This section will not apply to a resident whose residence or
property is contiguous to the alley and who is driving or walking or working
in the alley for legitimate reasons.



   (D)   The Town Manager may designate only certain hours that the no
trespassing rules would be in effect or he or she may designate a 24-hour
period. If less than a 24-hour period is designated, the hours that the
ordinance is in effect must be set forth on the no trespassing sign.



   (E)   No prosecution shall occur under this section until the
Council has designated the alley and an appropriate sign has been placed
there.



(Ord. 99-06, passed 11-18-1999; Res. 99-21, passed 11-18-1999)



§ 71.15  TRAFFIC-CONTROL MARKINGS AND DEVICES.



   All traffic-control markings and devices used in the town will be in
conformance with the Uniform Manual on Traffic-Control Devices.



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of A.R.S. Title 28,
which is classified as a civil traffic violation, shall be subject to the
imposition of a civil sanction not to exceed $250, unless another penalty is
specified.



   (B)   (1)   In addition to any civil sanction imposed, the town
court shall assess a default fee of $25.



      (2)   A default cost in the amount of $25 shall be assessed on
each civil traffic violation for failure to appear in a civil traffic
violation case, or for failure to pay or satisfy in full, a civil sanction
imposed in a civil traffic violation case when due.



   (C)   Anyone convicted of violating § 71.14 is guilty of a Class 3
Misdemeanor subject to a maximum fine of up to $500 and incarceration in jail
for up to 30 days, or both.



(Ord. 97-04, passed - -; Ord. 99-06, passed 11-18-1999; Res. 99-21, passed
11-18-1999; Ord. 2005-03, passed 6-9-2005)



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING



Section



   72.01   Method of parking



   72.02   Blocking traffic



   72.03   Parking adjacent to schools



   72.04   Authority to erect signs restricting parking



   72.05   Parking vehicles on sidewalks



   72.06   Abandoned vehicles on public property



   72.07   Restricted parking areas for the handicapped



   72.08   Parking vehicles for sale



 



   72.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Abandoned vehicles on private property, see Ch. 96



   Operation of vehicles on public and private property, see § 93.05



   Vehicles parking and use on vacant lots, see § 93.04



§ 72.01  METHOD OF PARKING.



   Except as otherwise provided by resolution of the Council, every
vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall
be so stopped or parked with the right hand wheels of such vehicle parallel
to and within 18 inches of the right hand curb.



(1989 Code, § 13-3-1)



§ 72.02  BLOCKING TRAFFIC.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle, or
other vehicle, upon a street in the town in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than 20 feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a person may
stop temporarily, in the actual loading or unloading of passengers or, when
necessary, in the observance of traffic signs or signals of a police officer.



   (B)   No person shall park a motor vehicle, or other vehicle, within
an alley or entrance to a private driveway except for the loading or
unloading of materials, and not then unless such loading or unloading can be
accomplished without blocking the alley to the free movement of vehicular
traffic.



(1989 Code, § 13-3-2)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.03  PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.



   When signs are erected indicating no parking on that side of the street
adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such
designated place for one hour before school opens until one hour after school
closes on any school day.



(1989 Code, § 13-3-3)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.04  AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS RESTRICTING PARKING.



   The Town Manager may direct the Police Chief to erect signs requiring
parking at an angle to the curb, allowing parking on the left hand curb on
one-way streets, notifying drivers that parking is prohibited, and
restricting parking in any way that may be necessary. No parking restrictions
shall become effective until signs have been erected as authorized by this
section. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle in disobedience to such
parking restrictions. The Town Manager shall report any changes to the
parking regulations of the Town Mayor and Town Council within 30 days of any
such change. The parking change shall continue in effect until such time as
either the Manager or the Town Council orders that such regulation be
rescinded or amended.



(1989 Code, § 13-3-4)  (Ord. 99-03, passed 2-11-1999)  Penalty, see §
72.99



§ 72.05  PARKING VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall park any vehicle, whether in usable condition or not,
nor shall an owner permit his or her vehicle to be parked upon any sidewalk
or public right-of-way in the town.



(1989 Code, § 13-3-5)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.06  ABANDONED VEHICLES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   Any vehicle parked upon a public sidewalk for any length of time or any
vehicle disabled or otherwise remaining parked upon a public street of the
town for more than three days without being moved is declared to be an
abandoned vehicle and the police shall remove said vehicle from the streets
or sidewalk of the town with the owner of said vehicle to pay the removal
cost.



(1989 Code, § 13-3-6)  (Ord. 2005-07, passed 6-9-2005)



§ 72.07  RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS FOR THE HANDICAPPED.



   No person shall park a vehicle in a parking space set aside and
identified for use only by persons with physical disabilities, unless the
vehicle has displayed thereon a distinguishing insignia or numbered plates
bearing the international wheelchair symbol as provided in A.R.S. § 28-881.



(1989 Code, § 13-3-7)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.08  PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE.



   (A)   No person shall park, or permit to be parked, any motor
vehicle or trailer as defined in A.R.S. § 28-101, or any boat or watercraft
as defined in A.R.S. §§ 5-301 et seq., on any lot or area within the town
for the purpose of offering said vehicle, trailer, or boat for sale unless
the property in question is the subject of appropriate zoning, licenses, and
permits, including a business license, to allow the operation of a business
selling motor vehicles, trailers, or watercraft on said lot.



   (B)   This section shall not be applicable to vehicles, trailers, or
watercraft parked by the registered owner on a residential lot, owned by the
owner of the motor vehicle, trailer, or watercraft, and upon which said owner
actually resides, providing that no more than two such sales per calendar
year shall be allowed.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall preclude a person, in an
appropriate case, from also being charged with criminal trespass and/or
operating a business without a license.



(Ord. 2000-01, passed 1-13-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Violation of § 72.08 is a civil traffic violation and shall
be a minimum fine of $85, with a maximum fine of $250.



CHAPTER 73:  HEAVY TRUCK TRAFFIC



Section



   73.01   Definitions



   73.02   Manager’s authority to designate streets



   73.03   Heavy truck traffic prohibited on some streets



   73.04   Future prohibition



   73.05   Warning signs



 



   73.99   Penalty



§ 73.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HEAVY TRUCK. A motor vehicle having a gross vehicle weight of 9,600
pounds or more or any truck and trailer combination exceeding 9,600 pounds or
any truck and trailer combination consisting of 18 wheels or more.



   THROUGH TRUCK TRAFFIC. A heavy truck which is traveling through the
town and has neither a departure point nor a delivery and/or destination
point within the town limits.



(Ord. 2001-07, passed 9-27-2001)



§ 73.02  MANAGER’S AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE STREETS.



   The Manager shall have the authority to declare that through heavy
truck traffic is forbidden on such streets as are designated by the Manager.



(Ord. 2001-07, passed 9-27-2001)



§ 73.03  HEAVY TRUCK TRAFFIC PROHIBITED ON SOME STREETS.



   No through heavy truck traffic shall operate on Avenida Dei Yaqui, nor
on Guadalupe Road anywhere within the town unless such heavy traffic has
departed from a departure point within the town and/or is traveling to a
delivery or destination point within the town.



(Ord. 2001-07, passed 9-27-2001)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.04  FUTURE PROHIBITION.



   The Manager may ban through heavy truck traffic from additional streets
in the future.



(Ord. 2001-07, passed 9-27-2001)



§ 73.05  WARNING SIGNS.



   Prior to enforcement of this chapter, the Manager will cause
appropriate warning signs in compliance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic-Control Devices to be placed at appropriate intervals on streets
where through heavy truck traffic is banned.



(Ord. 2001-07, passed 9-27-2001)



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   Any violation of this chapter shall be a class one misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,500 and/or a jail term not to exceed
six months.



(Ord. 2001-07, passed 9-27-2001)



CHAPTER 74:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule




   I   Speed limits




SCHEDULE I.  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   Commercial vehicles.



      (1)   The speed limit for commercial vehicle traffic on San
Angelo Street between Avenida del Yaqui and Calle Maravilla shall be 15 mph.



      (2)   The speed limit for commercial vehicle traffic on Calle
Iglesia between Avenida del Yaqui and Calle Yusuco shall be 15 mph.



      (3)   The Public Works Department is hereby empowered to post
signs regulating the speed of commercial vehicle traffic.



      (4)   For purposes of this division (A), COMMERCIAL VEHICLE
means any vehicle used for commercial purposes, whether or not in use as such
at the particular time of an offense under this division (A), having a gross
vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or more. COMMERCIAL VEHICLE does not include
vehicles used for municipal or governmental purposes.



      (5)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of
this division (A) shall be guilty of a civil traffic violation subject to the
provisions of A.R.S. Title 28.



   (B)   Speed limits. The speed limit for vehicle traffic on Calle
Vauo Nawi (south of Calle Guadalupe) shall be 15 mph. The Public Works
Department is hereby empowered to post signs regulating the speed of vehicle
traffic on this street. Any person found guilty of violating this division
(B) shall be guilty of a civil traffic violation subject to the provisions of
A.R.S. Title 28.



(Ord. 95-01, passed 3-9-1995; Ord. 2006-02, passed 3-23-2006)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS GENERALLY



      91.   FIREWORKS



      92.   HEALTH AND SANITATION



      93.   AIR QUALITY AND FUGITIVE DUST



      94.   CEMETERY REGULATIONS



      95.   PARTY PERMITS



      96.   ABANDONED VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



      97.   PARK REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS GENERALLY



Section




General Provisions




   90.01   Dangerous animals



   90.02   Killing dangerous animals



   90.03   Noises



   90.04   Strays; housing



   90.05   Swine



   90.06   Animals that bite




Rules and Regulations




   90.20   Definitions



   90.21   The State Veterinarian and the Department of Agriculture



   90.22   State Department of Health Services



   90.23   Enforcement agent



   90.24   License fees for dogs; tags; records; penalties;
classification



   90.25   Kennel permit; fee; violation; classification



   90.26   Anti-rabies vaccination; vaccination and license stations



   90.27   Rabies Control Fund



   90.28   Dogs not permitted at large; wearing license



   90.29   Establishment of pounds; impounding and disposal of dogs and
cats; reclaiming impounded dogs and cats; pound fees



   90.30   Animals that bite; reporting; and authority to destroy
animals



   90.31   Unlawful interference with enforcement agent



   90.32   Removing impounded animals



   90.33   Unlawful keeping of dogs



   90.34   Disposal of fecal matter



   90.35   Violation; classification



   90.36   Dogs; liability



   90.37   Proper care, maintenance, and destruction of impounded
animals



Cross-reference:



   General offenses, see Ch. 130



   Police and Fire Departments, see Ch. 33



   Park regulations, see Ch. 97




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 90.01  DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   It is unlawful to permit any dangerous, vicious animal of any kind to
run at large within the town, and such animals shall be immediately impounded
by the Police Department. Exhibitions or parades of animals, other than
domestic pets, may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the Town
Marshal.



(1989 Code, § 6-1-1)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.02  KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   The members of the Police Department are authorized to kill any
dangerous animals of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any
person or property.



(1989 Code, § 6-1-2)



§ 90.03  NOISES.



   It is unlawful and hereby declared a public nuisance for any person to
harbor or keep any animals which habitually bark, howl, yelp, squeal, shriek
or make any other sounds which disturb the peace and quiet of any
neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person
of normal sensitiveness residing in the area.



(1989 Code, § 6-1-3)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  STRAYS; HOUSING.



   (A)   Any person who keeps or causes to be kept any horses, mules,
cattle, burros, goats, sheep, or other livestock or poultry shall keep such
livestock or poultry in a pen or similar enclosure to prevent their roaming
at large within the corporate limits of the town.



   (B)   Any such livestock or poultry running at large may be
impounded by the Police Department.



   (C)   It is unlawful to cause or allow any stable or place where any
animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome.



(1989 Code, § 6-1-4)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.05  SWINE.



   It is unlawful to keep any live swine or pigs in the town.



(1989 Code, § 6-1-5)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.06  ANIMALS THAT BITE.



   Whenever any animal, except a dog, bites a person, the person so bitten
and the owner of the animal shall immediately notify the enforcement agent,
who shall cause an examination of the animal to be made by a duly licensed
physician or a duly licensed veterinarian, and shall order the animal held on
the owner’s premises or shall have it impounded as long as necessary for a
complete examination, if it is determined that the animal is infected with
rabies or other dangerous, contagious, and infectious disease, it shall be
the duty of the enforcement agent to destroy such animal in as humane a
manner as is reasonably possible. If at the end of the quarantine or
impoundment, a veterinarian is convinced that the animal is free from such
disease, the animal shall be released. If the animal dies during the period
of quarantine or impoundment, its head shall be sent to the laboratory at the
Department of Health Services for examination.



(1989 Code, § 6-1-6)




RULES AND REGULATIONS




§ 90.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL. Any animal of a species that is susceptible to rabies, except
humans.



   AT LARGE. On or off premises of the owner and not under control of the
owner or other person acting for the owner. Any dog in a suitable enclosure
or confined shall not be considered to be running AT LARGE.



   CUSTODIAN. Any person keeping, possessing, harboring, or maintaining
any dog.



   DEPARTMENT. The State Department of Health Services.



   ENFORCEMENT AGENT. The person in each county who has responsibility for
the enforcement of this chapter and the regulations promulgated thereunder.



   IMPOUND. The act of taking or receiving into custody by the enforcement
agent any dog or other animal for the purpose of confinement in an authorized
pound in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   KENNEL. An enclosed, controlled area, inaccessible to other animals, in
which a person keeps, harbors, or maintains five or more dogs under
controlled conditions.



   LIVESTOCK. Neat animals, horses, sheep, goats, swine, mules, and asses.



   OWNER. Any person keeping an animal other than livestock for more than
six consecutive days.



   POUND. Any establishment authorized for the confinement, maintenance,
safekeeping, and control of dogs and other animals that come into the custody
of the enforcement agent in the performance of his or her official duties.



   RABIES QUARANTINE AREA. Any area in which a state of emergency has been
declared to exist due to the occurrence of rabies in animals in or adjacent
to this area.



   STRAY DOG. Any dog three months of age or older running at large that
is not wearing a valid license tag.



   VACCINATION. The administration of an anti-rabies vaccine to animals by
a veterinarian or in authorized pounds by employees trained by a veterinarian.



   VETERINARIAN. Unless otherwise indicated, any veterinarian licensed to
practice in this state or any veterinarian employed in this state by a
governmental agency.



   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Any establishment operated by a veterinarian
licensed to practice in this state that provides clinical facilities and
houses animals or birds for dental, medical, or surgical treatment. A
VETERINARY HOSPITAL may have adjacent to it or in conjunction with it, or as
an integral part of it, pens, stalls, cages, or kennels for quarantine,
observation, or boarding.



   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal of the order carnivora that has a propensity
to bite human beings without provocation and has been so declared after a
hearing before a justice of the peace or a Town Magistrate.



   VICIOUS DOG. Includes:



      (1)   Any dog with a known propensity, tendency, or
disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to, or otherwise threaten
the safety of human beings or domestic animals;



      (2)   Any dog which because of its size, physical nature, or
vicious propensity is capable of inflicting serious physical harm or death to
humans and which would constitute a danger to human life or property if it
were not kept in the manner required by this chapter;



      (3)   Any dog which, without provocation, attacks or bites, or
has attacked or bitten, a human being or domestic animal;



      (4)   Any dog owned or in the custody of a custodian primarily
or in part for the purpose of dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog
fighting; or



      (5)   Any pit bull terrier, which shall be defined as any
American pit bull terrier or Staffordshire bull terrier or American
Staffordshire terrier breed of dog, or any mixed breed of dog which contains
as an element of its breeding the breed of American pit bull terrier or
Staffordshire bull terrier or American Staffordshire terrier as to be
identifiable as partially of the breed of American pit bull terrier or
Staffordshire bull terrier or American Staffordshire bull terrier.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-1)  (Ord. 89-04, passed 7-13-1989; Ord. 2003-10, passed
10-23-2003)



§ 90.21  THE STATE VETERINARIAN AND THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE .



   (A)   The State Veterinarian shall designate the type or types of
anti-rabies vaccines that may be used for vaccination of animals, the period
of time between vaccination and re-vaccination and the dosage and method of
administration of the vaccine.



   (B)   The State Department of Agriculture shall regulate the
handling and disposition of animals classed as livestock that have been
bitten by a rabid or suspected rabid animal or are showing symptoms
suggestive of rabies.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-2)



§ 90.22  STATE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES.



   (A)   The State Department of Health Services shall regulate the
handling and disposition of animals other than livestock that have been
bitten by a rabid or suspected rabid animal or are showing symptoms
suggestive of rabies.



   (B)   The State Department of Health Services may require the
enforcement agent to submit a record of all dog licenses issued and in
addition any information deemed necessary to aid in the control of rabies.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-3)



§ 90.23  ENFORCEMENT AGENT.



   (A)   The enforcement agent shall:



      (1)   Enforce the provisions of this chapter and the
regulations promulgated thereunder;



      (2)   Issue citations for the violation of the provisions of
this chapter and the regulations promulgated thereunder. The procedure for
the issuance of notices to appear shall be as provided for peace officers in
A.R.S. § 13-3903, except that the enforcement agent shall not make an arrest
before issuing the notice; and



      (3)   Be responsible for declaring a rabies quarantine area
within area of jurisdiction. When a quarantine area has been declared, the
enforcement agent shall meet with the State Veterinarian and representatives
from the Department of Health Services and the Game and Fish Department to
implement an emergency program for the control of rabies within the area. Any
regulations restricting or involving movements of livestock within the area
shall be subject to approval by the State Veterinarian.



   (B)   The issuance of citations pursuant to this section shall be
subject to the provisions of A.R.S. § 13-3899.



   (C)   The enforcement agent may designate deputies.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-4)         



§ 90.24  LICENSE FEES FOR DOGS; TAGS; RECORDS; PENALTIES; CLASSIFICATION.



   (A)   The board of supervisors of each county may set a license fee
which shall be paid for each dog three months of age or over that is kept,
harbored, or maintained within the boundaries of the state for at least 30
consecutive days of each calendar year. License fees shall become payable at
the discretion of the board of supervisors of each county. The licensing
period shall not exceed the period of time for re-vaccination as designated
by the State Veterinarian. Licensee fees shall be paid withing 90 days to the
board of supervisors. A penalty fee of $2 shall be paid if the license
application is made less than one year subsequent to the date on which the
dog is required to be licensed under this chapter. If the license application
is made one year or later from the date on which the dog is required to be
licensed, an additional penalty fee of $10 shall be paid for each subsequent
year up to a maximum of $22. This penalty shall not be assessed against
applicants who furnish adequate proof that the dog to be licensed has been in
their possession less than 30 consecutive days.



   (B)   Durable dog tags shall be provided. Each dog licensed under
the terms of this chapter shall receive, at the time of licensing, such a tag
on which shall be inscribed the name of the county, the number of the license
and the date on which it expires. The tag shall be attached to a collar or
harness which shall be worn by the dog at all times while running at large,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Whenever a dog tag is lost, a
duplicate tag shall be issued upon application by the owner and payment of a
fee to the enforcement agent.



   (C)   License fees may be lower for dogs permanently incapable of
procreation. An applicant for a license for a dog claimed to be incapable of
procreation shall furnish adequate proof satisfactory to the enforcement
agent that such dog has been surgically altered to be permanently incapable
of procreation.



   (D)   Any person who fails within 15 days after written notification
from the enforcement agent to obtain a license for a dog required to be
licensed, counterfeits or attempts to counterfeit an official dog tag, or
removes such tag from any dog for the purpose of willful and malicious
mischief or places a dog tag upon a dog unless the tag was issued for that
particular dog is guilty of a Class 2 Misdemeanor.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-5)  (Ord. 2003-10, passed 10-23-2003)  Penalty, see §
90.99



§ 90.25  KENNEL PERMIT; FEE; VIOLATION; CLASSIFICATION.



   (A)   A person operating a kennel shall obtain a permit issued by
the board of supervisors of the county where the kennel is located except if
each individual dog is licensed.



   (B)   The annual fee for the kennel permit is $75.



   (C)   A dog remaining within the kennel is not required to be
licensed individually under A.R.S. § 11-1009. A dog leaving the controlled
kennel conditions shall be licensed under A.R.S. § 11-1009, except if the
dog is only being transported to another kennel which has a permit issued
under this section.



   (D)   A person who knowingly fails within 30 days after written
notification from the county enforcement agent to obtain a kennel permit is
guilty of a Class 2 Misdemeanor.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-6)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.26  ANTI-RABIES VACCINATION; VACCINATION AND LICENSE STATIONS.



   (A)   Before a license is issued for any dog, the owner must present
a vaccination certificate signed by a veterinarian stating the owner’s name
and address and giving the dog’s description, date of vaccination, and
type, manufacturer, and serial number of the vaccine used, and date
re-vaccination is due. A duplicate of each rabies vaccination certificate
issued shall be transmitted to the enforcement agent on or before the tenth
day of the month following the month during which the dog was vaccinated. No
dog shall be licensed unless it is vaccinated in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the regulations promulgated thereunder.



   (B)   A dog vaccinated in any other state prior to entry into this
state may be licensed in this state provided that, at the time of licensing,
the owner of such dog presents a vaccination certificate, signed by a
veterinarian licensed to practice in that state or a veterinarian employed by
a governmental agency in that state, stating the owner’s name and address
and giving the dog’s description, date of vaccination, and type,
manufacturer, and serial number of the vaccine used. The vaccination must be
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.



   (C)   The enforcement agent shall make provisions for vaccination
clinics as deemed necessary. The vaccination shall be performed by a
veterinarian.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-7)



§ 90.27  RABIES CONTROL FUND.



   (A)   The enforcement agent or his or her authorized representative
shall place the monies collected by him or her under the provisions of this
chapter in a special fund to be known as the Rabies Control Fund to be used
for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.



   (B)   Any unencumbered balance remaining in the Rabies Control Fund
at the end of a fiscal year shall be carried over into the following fiscal
year.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-8)



§ 90.28  DOGS NOT PERMITTED AT LARGE; WEARING LICENSE.



   (A)   No dog shall be permitted at large. Each dog shall be confined
within an enclosure on the owner’s property, secured so that the dog is
confined entirely to the owner’s property, or on a leash not to exceed six
feet in length and directly under the owner’s physical control when not on
the owner’s property.



   (B)   Any dog over the age of three months on or off the premises of
owner and not under physical control of the owner or persons acting for the
owner, or any dog not in a suitable enclosure which actually confines the
dog, shall wear a collar or harness to which is attached a valid license tag.
Any dog over the age of three months on the premises of the owner and either
confined or under physical control of the owner or persons acting for the
owner need not wear a collar or harness with a valid license attached,
provided that they are properly vaccinated, licensed, and in compliance with
all sections of this chapter. Dogs used for control of livestock or while
being used or trained for hunting or dogs while being exhibited or trained at
a kennel club event or dogs while engaged in races approved by the state’s
Racing Commission, and such dogs while being transported to and from such
events, need not wear a collar or harness with a valid license attached
provided that they are properly vaccinated, licensed, and controlled.



   (C)   If any dog is at large on the public property, then said
dog’s owner or person acting for the owner is in violation of this chapter.



   (D)   If any dog is at large on the public park or school property,
then said dog’s owner or persons acting for the owner is in violation of
this chapter.



   (E)   If any female dog during her breeding or mating season or any
vicious dog at large, then said dog’s owner or persons acting for the owner
is in violation of this chapter.



   (F)   Any owner or persons acting for the owner who allows a dog to
run at large shall be considered in violation of this chapter unless one of
the following four exceptions applies.



      (1)   A dog is not at large if said dog is restrained by a
leash, chain, rope, or cord of not more than six feet in length and of
sufficient strength to control action of said dog.



      (2)   If said dog is used for control of livestock or while
being used or trained for hunting or being exhibited or trained at a kennel
club event or while engaged in races approved by the state’s Racing
Commission.



      (3)   While said dog is actively engaged in a dog obedience
training class and accompanied by and under the control of his or her owner
or persons acting for the owner or trainer as specified in division (J) below.



      (4)   If said dog, whether on or off the premises of the owner
or persons acting for the owner, is controlled as proved in division (F)(1)
above, or is within a suitable enclosure which actually confines the dog.



   (G)   The owner or persons acting for the owner of a dog is
responsible for the acts and conduct of the dog at all times when the dog is
in a public park. All dogs three months of age or older in or upon the
premises of a public park must be currently license and shall wear a collar
and durable valid lines tag as provided by this chapter.



   (H)   The owner or persons acting for the owner of a dog must
restrain and control the dog at all times when in a public park be securing
the dog with a leash of not more than six feet, except when the dog is in an
enclosed area within the park, which has been designated by the municipality
as a dog exercise area.



   (I)   At all times when a dog is off leash in a designated dog
exercise area as provided in division (H) above, the dog must be accompanied
by and under the control of the owner or persons acting for the owner.
Additionally, the owner or persons acting for the owner must at all times
have a leash of not more than six feet in length in his or her possession.



   (J)   At all times when a dog is off leash and participating in a
dog show, exhibition, or obedience class as provided in division (F) above:



      (1)   The dog must be accompanied by and under the control of
its owner or persons acting for the owner or trainer or handler, who must at
all times have a leash in his or her possession; and



      (2)   The owner or persons acting for the owner, trainer, or
handler or authorized representative of a club or organization to whom a
permit has been issued, shall have the permit on their person at all times
and shall present the permit for inspection upon request, to any police
officer, authorized member of the public parks staff, or the enforcement
agent.



   (K)   Any dog at large shall be apprehended and impounded by the
enforcement agent.



      (1)   Said agent shall have the right to enter upon private
property when it is necessary to do so in order to apprehend any dog that has
been running at large. Such entrance upon private property shall be in
reasonable pursuit of such dog and shall not include entry into a domicile or
enclosure which confines a dog unless it be at the invitation of the occupant.



      (2)   Said agent may issue a citation (s) to the dog owner or
persons acting for the owner when the dog is at large. The procedure of the
issuance of notice to appear shall be as provided for peace officers in
A.R.S. § 13-3903, except the county enforcement agent shall not make an
arrest before issuing the notice. The issuance of citation(s) pursuant to
this chapter shall be subject to provision of A.R.S. § 13-3899.



      (3)   In the judgment of the enforcement agent, if any dog at
large or other animal that is dangerous or fierce and a threat to human
safety cannot be safely impounded, it may be slain.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-9)  (Ord. 2003-10, passed 10-23-2003)  Penalty, see §
90.99



§ 90.29  ESTABLISHMENT OF POUNDS; IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSAL OF DOGS AND CATS;
RECLAIMING IMPOUNDED DOGS AND CATS; POUND FEES.



   (A)   Any stray dog shall be impounded. All dogs and cats impounded
shall be given proper care and maintenance.



   (B)   (1)   Each stray dog or any cat impounded shall be kept and
maintained at the pound for a minimum of 72 hours unless claimed by its
owner. Any person may purchase such a dog or cat upon expiration of the
impoundment period, provided such person pays all pound fees and complies
with the licensing and vaccinating provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   If the dog or cat is not claimed within the impoundment
period, the enforcement agent shall take possession and may place the dog or
cat for sale or may dispose of the dog or cat in a humane manner.



      (3)   If such dog or cat is to be used for medical research,
no license or vaccination shall be required. The enforcement agent may
destroy impounded sick or injured dogs or cats whenever such destruction is
necessary to prevent such dog or cat from suffering or to prevent the spread
of disease.



   (C)   (1)   Any impounded licensed dog or any cat may be
reclaimed by its owner or such owner’s agent, provided that the person
reclaiming the dog or cat furnishes proof of right to do so and pays all
pound fees.



      (2)   If the dog or cat is not reclaimed within the
impoundment period, the enforcement agent shall take possession and may place
the dog or cat for sale or may dispose of the dog or cat in a humane manner.



      (3)   Any person purchasing such dog or cat shall pay all
pound fees.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-10)



§ 90.30  ANIMALS THAT BITE; REPORTING; AND AUTHORITY TO DESTROY ANIMALS.



   (A)   (1)   (a)   An unlicensed or unvaccinated dog or cat
that bites any person shall be confined and quarantined in an authorized
pound or, upon request of and at the expense of the owner, at a veterinary
hospital for a period of not less than seven days.



         (b)   A dog properly licensed and vaccinated pursuant to
this chapter that bites any person may be confined and quarantined at the
home of the owner or wherever the dog is harbored and maintained with the
consent of and in a manner prescribed by the enforcement agent.



      (2)   (a)   Any animal other than a dog or cat that bites
any person shall be confined and quarantined in an authorized pound or, upon
the request of and at the expense of the owner, at a veterinary hospital for
a period of not less than 14 days, provided that livestock shall be confined
and quarantined for the 14-day period in a manner regulated by the state’s
Livestock Board.



         (b)   If the animal is a caged rodent, it may be
confined and quarantined at the home of the owner or where it is harbored or
maintained, for the required period of time, with the consent of and in a
manner prescribed by the enforcement agent.



      (3)   Any wild animal which bites any person may be killed and
submitted to the enforcement agent or his or her deputies for transmission to
an appropriate diagnostic laboratory.



      (4)   Whenever an animal bites any person, the incident shall
be reported to the enforcement agent immediately by any person having direct
knowledge.



      (5)   The county enforcement agent may destroy any animal
confined and quarantined pursuant to this chapter prior to the termination of
the minimum confinement period for laboratory examination for rabies if:



         (a)   Such animal shows clear clinical signs of rabies;
and



         (b)   The owner of such animal consents to its
destruction.



      (6)   Any animal subject to licensing under this chapter found
without a tag identifying its owner shall be deemed unowned.



      (7)   The county enforcement agent shall destroy a vicious
animal upon an order of a justice of the peace or a Town Magistrate. A
justice of the peace or Town Magistrate may issue such an order after notice
to the owner, if any, and a hearing.



   (B)   (1)   A vicious dog is “unconfined” if the dog is not
securely confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen
or structure upon the premises of the owner or custodian of the dog. The pen
or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides.
If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be
embedded into the ground no less than one foot deep. All such pens or
structures must be adequately lighted and kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.



      (2)   Owners and custodians of vicious dogs shall not allow
their dog or dogs to be unconfined.



      (3)   Owner and custodians of vicious dogs shall not permit
their dog or dogs to go beyond the premises of the property upon which the
dog is confined unless the dog is securely muzzled and restrained by a chain
leash and under the immediate physical restraint of an adult. The muzzle
shall be made in a manner not to injure the dog or restrict its breathing,
but shall prevent it from biting.



      (4)   Owners and custodians of a vicious dog or dogs shall
display in a prominent place on the premises where the dog is confined a
visible warning sign indicating that there is a vicious dog on the premises.
A second such sign shall be posted on the pen or kennel of the animal.



      (5)   No person shall possess or harbor or maintain care or
custody of any dog for the purpose of dog fighting, or train, torment,
badger, bait, or use any dog for the purpose of causing or encouraging the
dog to attack human beings or other animals.



      (6)   Owners of vicious dogs must, within 90 days of the
enactment of this section, provide proof to the Town Manager/Clerk of public
liability insurance in the amount of at least $50,000, insuring the owner for
any personal injuries inflicted by his or her vicious dog.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-11)  (Ord. 89-04, passed 7-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
90.99



§ 90.31  UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT AGENT.



   It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the enforcement agent
in the performance of his or her duties.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-12)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.32  REMOVING IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   No person may remove or attempt to remove an animal which has been
impounded or which is in the possession of the enforcement agent except in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-13)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.33  UNLAWFUL KEEPING OF DOGS.



   It is unlawful for a person to keep, harbor, or maintain a dog or
vicious dog within the town except as provided by the terms of this chapter.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-14)  (Ord. 89-04, passed 7-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
90.99



§ 90.34  DISPOSAL OF FECAL MATTER.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person owning, possessing, harboring,
or having the care, charge, control, or custody of a dog to fail to
immediately remove and thereafter properly dispose of any fecal matter
deposited by said animal in any park or any public property, including, but
not limited to, streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, town buildings, and
parking lots.



   (B)   All such fecal matter shall be disposed of by immediately
placing it in a closed or sealed container and thereafter depositing it into
a trash receptacle, sanitary disposal unit, or other closed and sealed
container.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to blind persons or disabled
persons accompanied by a service dog used for their assistance.



(Ord. 2015-03, passed 5-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.35  VIOLATION; CLASSIFICATION.



   Any person who fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter,
or who violates any of its provisions, is guilty of a Class 2 Misdemeanor
except as to the provisions of § 90.30(B). Persons who violate or fail to
comply with the provisions of § 90.30(B) shall be guilty of a Class 1
Misdemeanor.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-15)  (Ord. 89-04, passed 7-13-1989)



§ 90.36  DOGS; LIABILITY.



   Injury to any person or damage to any property by a dog while at large
shall be the full responsibility of the dog’s owner or person responsible
for the dog when such damages were inflicted.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-16)



§ 90.37  PROPER CARE, MAINTENANCE, AND DESTRUCTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   (A)   Any animal impounded in a county, city, or town pound shall be
given proper and humane care and maintenance.



   (B)   Any dog or cat destroyed while impounded in a county, city, or
town pound shall be destroyed only by the use of one of the following:



      (1)   Sodium pentobarbital or a derivative of sodium
pentobarbital;



      (2)   Nitrogen gas; or



      (3)   T-61 euthanasia solution or its generic equivalent.



   (C)   If an animal is destroyed by means specified in division (B)
above, it shall be done by a licensed veterinarian or in accordance with
procedures established by the State Veterinarian pursuant to A.R.S. §
10-1013.



   (D)   The governing body of any county, city, or town which operates
a pound shall establish procedures for the humane destruction of impounded
animals by the methods described in divisions (B) and (C) above.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-17)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   A person who fails to obtain a kennel permit under § 90.25 is
subject to a penalty of $25 in addition to the annual fee.



(1989 Code, § 6-2-6)



CHAPTER 91:  FIREWORKS



Section



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Fireworks prohibited; exceptions



   91.03   Limited use of permissible consumer fireworks



   91.04   Sale of fireworks



   91.05   Posting of signs by persons engaged in the sale of
fireworks; civil penalty



   91.06   Authority to enforce violations; means of enforcement



   91.07   Liability for emergency responses related to use of
fireworks; definitions



 



   91.99   Penalty



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSUMER FIREWORK. Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.



   DISPLAY FIREWORK. Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.



   FIREWORKS. Any combustible or explosive composition, substance or
combination of substances, or any article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration,
or detonation that is a consumer firework and display firework as defined by
A.R.S. § 36-1601.



   NFPA 1124. The National Fire Protection Association Code for the
Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks and
Pyrotechnic Articles as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.



   NOVELTY ITEMS. Federally deregulated novelty items that are known as
snappers, snap caps, party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices,
sparklers, and certain toys as defined in A.R.S. § 36-1601.



   PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Consumer fireworks defined by A.R.S. §
36-1601 that may be sold within the town.



   SUPERVISED PUBLIC DISPLAY. A monitored performance of display fireworks
open to the public and authorized by permit by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee.



(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-13-2017)



§ 91.02  FIREWORKS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   The use, discharge, or ignition of fireworks within the town is
prohibited on all public property, including, but not limited to, public
buildings, parking lots, public parks, public schools, streets, and public
rights-of-way, except as authorized in § 91.03.



   (A)   Nothing in this section or chapter shall be construed to
prohibit the use, discharge, or ignition of novelty items or the occurrence
of a supervised public display of fireworks.



   (B)   Permits may be granted by the Fire Chief or designee for
conducting a properly supervised public display of fireworks. Every such
public display of fireworks shall be of such character and so located,
discharged, or fired, only after proper inspection and in a manner that does
not endanger persons, animals, or property. A permit shall not be issued, and
may be revoked, during time periods of High Fire Danger warnings. The Fire
Chief has authority to impose conditions on any permits granted.



(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.03  LIMITED USE OF PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS.



   The use, discharge, or ignition of permissible consumer fireworks
within the town may be used from June 24 through July 6 and December 24
through January 3 of each year, except when a federal or state agency
implements a stage one or higher restriction on these dates.



(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-13-2017)



§ 91.04  SALE OF FIREWORKS.



   (A)   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of
permissible consumer fireworks to a person who is under 16 years of age.



   (B)   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of
permissible consumer fireworks in conflict with state law, this code, or NFPA
1124.



   (C)   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of
permissible consumer fireworks, except from May 20 through July 6 and
December 10 through January 3 of each year. The sale of permissible consumer
fireworks shall be prohibited from May 20 through July 6 and December 10
through January 3 when a federal or state agency implements a stage one or
higher restriction during these dates.



(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05  POSTING OF SIGNS BY PERSONS ENGAGED IN THE SALE OF FIREWORKS;
CIVIL PENALTY.



   (A)   Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks, every
person engaged in such sales shall prominently display signs indicating the
following:




State of Arizona Consumer Fireworks Regulations




         Arizona Revised Statutes § 36-1601, et al. The use of
permissible consumer fireworks as defined under state law is allowed: June 24
- July 6 and December 24 - January 3



         The sale of permissible consumer fireworks as defined under
state law is allowed: May 20 - July 6 and December 10 - January 3



         All other fireworks are prohibited, except as authorized by
local fire department permit.



         The sale and use of novelties known as snappers (pop-its),
party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices and sparklers are
permitted at all times.



         Permissible consumer fireworks may not he sold to persons
under sixteen years of age.



         Check with your local fire department for additional
regulations and dates before using.



   (B)   Signs required under this section may be placed at any retail
sales display of permissible consumer fireworks.



   (C)   The sign shall be eight and one-half inches by eleven inches
in size, on cardstock paper, in landscape orientation, and displayed on a
contrasting background. A model sign shall be posted on town’s website and
filed with the Town Manager/Clerk’s office.



(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-13-2017)



§ 91.06  AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE VIOLATIONS; MEANS OF ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Fire Chief or designee, a County Sheriff officer, or the
Town Attorney may issue civil complaints to enforce violations of this
chapter designated as civil offenses.



   (B)   Any person authorized pursuant to this section to issue a
civil complaint may also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be
taken and the time in which they are to be taken to avoid issuance of a civil
or criminal complaint.



   (C)   A county officer or the Town Attorney may issue civil or
criminal complaints to enforce this chapter.



(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-13-2017)



§ 91.07  LIABILITY FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSES RELATED TO USE OF FIREWORKS;
DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   A person who uses, discharges, or ignites permissible consumer
fireworks, fireworks, or anything that is designed or intended to rise into
the air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly above the ground, is
liable for the expenses of any emergency response that is required by such
use, discharge, or ignition. The fact that a person is convicted or found
responsible for a violation(s) of this chapter is prima facie evidence of
liability under this section.



   (B)   The expenses of an emergency response are a charge against the
person liable for those expenses pursuant to division (A) above. The charge
constitutes a debt of that person and may be collected proportionately by the
public agencies, for-profit entities, or not-for-profit entities that
incurred the expenses. The liability imposed under this section is in
addition to and not in limitation of any other liability that may be imposed.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      EXPENSES OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE. Reasonable costs directly
incurred by public agencies, for-profit entities, or not-for-profit entities
that make an appropriate emergency response to an incident.



      REASONABLE COSTS. Includes the costs of providing police,
firefighting, rescue, and emergency medical services at the scene of an
incident and the salaries of the persons who respond to the incident.



(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-13-2017)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The penalty for violating any prohibition or requirement
imposed by this chapter is a Class 3 Misdemeanor unless another penalty is
specifically provided for.



   (B)   Failure to comply with § 91.05 is a civil offense punishable
by civil fine of $300.



   (C)   Failure to comply with any permit requirements issued by the
Fire Chief is a civil offense punishable by civil fine for each violation of
$300.



(Ord. 2017-03, passed 7-13-2017)



CHAPTER 92:  HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section




Garbage and Trash Collection




   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Award of contract



   92.03   Collection agency



   92.04   Collection hours



   92.05   Rates




Preparation of Refuse for Collection




   92.20   Preparation of refuse



   92.21   Location for pick up



   92.22   Lids and covers



   92.23   Use of containers




Other Methods of Garbage and Trash Removal




   92.35   Vehicles and receptacles to be spill-proof



   92.36   Spilled refuse



   92.37   Dumping refuse




Removal of Litter




   92.50   Definitions



   92.51   Litter on private property



   92.52   Owner to maintain premises



   92.53   Placement of debris



   92.54   Procedure to compel removal of litter



   92.55   Notice to remove



   92.56   Service of notice



   92.57   Appeal to Council



   92.58   Removal by town



   92.59   Lien for removal



 



   92.99   Penalty




GARBAGE AND TRASH COLLECTION




§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE. All putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes,
including all organic wastes that have been prepared for, or intended to be
used as, food or have resulted from the preparation of food, including all
such substances from all public and private establishments and residences.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.  All those materials which are capable of being
recycled.  These materials include many kinds of glass, paper, cardboard,
metal, plastic, textiles and electronics.



   REFUSE. All garbage and trash.



   TRASH. All nonputrescible wastes.



(1989 Code, § 10-1-1)



§ 92.02  AWARD OF CONTRACT.



   (A)   The Council may by resolution award a contract for the
collection and disposal of garbage, swill, refuse, and waste matter to any
person which the Council believes best qualified and equipped to perform the
work.



   (B)   The contract shall require the contractor to collect, remove,
and dispose of garbage, swill, refuse, and waste matter in the town in
accordance with such regulations as may be prescribed by the Council. It
shall require the contractor to carry worker’s compensation insurance and
property damage and public liability insurance in such sums as shall be fixed
by resolution.



(1989 Code, § 10-1-2)



§ 92.03  COLLECTION AGENCY.



   The town, or other collectors authorized by the town, shall collect all
refuse within the town. No person, except as provided in this chapter, shall
collect or gather refuse within the town.



(1989 Code, § 10-1-3)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.04  COLLECTION HOURS.



   The Town Manager is hereby authorized to establish the hours of
collection of refuse within the town.



(1989 Code, § 10-1-4)



§ 92.05  RATES.



   The Council shall from time to time fix the rates and classifications
for garbage and trash collection within the town and shall make such other
rules and regulations as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce
this chapter.



(1989 Code, § 10-1-5)




PREPARATION OF REFUSE FOR COLLECTION




§ 92.20  PREPARATION OF REFUSE.



   All refuse shall be prepared for collection or disposed of as follows.



   (A)   Garbage.



      (1)   Residential garbage will be picked up at the
resident’s curbside by a waste collection company hired by the town. 
Garbage containers will be provided for each residential structure in the
town.  The maximum total weight of the waste placed in the containers shall
not exceed 100 pounds. All garbage shall be placed in plastic bags before
being placed in the container. 



      (2)   Containers found to be no longer serviceable will be
replaced by the contracted waste collection company.



   (B)   Trash. Trash shall not be placed in containers provided for
residential pickup except as provided in subsection (E)(2).



   (C)   Brush. Brush shall be cut into such a size that will allow it
to be placed in the provided residential container and allow the lid of the
container to close.



   (D)   Appliances and vehicles. The customer shall, at their sole
cost, remove or cause to be removed all appliances, vehicles, or equipment
classed as refuse from his, her, or their premises or the public right-of-way.



   (E)   Building materials.



      (1)   All owners, contractors, and builders of structures
shall, upon the completion of any structure, gather up and haul away, at
their sole cost and expense, all refuse of every nature, description, or
kind, which has resulted from the building of such structure, including all
lumber scraps, shingles, plaster, brick, stone, concrete, and other building
material, and shall place the lot and all nearby premises utilized in such
construction in a clean condition.



      (2)   Residential customers may dispose of small amounts of
building materials from time to time, providing it is placed in a container
as described above and contains no concrete, masonry, or soil.



   (F)   Disposal of industrial and construction materials. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner, tenant, lessee, or contractor to dispose of
all industrial and construction materials and waste accumulated as a result
of construction and industrial operations.



   (G)   Dangerous and hazardous waste. Dangerous and hazardous wastes
shall be disposed of in accordance with standards established by the
Environmental Protection Agency and the disposal shall be the responsibility
of the customer.



   (H)   Soil and concrete. Waste soil, concrete, masonry blocks, sod,
and rocks shall be disposed of by the owner, tenant, or occupant of the
premises at the sole cost and expense to the party disposing of such
materials.



   (I)   Recyclable materials.  Residents are encouraged to recycle
materials as much as is possible.  For this purpose, the town provides a
clearly identified recycling container to all residents in which specified
residential recyclable materials will be placed. Residents will conform to
established pick-up times and guidelines for approved and acceptable
materials.



(1989 Code, § 10-2-1)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.21  LOCATION FOR PICK UP.



   All refuse placed in the town provided plastic container shall be
placed at the front of the property line on the sidewalk or parkway by 6:00
a.m. on the day of collection. All containers and piles of refuse shall be so
located as to not block the street, sidewalk, or gutter, or otherwise be a
hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.



(1989 Code, § 10-2-2)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.22  LIDS AND COVERS.



   The lids or covers of all containers shall at all times be kept secure
so that flies and other insects may not have access to the contents and shall
only be removed while the containers and receptacles are being filled,
emptied, or cleaned.



(1989 Code, § 10-2-3)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.23  USE OF CONTAINERS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be
deposited, any refuse in any container that he or she does not own or is not
entitled to use as a tenant.



   (B)   Only town residents shall dispose of locally generated
residential garbage or trash in containers furnished by the town or other
collector for the accumulation, storage, and collection of all locally
generated residential garbage or trash.



   (C)   Any nonresident of the town who disposes of any refuse or
trash in any container furnished by the town or other collector for the
accumulation, storage, and collection of all locally generated residential
garbage or trash in violation of § 92.23 shall be punishable by a fine of
not more than $500 or no more than 30 days in jail or both.



(1989 Code, § 10-2-4) Penalty, see § 92.99




OTHER METHODS OF GARBAGE AND TRASH REMOVAL




§ 92.35  VEHICLES AND RECEPTACLES TO BE SPILL-PROOF.



   It is unlawful for any person to haul or cause to be hauled on or along
any public street in the town any garbage, unless such garbage is contained
in strong, water-tight vehicles or vehicles with water-tight receptacles,
constructed to prevent any such garbage from falling, leaking, or spilling
and any odor from escaping.



(1989 Code, § 10-3-1)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.36  SPILLED REFUSE.



   Any person hauling any refuse along the streets of the town shall
immediately replace in the conveyance used for such hauling any refuse which
may fall upon any street.



(1989 Code, § 10-3-2)



§ 92.37  DUMPING REFUSE.



   It is unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed, any
refuse upon any public or private property within the town, except as
specifically permitted in this chapter.



(1989 Code, § 10-3-3)  Penalty, see § 92.99




REMOVAL OF LITTER




§ 92.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LITTER. Any rubbish, trash, weeds, filth, and debris which shall
constitute a hazard to public health and safety and shall include all
putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes including garbage, trash, ashes,
street cleaning, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and
industrial waste; any deposit, accumulation, pile, or heap of brush, grass,
debris, weeds, cans, cloth, paper, wood, rubbish, or other unsightly or
unsanitary matter of any kind whatsoever; and any growth of weeds, brush,
grass, or other vegetable growth to a height of over six inches.



   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building, or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for residential, commercial, or
industrial purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway,
porch, steps, or vestibules belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house,
building, or other structures.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or
other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds,
and buildings.



(1989 Code, § 10-4-1)



§ 92.51  LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter in or upon any
street, alley, private grounds, public grounds, school grounds, or church
grounds.



(1989 Code, § 10-4-2)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.52  OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES.



   The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all
times maintain the premises free of litter, provided that this section shall
not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.



(1989 Code, § 10-4-3)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.53  PLACEMENT OF DEBRIS.



   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall place any rubbish, trash,
filth, or debris upon any private or public property not owned or under the
control of said person, firm, or corporation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, in addition to any fine which may be imposed for violation of any
provision of this section, shall be liable for all costs which may be
assessed pursuant to this subchapter for the removal of said rubbish, trash,
filth, or debris.



(1989 Code, § 10-4-4)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.54  PROCEDURE TO COMPEL REMOVAL OF LITTER.



   The Town Manager shall enforce the provisions of §§ 92.51 through
92.53 by prosecuting violators in the Town Magistrate’s Court pursuant to
the criminal provisions of said sections, or in the event of inability to
prosecute violators by reason of failure to secure jurisdiction over their
persons, the Manager shall compel the removal of litter by the procedure
outlined in §§ 92.55 through 92.59.



(1989 Code, § 10-4-5)



§ 92.55  NOTICE TO REMOVE.



   (A)   To compel the removal of litter through the provisions of this
section and §§ 92.56 through 92.59, if a person owning or controlling any
property fails, neglects, or refuses to remove or properly dispose of litter
located on property owned or controlled by such person, he or she shall be
given written notice by certified mail by the Manager to remove all litter
from such property within 30 days from the date the notice was received by
him or her, and prior to the date of compliance on the notice.



   (B)   Such notice shall be received not less than 30 days before the
date set thereon for compliance and shall contain an estimate of the cost of
removal by the town, a statement that unless the person owning or controlling
such property complies therewith within 30 days from the date such written
notice is received that the town will, at the expense of the person owning or
controlling said property, perform the necessary work at a cost not to exceed
the estimate given in the notice, and that such person may appeal in writing
to the Council within 30 days from the date the notice is received by him or
her and prior to the date of compliance.



   (C)   An extension of the 30-day notice may be issued by the Manager
in hardship cases not to exceed two weeks from the date of compliance.



(1989 Code, § 10-4-6)



§ 92.56  SERVICE OF NOTICE.



   Notice shall be personally served on the owner or person controlling
such property, by a police officer of the town in the manner provided in Rule
4(d) of the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure, or mailed to the owner or
person controlling such property at his or her last known address by
certified or registered mail, or the address to which the tax bill for the
property was last mailed. If the owner does not reside on such property, a
duplicate notice shall also be sent to him or her by certified or registered
mail at his or her last known address.



(1989 Code, § 10-4-7)



§ 92.57  APPEAL TO COUNCIL.



   Prior to the date set for compliance on the notice, the owner or person
controlling such property may appeal in writing to the Council from the
demand of the Manager. The Council shall, at its next regular meeting after
receiving the appeal, hear and determine the same and the decision of the
Council shall be final. The Council may either affirm or reverse the decision
of the Manager or modify the scope of the work as required in the notice.



(1989 Code, § 10-4-8)



§ 92.58  REMOVAL BY TOWN.



   (A)   When any such person to whom notice, as aforesaid, has been
given, and on or before the date of compliance on the notice, or within such
further time as may have been granted by the Council on appeal, fails,
neglects, or refuses to move from such property any or all litter, the
Manager is authorized to cause same to be removed and disposed of at the
expense of the owner or person controlling such property.



   (B)   Upon completion of the work, the Manager shall prepare a
verified statement of account of the actual cost of such removal or
abatement, the date the work was completed, and the street address and the
legal description of the property on which said work was done, including 5%
for additional inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith,
and shall serve a duplicate copy of such verified statement upon the person
owning or controlling such property in the manner prescribed in § 92.56.



   (C)   The owner or person controlling such property shall have 30
days from the date of service upon him or her to appeal in writing to the
Council from the amount of the assessment as contained in the verified
statement. If an appeal is not filed with the Manager within such 30-day
period, then the amount of the assessment as determined by the Manager shall
become final and binding. If an appeal is taken, the Council shall, at its
next regular meeting, hear and determine the appeal and may affirm the amount
of the assessment, modify the amount thereof, or determine that no assessment
at all shall be made. The decision of the Council shall be final and binding
on all persons.



(1989 Code, § 10-4-9)



§ 92.59  LIEN FOR REMOVAL.



   (A)   If no appeal is taken from the amount of the assessment, or if
an appeal is taken and the Council has affirmed or modified the amount of the
assessment, the original assessment or the assessment as so modified shall be
recorded in the office of the County Recorder and, from the date of its
recording, shall be a lien on said lot or tract of land until paid. Such
liens shall be subject and inferior to the lien for general taxes and to all
prior recorded mortgage and encumbrances of record. A sale of the property to
satisfy a lien obtained under the provisions of this section shall be made
upon judgment of foreclosure or order of sale. The town shall have the right
to bring an action to enforce the lien in the superior court at any time
after the recording of the assessment, but failure to enforce the lien by
such action shall not affect its validity.



   (B)   The recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the
truth of all matters recited therein and of the regularity of all proceedings
prior to the recording thereof. A prior assessment for the purposes provided
in this section shall not be a bar to a subsequent assessment or assessments
for such purposes, and any number of liens on the same lot or tract of land
may be enforced in the same action.



(1989 Code, § 10-4-10)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any nonresident of the town who disposes of any refuse or
trash in any container furnished by the town or other collector for the
accumulation, storage, and collection of all locally generated residential
garbage or trash in violation of § 92.23 shall be punishable by a fine of
not more than $500 or no more than 30 days in jail or both.



(1989 Code, § 10-2-4)



   (C)   Any violation of § 92.51 shall be punishable by a fine of no
more than $500 or no more than 30 days in jail or both.



(1989 Code, § 10-4-2)



   (D)   Any violation of § 92.52 shall be punishable by a fine of no
more than $500 or no more than 30 days in jail or both.



(1989 Code, § 10-4-3)



   (E)   Any violation of § 92.53 shall be punishable by a fine of no
more than $500 or no more than 30 days in jail or both.



(1989 Code, § 10-4-4)



CHAPTER 93:  AIR QUALITY AND FUGITIVE DUST



Section



   93.01   Purpose



   93.02   Definitions



   93.03   Enforcement



   93.04   Vehicles parking and use on vacant lots



   93.05   Operation of vehicles on public and private property



   93.06   Parking, maneuvering, ingress, and egress



   93.07   Leaf blower restrictions



   93.08   Compliance monitoring



   93.09   Violations deemed a public nuisance



   93.10   Remedies not exclusive



   93.11   Compatibility with other regulations



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the town by improving air
quality through the regulation of fugitive dust and PM-10 particles to the
maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. The town
hereby finds and declares that this chapter is not a land use law.



   (B)   The town hereby finds and declares the objectives of this
chapter are:



      (1)   To regulate the contribution of fugitive dust and PM-10
from any town resident, developer, or visitor;



      (2)   To establish legal authority to implement all
inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary
for compliance with this chapter;



      (3)   To meet requirements imposed by state and federal law;



      (4)   To limit or prohibit situations that could be recognized
as public nuisances; and



      (5)   To allow for the protection of the public’s health and
safety, including transportation or traffic control, health and sanitation,
and pollution control.



(Ord. 2008-08, passed 4-3-2008)



§ 93.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AREA A. The part of the greater Phoenix metropolitan area where
specific pollution control programs are in place for ozone, carbon monoxide,
and particulate matter. As defined in A.R.S. § 49-541(1).



   COUNTY DUST CONTROL PERMIT. A permit issued by Maricopa County
evidencing that a dust generating operation has a satisfactory dust control
plan in place approved by the Maricopa County Air Quality Department.



   FUGITIVE DUST. The particulate matter not collected by a capture system
that is entrained in the ambient air and is caused from human and/or natural
activities, such as, but not limited to, movement of soil, vehicles,
equipment, blasting, and wind. For the purpose of this chapter, FUGITIVE DUST
does not include particulate matter emitted directly from the exhaust of
motor vehicles and other internal combustion engines, from portable brazing,
soldering, or welding equipment, or from piledrivers.



   LANDSCAPE DEBRIS. Debris generated or accumulated as a result of, or
moved in the course of, landscape operations. LANDSCAPE DEBRIS includes, but
is not limited to, grass clippings, leaves, branches, vegetative matter,
rubbish, soil, and rock.



   LEAF BLOWER. Any device that generates a stream of air that is designed
or used to move landscape debris.



   OFF-ROAD VEHICLE. A self-propelled device and its appurtenances,
including, but not limited to, off-road or all-terrain equipment, trucks,
cars, motorcycles, motorbikes, or motor buggies and excluding devices moved
by human power or used exclusively on stationary rails or trades and
excluding motorized wheelchairs.



   PERSON. Any individual, organization, public or private corporation or
other entity recognized by law, company, partnership, firm, association or
society of persons, the federal government and any of its departments or
agencies, or the state and any of its departments or agencies, or political
subdivisions.



   PM-10. The standard adopted by the Environmental Protection Agency that
focuses on smaller particulates in the air that are likely responsible for
adverse health effects because of their ability to reach the lower regions of
the respiratory tract. The PM-10 standard includes particles with an
aerodynamic diameter smaller than or equal to ten microns (micrometers) as
measured by the applicable state and federal reference test methods.



   PUBLIC ROADWAY. Any street, alley, road, highway, or thoroughfare of
any kind that is used by the public or that is open to the public as a matter
of right, for the purpose of vehicular travel.



   TOWN. The Town of Guadalupe, Arizona.



   UNSTABILIZED. A surface that has not been paved or stabilized with
asphaltic concrete, cement concrete, hardscape, penetration treatment of
bituminous material and seal coat of bituminous binder and a mineral
aggregate, decomposed granite cover, crushed granite cover, aggregate cover,
gravel cover, or grass or other continuous vegetative cover, or any
combination of such paving or stabilizing. Water or other stabilization
measure approved by the town and authorized by state law.



   VACANT LOT. Any of the following:



      (1)   An unsubdivided or undeveloped tract of land;



      (2)   A subdivided residential, industrial, institutional,
governmental, or commercial lot that contains no approved or permitted
buildings, structures, or uses of a temporary or permanent nature;



      (3)   A partially developed residential, industrial,
institutional, governmental, or commercial lot; or



      (4)   For the purpose of this chapter, a VACANT LOT is not a
public roadway.



   VEHICLE. A self-propelled device and its appurtenances, excluding
devices moved by human power or used exclusively on stationary rails or
tracks.



(Ord. 2008-08, passed 4-3-2008)



§ 93.03  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Responsibility for administration.



      (1)   The enforcement officer, acting through and designated
by the Town Manager, shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions
of this chapter involving air quality and fugitive dust. The enforcement
officer may enforce the provisions of this chapter when reasonable cause
exists to believe that any person has violated or is in violation of any
provision of this chapter.



      (2)   The term ENFORCEMENT OFFICER means any person, who is
either an employee, agent, or independent contractor, authorized by the Town
Manager to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter
and who has authority to enforce the town rules, regulations, resolutions,
and ordinances. The ENFORCEMENT OFFICER may include more than one person,
including a civil hearing officer acting in compliance with A.R.S. §
9-500.21.



   (B)   Application.



      (1)   This chapter shall not apply during a period of public
emergency as declared by the town, state authorities, or federal authorities,
or if the operation is directed by a peace officer or other public authority.



      (2)   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-500.04(H), the requirements of
§§ 93.04, 93.06, and 93.07 do not apply to any site that has a permit
issued by a control officer as defined in A.R.S. § 49-471 for the control of
fugitive dust from dust generating operations.



(Ord. 2008-08, passed 4-3-2008)



§ 93.04  VEHICLES PARKING AND USE ON VACANT LOTS.



   A person shall not park or use a vehicle on an unstabilized vacant lot
within the town. This section does not apply to sites that have been issued a
county dust control permit for the control of fugitive dust from dust
generating operations or a special parking permit issued by the town.



(Ord. 2008-08, passed 4-3-2008)



§ 93.05  OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   A person shall not operate any vehicle, including off-road
vehicles, on unpaved public property that is not a public roadway or lawful
easement without lawful authority. Lawful authority shall consist of rules,
regulations, or orders of a federal agency, this state, a county, or
municipality, which shall be made available to the public by any one of the
following methods:



      (1)   A sign to designate the property is/as open. Such sign
shall be in compliance with the standard travel management sign protocol used
by southwest land management agencies and shall at a minimum be conspicuously
placed at all points of vehicular access and contain the following
information: “Travel Must Remain On Designated Routes.” Copies of the
standard travel management sign protocol are available for review at the
Maricopa County Air Quality Department, 1001 North Central Avenue, Phoenix,
AZ 85004;



      (2)   Orders of a government land management agency;



      (3)   Most current maps approved by such government land
management agency; and



      (4)   Virtual posting from a government land management agency.



   (B)   A person shall not operate any vehicle, including off-road
vehicles, on unpaved private property that is not a private road, street, or
lawful easement and that is closed by the landowner by rule or regulation of
a federal agency, this state, a county, or a municipality or by a proper
posting, without the consent of the lawful owner. Consent of the lawful owner
consists of either or both of the following:



      (1)   A sign to designate the property is/as open. Such sign
shall be in compliance with the standard travel management sign protocol used
by southwest land management agencies and shall at a minimum be conspicuously
placed at all points of vehicular access and contain the following
information: “Travel Must Remain On Designated Routes.” Copies of the
standard travel management sign protocol are available for review at the
Maricopa County Air Quality Department, 1001 North Central Avenue, Phoenix,
AZ 85004;



      (2)   Prior written permission which contains the following:



         (a)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
person granting permission for the use of the property;



         (b)   A description of the interest the person granting
permission has in the property (i.e., property owner, lessee, or agent);



         (c)   If the person granting permission is not the owner
of the property, the written permission shall also contain the name, address,
and telephone number of the property owner;



         (d)   Specific period of time for which permission for
the use of the property is being granted; and



         (e)   The signature of the person granting permission
for the use of the property.



   (C)   Whenever any person is stopped by an enforcement officer for a
violation of this section, he or she shall, upon the request of the
enforcement officer identify or present the lawful authority or consent of
the lawful owner required in this section.



   (D)   The property owner, person entitled to immediate possession of
the property, or invitee who has lawful authority may operate such vehicles
on the property if such use does not violate any other applicable laws.



   (E)   Exemptions to this section.



      (1)   This section shall not apply to the operation of
vehicles used in the normal course of business or the normal course of
government operations.



      (2)   This section shall not apply to operations directed by
utilities for operation, distribution, and transmission systems, provided
that both of the following conditions are satisfied:



         (a)   Operations are performed with a marked company
vehicle; and



         (b)   If operations are performed with a personal
vehicle, then identification of the company shall be visible and readable by
the public.



   (F)   As mandated by A.R.S. § 9-500.27, a person who violates this
section is guilty of a Class 3 Misdemeanor.



   (G)   As mandated by A.R.S. § 9-500.27, if a person is deemed to
have violated this section, in addition to or in lieu of a fine, a judge may
order the person to perform at least eight but not more than 24 hours of
community restitution, or to complete an approved safety course related to
the off-highway operation of motor vehicles, or both.



(Ord. 2008-08, passed 4-3-2008)



§ 93.06  PARKING, MANEUVERING, INGRESS, AND EGRESS.



   (A)   Other than residential. All persons who are owners, tenants,
or operators shall maintain parking, maneuvering, ingress, and egress areas
at developments other than residential buildings with four or fewer units
with one or more of the following dust-proof paving methods:



      (1)   Asphaltic concrete;



      (2)   Cement concrete;



      (3)   Penetration treatment of bituminous material and seal
coat of bituminous binder and a mineral aggregate; and



      (4)   A stabilization method approved by the town.



   (B)   Residential. All persons who are owners, tenants, or operators
that have parking, maneuvering, ingress, or egress areas that are 3,000
square feet or more in size at residential buildings with four or fewer units
shall maintain said parking or ingress or egress areas with a paving or
stabilization method authorized by the town code or permit.



(Ord. 2008-08, passed 4-3-2008)



§ 93.07  LEAF BLOWER RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   A person shall not operate a leaf blower in a manner that
causes landscape debris to be blown into a public roadway.



   (B)   No person who is an employee or contractor of the town shall
operate a leaf blower on any high pollution advisory day forecast by the
Department of Environmental Quality, except while in vacuum mode.



(Ord. 2008-08, passed 4-3-2008)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.08  COMPLIANCE MONITORING.



   (A)   The town shall not be replaced until the inspection is
completed.



   (B)   If a property owner has security measures in force, which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises,
the property owner shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to
representatives of the town, including the enforcement officer.



   (C)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the property to be inspected shall be promptly removed by the property
owner at the written or oral request of the town, including the enforcement
officer, and shall not be replaced until the inspection is completed. The
costs of such access shall be borne by the property owner.



(Ord. 2008-08, passed 4-3-2008)



§ 93.09  VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   In addition to the enforcement process and penalties provided herein,
any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare,
and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or
restored at the violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin,
or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.



(Ord. 2008-08, passed 4-3-2008)



§ 93.10  REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   (A)   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any
other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law
and it is within the discretion of the town to seek cumulative remedies.



   (B)   The town may recover all attorneys’ fees, court costs, and
other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including
monitoring expenses.



(Ord. 2008-08, passed 4-3-2008)



§ 93.11  COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance,
rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter
are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation,
or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more
restrictive or imposes higher protective standards of human health or the
environment shall control.



(Ord. 2008-08, passed 4-3-2008)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   Unless an alternative process or penalty is expressly
indicated within this chapter or the town code, when the enforcement officer
has reasonable cause to believe that any person has violated or is in
violation of any provision of this chapter, the enforcement officer shall
issue, for the first violation of this chapter, a warning notice stating
which requirement of the chapter was violated.



      (2)   Unless an alternative process or penalty is expressly
indicated within this chapter or the town code, the enforcement officer may
impose a civil penalty of $50 for the second violation of this chapter. Upon
a third violation of this chapter, the enforcement officer may impose a civil
penalty of $100. After the fourth and subsequent violations of this chapter,
the enforcement officer may impose a misdemeanor penalty of $250.



(Ord. 2008-08, passed 4-3-2008)



CHAPTER 94:  CEMETERY REGULATIONS



Section



   94.01   General provisions



   94.02   Alcohol use banned



 



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The cemetery shall be managed by the Town Manager.



   (B)   Any one wishing to bury a body in the town cemetery must first
obtain a permit from the Town Manager/Clerk.



   (C)   Only town residents may be buried in the cemetery.



   (D)   TOWN RESIDENT is defined as a person who has resided in the
town for the last six months.



   (E)   Acceptable proof of such residency shall be a driver’s
license, voter registration card, utility bill, birth certificate, and/or any
other document that establishes the identity and address of the applicant
and/or deceased person deemed acceptable by the Town Manager/Clerk.



   (F)   Any one who disagrees with a decision by the Town
Manager/Clerk concerning the cemetery may appeal to the Town Manager,
providing they do so in writing within 72 hours of notice of the decision
being appealed. Thereafter, the Town Manager will respond within 72 hours.
The decision of the Town Manager is not appealable.



(Ord. 2003-02, passed 2-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.02  ALCOHOL USE BANNED.



   No alcohol shall be possessed, drank, consumed, sold, or transferred on
the town cemetery grounds.



(Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-27-2005)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any one found violating § 94.01 is guilty of a Class 1
Misdemeanor, the maximum penalty for which could be incarceration in jail for
a period not to exceed six months and a fine not to exceed $2,500.



   (C)   Anyone who violates § 94.02 shall have committed a Class 1
Misdemeanor as set forth in division (B) above.



(Ord. 2003-02, passed 2-13-2003; Ord. 2005-11, passed 10-27-2005)



CHAPTER 95:  PARTY PERMITS



Section



   95.01   Definitions



   95.02   Permit required



   95.03   Exemptions



   95.04   Application



   95.05   Fees



   95.06   Security



   95.07   Standards for issuance



   95.08   Notice of denial



   95.09   Appeal



   95.10   Notice to other officials



   95.11   Contents of permit



   95.12   Duty of permitees



   95.13   Prohibitions



   95.14   Revocation of permit



 



   95.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Noise regulations, see § 130.07



   Park regulations, see Ch. 97



   Town Manager, see § 31.20



§ 95.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMPLIFIED MUSIC. Live bands or musical performers using an amplified
sound system or a “disc jockey” playing musical recorders and using an
amplified sound system.



   HOST. The person who is holding the party.



   OWNER. The person who owns the property where the party is being held.



   PARTY. Any gathering of more than 30 persons for the purpose of fun,
entertainment, socializing, or any other purpose.



   PARTY PERMIT. A permit as set forth in this chapter.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.



   REQUEST FOR A FEE OR DONATION. A request that a person attending a
party pay a stated fee or a donation in exchange for admittance.



   SIDEWALK. Any area or way set aside or open to the general public for
purposes of pedestrian traffic whether or not it is paved.



   STREET. Any place or way set aside or open to the general public for
purposes of vehicular traffic including any right-of-way, shoulder, or
median, whether or not it is paved.



   TOWN. The Town of Guadalupe, Arizona.



   TOWN MANAGER. The Town Manager of the Town of Guadalupe, Arizona.



(Ord. 2003-11, passed 11-20-2003)



§ 95.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall host or allow a party on his or her property or host a
party on the property of another without first obtaining a permit from the
Town Manager or his or her designee.



(Ord. 2003-11, passed 11-20-2003)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.03  EXEMPTIONS.



   This chapter shall not apply to the following:



   (A)   Funeral and similar observances that do not use amplified
sound;



   (B)   Religious observances and other gatherings solely for the
purpose of public issue speech or protected by the first amendment to the
United States Constitution;



   (C)   Family gatherings that do not involve amplified sound; and



   (D)   Gatherings of any sort that begin after 5:00 a.m. and end
prior to 6:00 p.m.



(Ord. 2003-11, passed 11-20-2003)



§ 95.04  APPLICATION.



   (A)   A person seeking a party permit shall apply for such permit on
forms supplied by the Town Manager and the application shall be signed by the
applicant under oath.



   (B)   The application shall be filed with the Town Manager not less
than seven nor more than 90 days in advance of the proposed party date. The
Town Manager may for good cause waive the time limits set forth herein.



   (C)   The application shall state:



      (1)   Name, address, and telephone number of the host and/or
the property owner where the party is to be held;



      (2)   Name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters
of the organization hosting the party and the name of the person to be
responsible for overseeing the party;



      (3)   The requested date and time of the party. A party must
conclude by 12:00 a.m. midnight;



      (4)   The hour the party will commence and end;



      (5)   The number of persons estimated to be in attendance;



      (6)   The type of party planned and the type of events planned;



      (7)   A description of the type of any recording or sound
amplified equipment;



      (8)   If a band or musician will play without sound
amplification, the number of band members or musicians and the type of
musical instruments to be played;



      (9)   Whether alcoholic beverages will be served; and



      (10)   Any other information that the Town Manager believes
would be reasonably necessary to make a decision.



(Ord. 2003-11, passed 11-20-2003)



§ 95.05  FEES.



   (A)   A non-refundable fee of $5 shall be paid to the town by the
applicant.



   (B)   In addition to the foregoing fee, a fee of $45 shall be paid
if the party will involve amplified music.



(Ord. 2003-11, passed 11-20-2003; Ord. 2007-04, passed 7-12-2007)



§ 95.06  SECURITY.



   The Town Manager, in his or her discretion, will determine whether
police or other security shall be required. The Manager shall base his or her
decision on the size, location, and time of the party and whether alcoholic
beverages will be served.



(Ord. 2003-11, passed 11-20-2003)



§ 95.07  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The Town Manager shall issue the permit when he or she finds:



      (1)   Conduct of party will not substantially interrupt the
peace and safety of the neighborhood;



      (2)   Conduct of party will not endanger the lives and
property of persons in the party and those that live in the neighborhood;



      (3)   Adequate sanitation will be available for the expected
number of party guests;



      (4)   The location of the party is of a sufficient size to
handle the expected number of guests and there is sufficient parking for the
expected number of guests; and



      (5)   Applicant has arranged for security.



   (B)   Other factors to be considered prior to issuing of the permit:



      (1)   Whether a party permit has previously been issued for
this location within the last 30 days;



      (2)   Whether the applicant has previously had a party permit
revoked or denied; and



      (3)   No structure shall be erected on a public sidewalk,
street, or public property without approval by the Town Council.



(Ord. 2003-11, passed 11-20-2003)



§ 95.08  NOTICE OF DENIAL.



   The Town Manager shall act promptly on a timely filed application and
shall advise the applicant of a denial not less than three days prior to an
event.



(Ord. 2003-11, passed 11-20-2003)



§ 95.09  APPEAL.



   (A)   The applicant shall have the right to appeal a negative
decision by the Town Manager to the Town Council which shall hear the appeal
not later than its next regularly scheduled Council meeting, providing there
is time to properly notice such appeal on the Council agenda. If not, the
appeal will be heard at the next regular or special meeting thereafter.



   (B)   If the Town Council rejects the applicant’s appeal, the
applicant may file a request for review with the Superior Court.



(Ord. 2003-11, passed 11-20-2003)



§ 95.10  NOTICE TO OTHER OFFICIALS.



   Immediately upon issuance of the permit, the Manager shall notify the
following officials:



   (A)   Mayor and Council;



   (B)   Chief of Police/Sheriff’s Department; and



   (C)   Fire Chief.



(Ord. 2003-11, passed 11-20-2003)



§ 95.11  CONTENTS OF PERMIT.



   Each party permit shall state:



   (A)   Starting and ending time; and



   (B)   Any other requirement set forth by the Town Manager.



(Ord. 2003-11, passed 11-20-2003)



§ 95.12  DUTY OF PERMITEES.



   (A)   Permitees shall comply with all laws and permit conditions and
directions.



   (B)   The party host shall be present at the party and shall carry
the permit on his or her person.



   (C)   The party host shall maintain order at the party.



   (D)   The party host shall be responsible for any littering on the
street by his or her guests going to and from the party.



(Ord. 2003-11, passed 11-20-2003)



§ 95.13  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to host a party without first obtaining a
permit.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to attend a party for
which that person knows no permit was obtained.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to participate at a party
in such a way as to endanger the safety or property of any person.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any party host or any other person to
knowingly violate any condition of a party permit.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for the party host or any party attendee
to allow noise or fighting or other disruptive behavior or to engage in the
aforementioned conduct in such a manner as to disrupt those living in the
neighborhood of the peaceful enjoyment of their property.



   (F)   No fee or donation request will be made to guests to attend
the party unless the party has a stated charitable purpose such as a fund
raiser for a charity or a needy family. Parties purely for profit shall not
be allowed.



(Ord. 2003-11, passed 11-20-2003)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.14  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The Town Manager or his or her designee has the authority to revoke a
party permit instantly upon violation of the conditions or standards for
issuance as set forth herein or when the party creates conditions that
threaten to overwhelm the town’s police resources and endanger the lives
and property of others. The issuance of a party permit does not authorize the
recipient to violate the town noise ordinance or any other portion of the
town code or state law.



(Ord. 2003-11, passed 11-20-2003)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
Class 1 Misdemeanor subject to a fine not to exceed $2,500 and imprisonment
for not more than six months in jail. Probation is available for this offense.



(Ord. 2003-11, passed 11-20-2003)



CHAPTER 96:  ABANDONED VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



Section



   96.01   Definitions



   96.02   Abandoned vehicles



   96.03   Abatement of nuisance



 



   96.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Abandoned vehicles on public property, see § 72.06



   Parking vehicles for sale, see § 72.08



   Zoning, see Ch. 154



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED. Worn out, unused, stripped, unclaimed, scrapped, junked, or
discarded.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Land owned in the town by any person, firm,
partnership, or corporation other than the United States or the State of
Arizona.



   STORAGE . The presence or locating of abandoned motor vehicles.



   VEHICLE. An automobile, truck, or tractor, including trailers and farm
equipment.



(1989 Code, § 13-4-1)



§ 96.02  ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   All abandoned vehicles being repaired or restored shall be kept in an
enclosed area by the owner or occupant of the property upon which such
vehicle is located, in such a manner as to not be visible from any point
outside the property.



(1989 Code, § 13-4-2)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.03  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.



   (A)   The owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant of any private property
within the corporate limits of the town upon which storage of an abandoned
vehicle is made and the owner of such abandoned motor vehicle involved in
such storage shall jointly and severally be responsible for abating said
nuisance.



   (B)   Any owner, tenant, lessee, occupant, or other person who
fails, neglects, or refuses to abate such nuisance shall be notified in
writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, by the Town Manager or
his or her representative to abate said nuisance within 30 days from the date
appearing on such written notice and that such person may appeal in writing
to the Council within 30 days from the date the notice is received by him or
her and prior to the date of compliance. An extension of the 30-day notice
may be issued by the Manager in hardship cases not to exceed two weeks from
the date of compliance.



   (C)   When any such owner, tenant, lessee, occupant, or other person
to whom notice as provided in this section has been mailed fails, neglects,
or refuses for more than 30 days from the date appearing on said notice to
abate said nuisance, the Town Manager or his or her representative is hereby
authorized and directed to remove said abandoned motor vehicle from said
premises, and dispose of the vehicle according to the provisions of the
Arizona Revised Statutes relating to abandoned vehicles, including a report
to the Motor Vehicle Division of the state’s Department of Transportation.
The owner or person controlling such property shall have 30 days from the
date of service upon him or her to appeal in writing to the Council from the
amount of the assessment as contained in the verified statement. If an appeal
is not filed with the Manager within such 30-day period, then the amount of
the assessment as determined by the Manager shall become final and binding.
If an appeal is taken, the Council shall, at its next meeting, hear and
determine the appeal and may affirm the amount of the assessment, modify the
amount thereof, or determine that no assessment at all shall be made. The
decision of the Council shall be final and binding on all persons.



(1989 Code, § 13-4-3)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any owner, tenant, lessee, occupant, or
other person to fail, neglect, or refuse to abate the nuisance as provided in
this chapter, and upon conviction thereof, may be punished by a fine of not
more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.



   (B)   Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. The imposition of any sentence shall not
exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



(1989 Code, § 13-4-6)



CHAPTER 97:  PARK REGULATIONS



Section



   97.01   Alcoholic beverages in parks



   97.02   Hours of operation; loitering



   97.03   Riding vehicles on grounds



   97.04   Damaging facilities



 



   97.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   General offenses, see Ch. 130



   Placement of debris, see § 92.53



§ 97.01  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PARKS.



   It is unlawful for any person while on the premises of a town park to
commit any of the following acts:



   (A)   Drink or have in his or her possession any alcoholic
beverages; or



   (B)   Have in his or her possession any bottle, can, container, box,
or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened,
its seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed.



(1989 Code, § 12-2-1)  (Ord. 2003-09, passed 9-25-2003)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.02  HOURS OF OPERATION; LOITERING.



   (A)   All municipal parks, playgrounds, and recreational facilities
shall be open for the use of the general public between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



   (B)   No person shall loiter upon the grounds of any municipal park,
playground, recreational area, or facility without the express written
permission of an authorized representative of the town between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



(1989 Code, § 12-2-2)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.03  RIDING VEHICLES ON GROUNDS.



   No person shall drive or ride at any time any automobile, truck,
motorcycle, motor scooter, horse, or other motor vehicle or animal upon the
grounds of any municipal park, playground, recreational area, or facility,
except within designated parking areas located upon the premises, without the
express permission of the town or an authorized representative of the town.



(1989 Code, § 12-2-3)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.04  DAMAGING FACILITIES.



   No person shall damage or wastefully or improperly use any temporary or
permanent fixture in any municipal park, playground, recreational area, or
facility or cause the lighting facilities or electrical appliances to be
turned on or used without the express permission of the town or an authorized
representative of the town.



(1989 Code, § 12-2-4)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Upon conviction for violation of § 97.01, the sentence to be
imposed shall be a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more
than 30 days or both.



(1989 Code, § 12-2-1)  (Ord. 2003-09, passed 9-25-2003)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   PEDDLERS



      111.   BUSINESS LICENSE TAX



      112.   MASSAGE PARLORS AND BATHHOUSES



      113.   CABLE REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 110:  PEDDLERS



Section



   110.01   Registration required



   110.02   Application to Town Manager



   110.03   Issuance of registration cards



   110.04   Revocation of registration cards



   110.05   Peddling without registration cards prohibited



   110.06   Permission required for selling on streets or sidewalks



   110.07   Signs to be observed



   110.08   Newsboys exempt



   110.09   Toy guns



 



   110.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Business license tax, see Ch. 111



   Finances and taxation, see Ch. 35



§ 110.01  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   Any person operating as a solicitor, peddler, hawker, salesperson, or
vendor of goods, wares, merchandise, newspapers, magazines, or services, who
goes from house to house, or to only one house in the town, shall register
with the Town Manager and obtain an identification card showing such
registration.



(1989 Code, § 8-1-1)



§ 110.02  APPLICATION TO TOWN MANAGER.



   (A)   Applicants for registration under the terms of § 110.01 shall
be required to furnish two satisfactory photographs of the applicant, one to
be attached to the applicant’s registration card and the other to be
retained by the Police Department. The Manager shall require the applicant to
file his or her fingerprint identification with the Police Department.



   (B)   Such applicants for registration shall be required to furnish
to the Police Department a complete description of the product to be sold in
the town, together with information regarding sales methods to be used and
references that will enable the Town Manager to determine whether or not such
applicant is qualified to receive a registration card as provided in §
110.03. Investigation by the Town Manager under the provisions of this
chapter shall be completed within 15 days after the applicant has given the
required information.



(1989 Code, § 8-1-2)



§ 110.03  ISSUANCE OF REGISTRATION CARDS.



   Registration cards under this chapter shall be given, for a fee to be
set by the Council, to all applicants who have complied with § 110.02,
unless the Town Manager discovers that any such applicant is deemed not to be
a proper person to be permitted to go from house to house because of any of
the following reasons: he or she is associated with a company that has
engaged in fraudulent dealings; or the proposed sales proposition includes
some element of trickery, fraud, or deceit, in which case, in the interest of
public safety and protection, the applicant shall not be registered.



(1989 Code, § 8-1-3)



§ 110.04  REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION CARDS.



   Registration cards under this chapter may be revoked by the town at any
time, if deemed necessary in the interest of public safety and protection.



(1989 Code, § 8-1-4)



§ 110.05  PEDDLING WITHOUT REGISTRATION CARDS PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to take part in the act of soliciting,
peddling, hawking, selling, or vending of goods, wares, merchandise,
newspapers, magazines, or services from house to house, or to only one house
in the town, without having registered with the Town Manager and without
having obtained a registration card; without having such card in possession;
or failing to exhibit such card when request is made for the registration
card by any resident of the town.



(1989 Code, § 8-1-5)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.06  PERMISSION REQUIRED FOR SELLING ON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.



   It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any booth, stand, or
counter on any sidewalk in the town for the purpose of barter, sale, or trade
or keep or maintain upon the streets or alleys any wagon, cart, wheel,
vehicle, movable booth, or stand for the purpose of barter or trade without
obtaining permission of the Council.



(1989 Code, § 8-1-6)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.07  SIGNS TO BE OBSERVED.



   It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, or canvasser in the course
of his or her business to ring the doorbell or knock at any building whereon
a sign bearing the words “no peddlers, solicitors, or canvassers” or a
similar message is exposed to public view.



(1989 Code, § 8-1-7)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.08  NEWSBOYS EXEMPT.



   Newsboys are exempt from the provisions of this chapter for the sale of
newspaper subscriptions.



(1989 Code, § 8-1-8)



§ 110.09  TOY GUNS.



   (A)   Unlawful to sell or furnish. It is unlawful for any person to
sell or furnish any look-a-like toy gun to another person.



   (B)   Look-a-like defined. A LOOK-A-LIKE TOY GUN is any water gun,
cap pistol, or other toy gun primarily designed for use by children which
simulates the appearance of a real gun or firearm.



   (C)   Exceptions. A toy gun is not a look-a-like gun if it is made
out of clear or brightly colored plastic or other material where it is
readily apparent that it is not a real gun.



(Ord. 98-03, passed 4-26-1998)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   In addition to any other penalties prescribed by the
town code, a violation of § 110.09 could result in revocation of any
registration card as set forth in § 110.04, or the revocation of any permit
issued by the Council to operate a booth or stand pursuant to § 110.06.



      (2)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of §
110.09 shall be guilty of a Class 1 Misdemeanor.



(Ord. 98-03, passed 4-26-1998)



CHAPTER 111:  BUSINESS LICENSE TAX



Section



   111.01   License required



   111.02   Issuance of license



   111.03   Payment



   111.04   Posting of license



   111.05   Exhibition of license required



   111.06   License not transferable



   111.07   Exemption



   111.08   Fees



   111.09   Transient lodging tax



   111.10   Credit card fees



Cross-reference:



   Taxation, see TSO Table II



§ 111.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to carry on any trade, calling,
profession, occupation, or business specified in this chapter without first
having procured a license from the town to do so and without complying with
any and all regulations of such trade, calling, profession, occupation, or
business as specified in this chapter.



(1989 Code, § 8-2-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.02  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Town Manager/Clerk to prepare and
issue a license under this chapter for every person, firm, company, or
corporation liable to pay a license fee hereunder, and to state in each
license the amount charged; the period of time covered; the name of the
person, firm, or corporation for whom issued; the trade, calling, profession,
occupation, or business licensed; and the location or place of business where
the trade, calling, profession, occupation, or business is to be carried on.



   (B)   In no case shall any mistake of the Town Manager/Clerk in
stating the amount of a license, prevent or prejudice the collection for the
town of what shall be actually due from anyone carrying on a trade, calling,
profession, occupation, or business, subject to license under this chapter.



(1989 Code, § 8-2-2)



§ 111.03  PAYMENT.



   (A)   All business license fees shall be paid at the office of the
Town Manager/Clerk in such manner as may be specified by the Town
Manager/Clerk. Such license fees shall be paid in the amounts and be due on
the dates set forth in § 111.08.



   (B)   A separate license must be obtained for each branch
establishment or separate place of business in which any trade, calling,
profession, occupation, or business is carried on. Each license shall
authorize the person obtaining such license to carry on, pursue, or conduct,
only that trade, calling, profession, occupation, or business described in
such license and only at the location or place of business which is indicated.



   (C)   Every person engaged in more than one business in the same
location for which license fees are hereinafter provided shall pay the
highest fee which is set up for any said businesses in which he or she is
engaged at such location.



(1989 Code, § 8-2-3)



§ 111.04  POSTING OF LICENSE.



   Every person, firm, company, or corporation having a license under the
provisions of this chapter, and carrying on a trade, calling, profession,
occupation, or business at a fixed place of business shall keep such license
posted and exhibited, while in force, in some conspicuous part of the place
of business. Every person having such a license, and not having a fixed place
of business, shall carry such license with him or her at all times while
carrying on that trade, calling, profession, occupation, or business for
which the same was granted. Every person, firm, company, or corporation
having a license under the provisions of this chapter shall produce and
exhibit the same when applying for a renewal thereof, and whenever requested
to do so by any police officer or by any other officer authorized to issue,
inspect, or collect licenses.



(1989 Code, § 8-2-4)



§ 111.05  EXHIBITION OF LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall have and exercise the power to make
arrests and to cause complaints to be filed against all persons violating the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Chief of Police or any duly authorized official shall have
the power to enter free of charge at any time any place of business for which
a license is required by this chapter, and to demand the exhibition of such
license for the current term from any person engaged or employed in the
transaction of any such business. It is unlawful for such person to fail to
exhibit such license when requested to do so.



(1989 Code, § 8-2-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.06  LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   No license granted or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
be in any manner assignable or transferable to any other person, firm,
company, or corporation other than is therein mentioned or named without
first obtaining permission from the Council.



(1989 Code, § 8-2-6)



§ 111.07  EXEMPTION.



   Any person wishing to sell any form of agricultural products produced
by himself or herself shall be exempt from any license tax imposed hereunder
for the privilege of selling such products only. Before receiving the
exemption, an affidavit of the facts entitling the seller to an exemption
must be filed with the Town Manager/Clerk.



(1989 Code, § 8-2-7)



§ 111.08  FEES.



   (A)   License fee schedule.

 


Type

 

Fee





Carnival
 
$100 per day


Junk collectors
 
$100 per quarter


Junk dealers
 
$50 per quarter


Massage parlor
 
$100 per month, $75 per month per attendant


Mobile vendors
 
$100 per year/$50 per month


Palmistry/fortune telling
 
$100 per month, $75 per month per attendant


Pawnbrokers
 
$300 per year


Salesperson (door to door)
 
$100 per year


Secondhand stores
 
$50 per quarter


Special event vendor (more than one day)
 
$35 per event


Special event vendor (one day)
 
$25 per event


All other businesses, occupations, professions, trades, or callings
 
$55 per year




 



   (B)   Liquor.

 


Series

 

Application

 

Issuance

 

Annual



Beer and wine store
 

$100

 

$1,550

 

$800



Club
 

$100

 

$1,150

 

$800



Hotel/motel
 

$100

 

$2,000

 

$800



In state producer
 

$100

 

$1,850

 

$800



Microbrewery
 

$100

 

$600

 

$800



Restaurant
 

$100

 

$2,000

 

$800




 



   (C)   When fee is payable. Application and issuance fee is payable
at the time of application. Issuance fee will be refundable if application is
denied by the Council or State Liquor Commission. If application is approved,
the annual fee is payable prior to issuance of license.



(1989 Code, § 8-2-8)  (Ord. 92-07, passed 12-10-1992; Ord. 2005-10, passed
12-8-2005)



§ 111.09  TRANSIENT LODGING TAX.



   (A)   In addition to the tax imposed pursuant to § 35.01, there is
levied and shall be collected a tax in an amount of 6% of the gross proceeds
of sale or gross income from the lodging business of any hotel engaged or
continuing within the town in the business of charging for lodging or lodging
space to be furnished to any transient, provided that this section shall not
apply to a permanent resident, room rental paid by the lessee under a valid
written lease of one month or longer, and room rental paid by the United
States government, its departments or agencies.



   (B)   The definitions, licensing, recordkeeping, and administration
of the tax shall conform as nearly as possible to the same specified in the
tax code adopted by § 35.01; provided that payments shall be made in
accordance with provisions established in the model tax code.



(1989 Code, § 8-4)  (Ord. 2008-03, passed 6-28-2007)



§ 111.10  CREDIT CARD FEES.



   Should the Town Manager decide to establish a program whereby the
public would be allowed to pay for certain fees and costs with the use of a
credit card or a debit card, any processing or use fee charged to the town by
the credit card or debit card company shall be added to the amount of the fee
or cost being charged. This would also apply to the court should the judge
decide to implement such a program for fines, fees, and restitution.



(Ord. 2005-02, passed 6-9-2005)



CHAPTER 112:  MASSAGE PARLORS AND BATHHOUSES



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   License required



   112.03   License exceptions



   112.04   License application



   112.05   License fee



   112.06   Prerequisites to issuance of license



   112.07   Revocation of license



   112.08   Register of employees; notice of employment of new attendant



   112.09   Certain services and operations prohibited



   112.10   Right of entry and inspection



Cross-reference:



Business license tax, see Ch. 111



Finances and taxation, see Ch. 35



Police Department, see Ch. 33



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ATTENDANT. The employee who administers any of the services of a
bathhouse or massage parlor within the bath or massage rooms.



   BATHHOUSE. An establishment in which is carried on the business of
providing baths and other forms of hydrotherapy; provided, that the business
of providing sauna baths or shower facilities for patrons or customers shall
not be considered within the above definition.



   MASSAGE PARLOR. An establishment in which is carried on the business of
providing any service of manual massage of the human body by an operator or
attendant; provided, that the business of a physical therapist or the
business of providing vibrating, rotary, or oscillating electrical or
mechanical massage or body building equipment for the use and benefit of
patrons or customers or the use by such customers of gymnasium type, body
building, or reduction equipment made available by the establishment for the
use of such customers shall not be considered within this definition.



(1989 Code, § 8-3-1)



§ 112.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall operate any bathhouse or massage parlor
without first securing and having in effect a license so to do issued by the
Town Manager/Clerk or his or her authorized agent.



   (B)   No person shall perform the services of an attendant in a
bathhouse or massage parlor without first securing and having in effect a
license so to do issued by the Town Manager/Clerk or his or her authorized
agent.



   (C)   No operator of a bathhouse or massage parlor shall permit any
person to act as an attendant unless such person is a duly licensed attendant.



(1989 Code, § 8-3-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.03  LICENSE EXCEPTIONS.



   No license shall be required under this chapter for naturopaths,
chiropractors, osteopathic physicians, or medical doctors who hold state
licenses, nor shall the attendants working under the direct supervision and
in the same establishment as such excepted individuals be required to hold a
license under this chapter.



(1989 Code, § 8-3-3)



§ 112.04  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   Each licensee under this chapter shall apply for a license annually by
application as if for an original license. There shall be no automatic
renewal, and authorization by the Town Manager/Clerk shall be required as in
the case of an original application.



(1989 Code, § 8-3-4)



§ 112.05  LICENSE FEE.



   The license fee for any operator of a bathhouse or massage parlor shall
be $100 per month, and the license fee for an attendant in either
establishment shall be $75 per month. Such fee in each instance shall be paid
upon application for the license, and, if for any reason a license is not
issued, such fee shall be deemed an application fee and not returnable to the
applicant.



(1989 Code, § 8-3-5)



§ 112.06  PREREQUISITES TO ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   No license for the operation of a bathhouse or massage parlor
shall be issued by the Town Manager/Clerk or his or her authorized agent
unless and until a written authorization to so issue has been received from
the Town Manager. Before authorizing such license, the Town Manager shall
first determine the following.



      (1)   The applicant has been a resident of the state at least
90 days and is over the age of 21 years.



      (2)   The applicant, including each member of a partnership if
the applicant is a partnership, and including the actual manager of the
business, if the applicant is a corporation, is of good moral character.



      (3)   The applicant, if such applicant performs the duties of
an attendant or manages or supervises the attendants, is a graduate of a
recognized school of hydrotherapy or physical therapy; or in lieu thereof,
that the applicant proves by at least three references from reliable sources,
capable of judging ability, that he or she is competent to perform the duties
for which the license is issued.



      (4)   The applicant, including each of the persons mentioned
in division (A)(2) above, has provided a recent frontview photograph of his
or her face and shoulders and in addition has his or her fingerprints on file
with the Town Manager/Clerk.



      (5)   The applicant, including each of the persons mentioned
in division (A)(2) above, has first been examined by and been issued a health
certificate by the Health Department.



      (6)   The applicant, including each of the persons mentioned
in division (A)(2) above, has not previously been convicted of any violation
of this chapter.



   (B)   No license for the occupation of attendant shall be issued by
the Town Manager/Clerk or his or her authorized agent until a written
authorization to issue has been received from the Town Manager. Before
authorizing such a license, the Town Manager shall first determine the
following.



      (1)   The applicant is of good moral character.



      (2)   The applicant has provided a recent frontview photograph
of his or her face and shoulders and in addition has had his or her
fingerprints on file with the Police Department.



      (3)   The applicant is over 21 years of age.



      (4)   The applicant has been examined by and been issued a
health certificate by the Health Department.



      (5)   The applicant is a graduate of a recognized school of
hydrotherapy or physical therapy; or in lieu thereof that the applicant
proves by at least three references from reliable sources, capable of judging
ability, that he or she is competent to perform the duties for which the
license is issued.



      (6)   The applicant has not previously been convicted of any
violations of this chapter.



(1989 Code, § 8-3-6)



§ 112.07  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Whenever the Town Manager believes that any licensed operator
or attendant has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or is not
qualified under this chapter to hold a license, he or she may order a hearing
before a board composed of the investigating officer, the Town Manager and
the licensing official. Such hearing shall be held at a reasonable time and
place designated by the Town Manager in written notice to the licensee.
Following such hearing, the Town Manager shall reduce the findings of fact to
writing, and, if he or she determines that the licensee has violated any of
the provisions of this chapter, or is unqualified under the provisions of
this chapter to hold the license in effect, he or she shall transmit a copy
of such finding to the Town Manager/Clerk or his or her authorized agent
recommending revocation and the Town Manager/Clerk or his or her authorized
agent shall immediately revoke such license.



   (B)   Should the Town Manager, following issuance of a license of
either type provided for in this chapter, learn from a reliable source that
the applicant, at any time, has been convicted of having committed a lewd or
indecent act, he or she shall immediately notify the Town Manager/Clerk or
his or her authorized agent who shall forthwith cancel the license.



   (C)   A conviction for violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute sufficient cause for immediate revocation of the
license of such licensee, upon recommendation by the Town Manager.



(1989 Code, § 8-3-7)



§ 112.08  REGISTER OF EMPLOYEES; NOTICE OF EMPLOYMENT OF NEW ATTENDANT.



   The operator of each bathhouse or massage parlor shall keep and
maintain up-to-date a register of all employees, including, in addition to
the employee’s name, his or her address, age, sex, race, duties, and such
other information as the Town Manager may reasonably require. Upon hiring any
attendant, the operator shall immediately notify the Town Manager in writing
and shall include in such notice the same information required to be in the
register.



(1989 Code, § 8-3-8)



§ 112.09  CERTAIN SERVICES AND OPERATIONS PROHIBITED.



   No bathhouse or massage parlor shall:



   (A)   Provide treatment at the same time to persons of the opposite
sex in the same room or quarters;



   (B)   Provide to any person at any time services which the health
officer may reasonably consider to be clearly dangerous to health or safety;



   (C)   Provide to any person at any time any service which is
contrary to commonly accepted standards of morality; or



   (D)   Remain open or provide services at any time between the hours
of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.



(1989 Code, § 8-3-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.10  RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION.



   Any bathhouse or massage parlor and its equipment, records, and methods
of operation shall be open at reasonable hours to inspection by
representatives of the Police Department or police officials, Building
Inspections Department, or the health officer. The health officer and the
Town Manager shall assign qualified personnel to make regular inspections of
licensees, and a report of such inspections shall be made to the Town Manager
in writing. No inspector shall enter a room or immediate quarters wherein a
person of the sex opposite to that of the inspector is undergoing treatment
or receiving service.



(1989 Code, § 8-3-10)



CHAPTER 113:  CABLE REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   113.001   Definitions



   113.002   Nondiscrimination




Procedures for Granting, Renewing, Transferring,
and Acquiring by Town of Cable Television Licenses




   113.015   License to operate; required



   113.016   Failure to have license, violation



   113.017   Authorization to engage in business



   113.018   Limitations of license



   113.019   Acquisition by town



   113.020   Rights reserved to the town



   113.021   Initial license; applications



   113.022   Fees; application of initial license



   113.023   Selection of licensee; initial license



   113.024   Duration of license



   113.025   Renewal



   113.026   Transfers and assignments




Initial and Renewal License Requirements




   113.040   Effect of award of license



   113.041   Payment of license fee



   113.042   Use of telephone facilities



   113.043   Required services and facilities



   113.044   Subscriber services; rates



   113.045   Access and public safety channels



   113.046   Changes in cable technology



   113.047   Time is of the essence



   113.048   Acceptance and effective date




Construction Requirements




   113.060   Permits, installation, and service



   113.061   Line extension



   113.062   Placement of transmission facilities



   113.063   Construction and technical standards



   113.064   Utility locating system



   113.065   Resident notification of construction activity required



   113.066   Cable system construction map and schedule




Regulations Pertaining to Use of Town Streets
and Public Rights-of-Way




   113.080   Location of property of licensee



   113.081   Emergency work



   113.082   Removal and abandonment of property of licensee



   113.083   Temporary removal of wire for building improvements



   113.084   Changes required by public improvements



   113.085   Methods and materials of street repair



   113.086   Failure to perform street repair




Subscriber Service Provisions




   113.100   Local business office requirements



   113.101   Efficient telephone communications service



   113.102   Subscriber service standards



   113.103   Subscriber and town notification requirements



   113.104   Billing practices; information and procedures



   113.105   Changes to subscriber service obligations



   113.106   Subscriber complaint procedures



   113.107   Subscriber solicitation procedures



   113.108   Disconnection and termination of cable services



   113.109   Rights of individuals



   113.110   Protection of subscriber privacy




Administration and Enforcement Provisions




   113.125   Reports



   113.126   Inspection of property and records



   113.127   Protection of town against liability



   113.128   Letter of credit



   113.129   Liquidated damages



   113.130   Administrative hearing



   113.131   Hearing by Town Council



   113.132   Revocation



   113.133   Continuity of service mandatory



   113.134   Failure of town to enforce a license; no waiver of the
terms thereof



   113.135   Waivers



   113.136   Validity of license



   113.137   Construction bond



   113.138   Miscellaneous provisions



   113.139   Force majeure



 



   113.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 113.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words,
abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word
“shall” is always mandatory, not merely directory. All references to days
shall mean calendar days, unless otherwise specified. References to “this
code” are to this cable communications chapter. The terms “will be
available”, “will be equipped”, “will use”, “will be designed”,
“will perform”, “will be utilized”, “will permit”, “will
allow”, “will be activated”, “will be initially connected”, “will
be capable”, “will provide”, “will include”, “will employ”,
“will be established”, “will be able”, “will be implemented”,
“will be delivered”, “will utilize”, and other similar uses of terms
in a licensee’s proposal denoting the activation of cable service. Delivery
or accomplishment at a date no later than the initial activation of cable
service (as defined in this section), unless otherwise expressly and clearly
stated or qualified in the licensee’s proposal to mean a more specific or
different time.



   ACCESS CHANNEL. One or more channels dedicated in whole or in part for
local non-commercial programming that are not originated by a cable company;
provided that such access programming shall not include:



      (1)   The retransmission of local television broadcast
signals; or



      (2)   Programming produced by persons unaffiliated with the
cable company under the provisions of § 612 of the Cable Act.



   AFFILIATE. Any person who owns or controls, is owned by or controlled
by, or is under common ownership or control with a licensee.



   APPLICANT. A person who applies for a license to provide cable service
in the town.



   APPLICATION. Refers to the offer by a qualified applicant to furnish
and provide a cable system and cable services to residents, businesses,
industries, and institutions within the town in accordance with the town’s
specifications.



   BASIC SERVICE. Any service tier that includes the retransmission of
local television broadcast signals. Each such tier shall include all access
channels, as defined in § 611 of the Cable Act.



   CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended,
including the Telecommunications Act of 1996.



   CABLE SERVICES or CABLE SERVICE.



      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming and other programming services; and



      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of such programming and programming services.



   CABLE SYSTEM.



      (1)   A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that
is designed to provide cable services, that includes video programming, and
that is provided to multiple subscribers within the town, but such term does
not include:



         (a)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the
television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;



         (b)   A facility that serves subscribers without using
any public right-of-way;



         (c)   A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in
whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of
1934, except that such facility shall be considered a CABLE SYSTEM to the
extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide
interactive on-demand services;



         (d)   An open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C.
§ 653; or



         (e)   Any facility of an electric utility used solely
for operating its electric utility systems.



      (2)   Any reference to licensee’s cable system refers to the
CABLE SYSTEM as a whole or any part thereof.



   COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION or COMPLETE SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION.
Satisfactorily complete and fully activated. In each instance, these terms
shall mean that, for aerial construction, strand has been put up and all
necessary cable has been lashed, for underground construction, all cable has
been laid and trenches refilled, all road surfaces restored to the town’s
satisfaction, and, except as prevented by weather conditions or delayed
because of seasons, landscaping restored; that all amplifier housings and
modules have been installed, that power supplies have been installed, that
construction of the headends or hubs has been completed, and that all
necessary processing equipment has been installed; and that any and all other
construction necessary for the cable system to be ready to deliver cable
service to subscribers has been completed with no unresolved violations of
this chapter or the license. Final balancing shall have been conducted on
each otherwise completed segment of the cable system before direct marketing
of that segment begins. It is expected that segments of less than the entire
cable system will be activated and final balanced when completed.
Construction of any segment or of the entire cable system will not be
considered complete until final balance has been conducted on such segment
(or in the case of the entire cable system, until final balancing and proof
of performance tests have been conducted on all segments of the cable
system.) The term COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION does not include marketing and
installation of subscriber service.



   EDUCATION ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel or bandwidth on a cable system
set aside by a licensee for educational use.



   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission, or a designated
representative.



   GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel or bandwidth on a cable system
set aside by a licensee for governmental use.



   GROSS REVENUES.



      (1)   All cash, credits, property of any kind or nature, or
other consideration, less related bad debts up to a maximum of 1.5% annually
of such cash, credits, and property, received directly or indirectly by a
licensee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent, and any person, firm, or
corporation in which a licensee has a financial interest or that has a
financial interest in a licensee, arising from or attributable to the
licensee’s operation of its cable system to provide cable services (as
defined from time to time by applicable federal law) within the town,
including, but not limited to:




         (a)   Revenue from all charges for services provided to
subscribers;




         (b)   Revenue from all charges for the insertion of
commercial advertising upon the cable system;



         (c)   Revenue from all charges for the leased use of
studios;



         (d)   Revenue from all charges for the use of or lease
of leased access channels or band width;



         (e)   Revenue from the production or transmission over
the cable system of video programming by licensee including programming
produced by its mobile facilities;



         (f)   Revenue from all charges for the installation,
removal, connection, and reinstatement of equipment necessary for a
subscriber to receive cable services;



         (g)   Revenue from the sale, exchange, use, or cablecast
of any programming developed for community use or institutional users; and




         (h)   Any other income derived from the cable system.




      (2)   GROSS REVENUES does not include taxes or fees (except
the license fee) collected by licensee on behalf of any governmental
authority; any increase in the value of stock, security, or asset; any
surcharges for underground conversion of cable plant costs; any increase in
the value of any stock, security, or asset; the value of complimentary
service provided to licensee’s employees and as required by this chapter or
any license; and dividends or other distributions made in respect of any
stock or securities; or value received by a licensee or any of its affiliates
through cooperative advertising.



      (3)   GROSS REVENUES shall not include cash, credit, property
of any kind or nature, or other consideration received by a licensee’s
affiliates or any person, firm, or corporation (“related person”) in
which a licensee has a financial interest or that has financial interest in a
licensee for any sales of advertising on the cable system, services to
provide programming on the cable system, production services, and/or
telecommunication services that are cable services when such services are
provided by a related person that has all the following characteristics: the
related person is a separate legal entity, with separate employees, with
separate financial records (that may be part of consolidated financial
reporting records), and a separate mission; it makes payments to licensee
that meet market standards for the services and industries involved, even if
it does not offer and provide its services to persons other than licensee in
the same industry as licensee; and it was established for valid business
purposes and not with the intent and purpose of circumventing payment of
license fees on gross revenues. Nothing contained in this exclusion from
gross revenues shall be interpreted to exclude from gross revenues such cash,
credit, property of any kind or nature, or other consideration that would be
considered the licensee’s GROSS REVENUES derived from the operation of the
cable system to provide cable services under the Cable Act. Except for GROSS
REVENUE from such sales of advertising on the cable system, services to
provide programming on the cable system, production services, or
telecommunication services that are cable services received by such related
person, this division (3) shall not exclude from GROSS REVENUES any source of
gross revenues that an existing licensee itself is receiving at the time it
is granted a license under this chapter.



      (4)   When a licensee (or an affiliate) holds one or more
other cable television licenses in the county, and receives and allocates
GROSS REVENUES from divisions (1)(b), (1)(d), and (1)(e) above, then GROSS
REVENUES derived from divisions (1)(b), (1)(d), and (1)(e) above, shall be
allocated pro rata to the town based on the ratio of the number of
subscribers of licensee (or an affiliate), in the town to the number of
subscribers of licensee (or an affiliate) in all the jurisdictions in the
county, in that licensee (or an affiliate) holds a cable license. If a
licensee does not allocate its gross revenues derived from divisions (1)(b),
(1)(d), and (1)(e) from such other jurisdiction(s), then the number of
subscribers in such jurisdiction(s) shall not be included in the total number
of subscribers in all other jurisdictions.



   INITIAL ACTIVATION OF CABLE SERVICE. With respect to a particular
segment (as defined in any license issued hereunder), or with respect to a
group of segments or the entire cable system, as the case may be, that all
proposed cable services and cable system capabilities as stated in the
license are available and/or in place, construction has been completed, and
the completed segment or segments in question or the entire cable system, as
the case may be, have been activated.



   INITIAL LICENSE. A license sought by, or granted to, a person who does
not hold a license.



   INTERACTIVE ON-DEMAND SERVICES. A service providing video programming
to subscribers over switched networks on an on-demand, point-to-point basis,
but does not include services providing video programming prescheduled by the
programming provider.



   LICENSE. Any authorization granted under this chapter in terms of a
privilege, permit, license, or otherwise to construct, operate, and maintain
a cable system in the town, and to provide non-cable communication services
including initial licenses and renewal licenses. Any such authorization, in
whatever term granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit
required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within
the town in accordance with the town’s tax code or Chapter  111 of the
town code.



   LICENSE AREA. The current incorporated boundaries of the town and any
future annexed area, unless the term of a license provides otherwise.



   LICENSEE. The person or entity to which a license hereafter is granted
for continuation, operation, maintenance, or reconstruction of a cable system.



   LICENSOR. The town as represented by the Town Council or Town Manager,
or their designee.



   MULTIPLE DWELLING UNITS (MDU). Any adjacent building(s) such as
apartments under common ownership containing more than four dwelling units
used as living quarters.



   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS. Those hours during which most similar businesses
in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, NORMAL BUSINESS
HOURS must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some
weekend hours.



   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS.



      (1)   Those service conditions that are within the control of
the licensee. Those conditions that are not within the control of the
licensee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, utility company power outages, telephone network outages, and
severe or unusual weather conditions.



      (2)   Those conditions that are ordinarily within the control
of the licensee include, but are not limited to, special promotions,
pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods,
and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.



   OUTAGE. Exist whenever licensee’s cable system experiences three
subscriber complaints within any 60-minute period of “no picture” within
the same quarter section.



   PROPOSAL. A response by a qualified cable company in accordance with
town specifications to provide cable services to residents, businesses,
industries, and institutions within the town.



   RENEWAL LICENSE. A license sought by, or granted to, a person currently
holding a valid license to provide cable services in the town.



   SCHOOL. Public educational institutions, including primary and
secondary schools, colleges and universities, and charter schools that have
150 or more students between the ages of five and 18.



   SERVICE CALL. Result when service problems occur relating to:



      (1)   Any “no picture” complaint;



      (2)   A degraded signal or picture on one or more channels;



      (3)   Property damage by licensee’s employees or authorized
contractors; or



      (4)   In-house cable equipment problems.



   SERVICE INTERRUPTION. Exist when a subscriber loses the signal on all
channels.



   STANDARD DROP.



      (1)   A cable connection that requires no more than a 225-foot
drop measured from the nearest point of a subscriber’s home or place of
business to the nearest existing technically feasible point from that an
individual subscriber can be connected to the cable system; involves only one
outlet and standard materials; and does not involve a wall fish.



      (2)   In addition, a STANDARD DROP shall exclude custom
installation work, including specific subscriber requested work that requires
non-standard inventory or cable routing requiring construction methods
exceeding reasonable underground or aerial work.



   STREET or PUBLIC STREET. Only a street, road, highway, freeway, lane,
path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, right-of-way, or drive that is owned
by a public entity in fee or as to which a public easement has been dedicated
for street purposes, and with respect to which, and to the extent that, town
has a right to grant the use of the surface of, and space above and below in
connection with a license for a cable system, or other compatible uses.



   SUBSCRIBER. Any person, firm, corporation, or entity receiving for any
purpose the cable service of a licensee’s cable system.



   TOWN. The Town of Guadalupe, a municipal corporation of the State of
Arizona, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized,
consolidated, enlarged, or reincorporated form.



   TOWN COUNCIL. The present governing body of the town or any future
council constituting the legislative body of the town.



   TOWN MANAGER. The Town Manager or the Town Manager’s designee.



   USER. A party utilizing a cable system channel for purposes of
production or transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with
receipt in a subscriber capacity.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.002  NONDISCRIMINATION.



   (A)   The licensee shall not deny service, access, or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, users, or any resident of the town.



   (B)   The licensee shall conduct a continuing review of employment
structures and employment practices and adopt positive recruitment policies,
on-the-job training, job design, and other measures needed to assure genuine
equality of opportunity.



   (C)   The licensee shall regularly recruit through schools and
colleges with high minority enrollments; shall maintain contact with media
advocacy groups, minority and human relations organizations, leaders,
spokespersons, and other appropriate recruitment sources within the county to
make it known that qualifies minority persons are being sought for
consideration when the licensee is hiring.



   (D)   The licensee is encouraged to hire from within the town
whenever possible.



(Ord. 89-05, passed 8-3-1989)




PROCEDURES FOR GRANTING, RENEWING, TRANSFERRING, AND ACQUIRING
BY TOWN OF CABLE TELEVISION LICENSES




§ 113.015  LICENSE TO OPERATE; REQUIRED.



   A non-exclusive license to construct, operate, and maintain a cable
system within all or any portion of the town is required of anyone desiring
to provide cable service in the town. A license may be granted by the Town
Council to any person, whether operating under an existing license or not,
who offers to furnish and provide such cable service under and pursuant to
the terms and provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.016  FAILURE TO HAVE LICENSE, VIOLATION.



   (A)   From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to establish, operate, or to carry on the business of
distributing to any person in this town any television signals or radio
signals by means of a cable system unless a license therefor has first been
obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and unless such license
is in full force and effect.



   (B)   From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to construct, install, or maintain within any public
street in the town, within any other public property of the town, or within
any privately-owned area within the town that has not yet become a public
street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any
preliminary subdivision map approved by the town, any equipment or facilities
for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a cable
system, unless a license authorizing such use of such street or property or
area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and
unless such license is in full force and effect.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized
connections, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or
otherwise, with any part of a licensed cable system within this town for the
purpose of enabling himself or herself or others to receive any television
signal, radio signal, picture, program, sound, or any other signals
transmitted on the cable system, without the permission of the licensee.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of
the licensee, to willfully tamper with, remove, or injure any cables, wires,
or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals,
pictures, programs, sounds, or any other signals transmitted on the cable
system.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)  Penalty, see § 113.999



§ 113.017  AUTHORIZATION TO ENGAGE IN BUSINESS.



   Any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
authorize and permit the licensee to engage in the business of operating and
providing a cable system in the town, and for that purpose to erect, install,
solicit, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, and retain in,
on, over, under, upon, across, and along any street, such poles, wires,
cable, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the
cable system; and in addition, so to use, operate, and provide similar
facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms, or
corporations, including, but not limited to, any public utility or other
licensee licensed or permitted to do business in the town.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.018  LIMITATIONS OF LICENSE.




   (A)   Any license granted under this chapter shall be nonexclusive.




   (B)   Any privilege claimed under any license by the licensee in any
public street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior or
subsequent lawful occupancy or use thereof by the town or any other
governmental entity and shall be subordinate to any prior easements therein;
provided, however, that nothing shall extinguish or otherwise interfere with
property rights established independently of any license issued pursuant to
this chapter.



   (C)   Any right or power in, or duty imposed upon, any officer,
employee, department, or board of the town shall be subject to transfer by
the town to any other officer, employee, department, or board of the town.



   (D)   A licensee shall be subject to all requirements of town’s
rules, regulations, and specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or
established and shall comply with all applicable state and federal laws and
regulations heretofore enacted or established. There is hereby reserved to
the town the power to amend any subchapter of this chapter so as to require
additional or greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance, or
otherwise pursuant to the town’s lawful police powers or as provided in the
license.



   (E)   Any license granted shall not relieve the licensee of any
obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any department of the town,
utility company, or from others lawfully maintaining poles in streets.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.019  ACQUISITION BY TOWN.



   (A)   In accordance with § 627 of the Cable Act, if a renewal of a
license held by a licensee is denied and the town acquires ownership of the
cable system or effects a transfer of ownership of a cable system to another
person, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at fair market value,
determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but
with no value allocated to the license itself. If a license held by a
licensee is revoked for cause and the town acquires ownership of the cable
system or effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to another
person, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at an equitable price.
Under the term “equitable price”, such matters as the harm to the
community resulting from the licensee’s breach of the license may be
considered in determining the appropriate price. No payment shall be made by
the town to the licensee that would include a value attributed to the license
itself.




   (B)   The fair market value of the cable system shall be determined
as follows.




      (1)   The fair market value of the cable system shall be
determined by an appraisal committee consisting of three appraisers
nationally recognized by training and experience as qualified to appraise the
fair market value of a large, urban cable system. No appraiser shall have
previously acted in any capacity for either the town or licensee. The
appraisal committee shall function as an arbitration panel and shall conduct
its appraisal process in the county, in accordance with the Center for Public
Resources Rules for Non-Administered Arbitration of Business Disputes (the
“rules”), supplemented by the following procedures that shall control to
the extent they conflict with the rules.



      (2)   Each party shall appoint an appraiser within 30 days
after the town sends notice initiating appraisal proceedings. The two
appraisers shall select a third appraiser within 30 days after selection of
the second appraiser. If the two appraisers are unable to agree on the
appointment of a third appraiser within such 30-day period, either the town
or the licensee may petition the presiding Civil Judge of the County Superior
Court, acting in his or her individual capacity, for the selection of a third
appraiser.



      (3)   Each party shall bear the cost of its own appraiser and
one-half of the cost of appointing the third appraiser, of paying the third
appraiser’s fee, and of any reasonable expenses incurred by the appraisers
in order to carry out the appraisal process.



      (4)   Within 30 days after selection of the third appraiser,
the appraisers shall meet for the purpose of determining the manner in which
the parties may present by evidence that may bear upon the appraisal. Within
90 days after such meeting, the appraiser shall receive and consider such
evidence and enter an award determining the fair market value of the cable
system consistent with the requirements of this section. Such award shall be
final and binding upon the parties, and judgment upon the award rendered may
be entered by any court having jurisdiction thereof.



   (C)   Upon the termination of a license and the rights granted
thereunder, whether by expiration or forfeiture, the town Council may direct
and require the licensee as provided in § 113.082 to remove its wires,
cables, fixtures, and accessories and appurtenances from the streets. If
directed, the town shall make a claim on the letter of credit as prescribed
in § 113.128.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.020  RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE TOWN.



   (A)   Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or
affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the town to acquire the
property of the licensee, by purchase, at fair market value, which shall not
include any amount for the license itself or for any of the rights or
privileges granted. And nothing herein contained shall be construed to
contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity,
the town’s right of eminent domain at fair market value.



   (B)   There is hereby reserved to the town every right and power
that is required to be herein reserved or provided by any provision of the
charter or code, and a licensee shall comply with any action or requirements
of the town in its exercise of such rights or power heretofore or hereafter
enacted or established.



   (C)   Neither the granting of any license hereunder nor any of the
provisions contained herein shall be construed to prevent the town from
granting any identical or similar license to any other person, firm, or
corporation within the town.



   (D)   Neither the granting of any license nor the enactment of any
provision in this chapter shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of
any governmental right or power of the town, now existing or hereafter
granted.



   (E)   The Town Council may do all things that are necessary and
convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter and may,
through the Town Manager or through its own action, adjust, settle,
compromise, or otherwise resolve, pursuant to §§ 113.130 and 113.131, any
controversy or charge arising from the operations of any licensee under this
chapter.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.021  INITIAL LICENSE; APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Each application for an initial license to construct, operate,
or maintain any cable system in the town shall be filed with the office of
the Town Manager/Clerk and in the form of a proposal for initial license
prescribed by the town.



   (B)   Said forms shall require, but shall not be limited to the
following information:




      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;




      (2)   A detailed statement of the corporation or business
entity organization of the applicant, including, but not limited to, the
following and to whatever extent required by the town:



         (a)   The names and residence and business addresses of
all officers, directors, and associates of the applicant;



         (b)   The names and residence and business addresses of
all officers, persons, and entities having a 1% or larger share of the
ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each such
person or entity; and



         (c)   The names and addresses of any parent or
subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or
controlling applicant, in whole or in part, or owned in whole or in part by
the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or
subsidiary business entity, including, but not limited to, cable systems
owned or controlled by the applicant and its parent and subsidiary and the
areas served thereby.



      (3)   A detailed and complete financial statement of the
applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the
fiscal year next preceding the date of the application hereunder, and a
letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending
institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the Town
Council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending
institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a
lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be
required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed cable system
in the town, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant,
certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and
uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable system
in this town;



      (4)   A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for
each year of the initial license, projected number of subscribers, rates, all
revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules,
income statements, and a sources and uses of funds statement. All information
is to be presented in the format approved by the town;



      (5)   A statement identifying, by place and date, any other
cable system license(s) awarded to the applicant and its parent or
subsidiary; the status of said license(s) with respect to completion thereof;
the total cost of completion of such licensed cable system(s); and the amount
of applicant’s and its parent’s or subsidiary’s resources committed
thereto; and



      (6)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of
the applicant that shall include, but not be limited to, the following:



         (a)   A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be
served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment
necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced;



         (b)   A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed
classifications of rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all
rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation
charges and cable service charges;



         (c)   A detailed, informative, and referenced statement
describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the
applicant;



         (d)   A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking,
or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any
subscriber;



         (e)   A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety
any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written,
oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any
person, firm, or corporation that materially relate or pertain to or depend
upon the application and the granting of the initial license;



         (f)   A copy of any agreement covering the license area,
if existing between the applicant and the local telephone and/or electric
utilities providing for the use of any facilities of the utility, including,
but not limited to poles, lines, or conduits; and



         (g)   Any other details, statements, information, or
references pertinent to the subject matter of such application that shall be
required or requested by the Town Council, or by any other provision of law.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.022  FEES; APPLICATION OF INITIAL LICENSE.



   (A)   Amount. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter,
each applicant for an initial license must furnish with its proposal a
nonrefundable filing fee in the amount of $15,000, by cash, certified or
cashier’s check, wire transfer, or in any other manner acceptable to the
Town Manager made payable to the town. No proposal for an initial license
shall be considered without receipt of said fee.



   (B   Deposit and use. All fees received will be deposited to an
account of the town and will serve to recover actual expenses incurred by the
town in the preparation and granting of initial licenses and regulation of
licenses pursuant to this chapter.



   (C)   Additional fee. Any licensee under an initial license, upon
acceptance of such initial license, shall reimburse all additional expenses,
including, but not limited to, any and all administrative, engineering,
publication, or legal costs and consultants’ expenses incurred in
connection with the processing, evaluation, and preparation of documents
relating to the initial license. The town shall document all such expenses by
invoice. If expenses exceed the total amount of filing fees collected from
the applicant(s), the licensee shall pay to the town the excess amount within
30 days of demand by the town. All unpaid amounts at the end of 30 days shall
accrue interest at the rate of 1.5% per month.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.023  SELECTION OF LICENSEE; INITIAL LICENSE.



   (A)   Solicitation of proposals. The town may, by advertisement or
any other means, solicit and call for proposals for initial licenses, and may
determine and fix any date upon or after which the same shall be received by
the town, or the date before which the same must be received, or the date
after which the same shall not be received and may make any other
determinations and specify any other times, terms, conditions, or limitations
respecting the soliciting, calling for, making, and receiving of such
proposals. The terms and conditions for proposals shall be described in a
document called “request for proposals”.



   (B)   Unsolicited proposals. The town, upon receipt of an
unsolicited proposal for initial license, may by advertising or other means
solicit and call for competing proposals pursuant to division (A) above, or
may, in its sole discretion, reject such proposal as untimely.



   (C)   Compliance with town requirements. A person, firm, or
corporation submitting a proposal for initial license to operate a cable
system in response to the town’s request for proposals shall provide all
information required by this chapter and all other information requested by
town’s request for proposals or otherwise required by the town. Each
proposal shall be responsive to the questions soliciting the information, and
shall completely, accurately, and materially supply all of the information so
solicited. Any misrepresentation, failure, neglect, or refusal to provide any
of such information may, at the option of the town, render a proposal
invalid. This requested information must be complete and verified as true by
the applicant.



   (D)   Property of town. All proposals received by the town from an
applicant shall become the sole property of the town.



   (E)   Applicant responsibility. Before submitting a proposal, each
applicant shall be solely responsible for and must:



      (1)   Examine all regulatory chapters and the request for
proposals documents thoroughly;



      (2)   Be familiar with local conditions that may in any manner
affect performance under the license, including, but in no event limited to,
community and institutional telecommunication needs, relevant demographics,
topographies, pole attachment policies of appropriate utility authorities,
undergrounding, and subscriber desires;



      (3)   Be familiar with all applicable federal, state, and
local laws, chapters, rules, and regulations affecting performance under the
license; and



      (4)   Carefully correlate all observations with the
requirements of this chapter and the request for proposals documents.



   (F)   Referral to Town Manager.



      (1)   Upon receipt of any proposal for initial license, the
Town Manager shall prepare or cause to be prepared a report, including
recommendations respecting such proposal, and cause the same to be completed
and filed with the town. The town will evaluate all proposals that are
submitted.



      (2)   At the discretion of the Town Council, an applicant that
has met the town’s qualifications in the request for proposals and has
submitted a proposal on the required form will be offered the opportunity to
make a formal presentation to the Town Council in support of its proposal.



   (G)   Investigations. The town may make such investigations as it
deems necessary to determine the ability of the applicant to perform under
the initial license, and the applicant shall furnish to the town all such
information and data for this purpose as the town may request.



   (H)   Rejection. The town may reject any and all proposals from
whatever source and whenever received and the town also reserves the right to
waive all formalities where the best interest of the town may be served, and
may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals.



   (I)   Public comment. If, upon receiving the Town Manager’s
report, the Town Council shall determine to further consider the proposals,
the Town Manager/Clerk shall set a public hearing for the consideration of
proposals; fixing and setting forth a day, hour, and place certain when and
where any persons having any interest therein or who wish to file objections
may file written comments and appear before the Town Council and be heard,
and directing the Town Manager/Clerk to publish notice of such hearing at
least once within ten days of the passage thereof in the newspaper of general
circulation within the town.



   (J)   Consideration. In making any determination hereunder as to any
proposal for initial license, the town may consider any and all factors
relevant to significant interests of the community in cable television
including, but not limited to, the quality of the cable services proposed,
areas to be served, rates to subscriber, income to the town, experience,
character, background, and financial responsibility of any applicant, and its
management and owners, technical and performance quality of equipment,
willingness and ability to meet construction and physical requirements, to
meet all requirements set forth in this chapter, and to abide by all policy
conditions, license limitations, and requirements, and all other matters
deemed pertinent by the town for safeguarding the interests of the town and
the public.



   (K)   Determination. At the time set for the hearing on proposals
for an initial license, or at any adjournment thereof, the Town Council shall
proceed to hear all comments. Thereafter, the Town Council shall make one of
the following determinations:




      (1)   That such proposal be denied, which determination shall
be final and conclusive; or




      (2)   That such initial license be granted and the terms and
conditions thereof. No provision of this chapter shall be deemed or construed
so as to require the granting of an initial license.



   (L)   Additional information. The town may at any time demand and
applicant(s) shall provide such supplementary, additional, or other
information as the town may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether
the requested initial license should be granted.



   (M)   Awards based on public record. It is the intention of the town
to award an initial license solely on the basis of the public record. To this
end, communication with the Town Council by those wishing to submit proposals
for an initial license shall be limited to public sessions. Requests for
information should be directed to the office of the Town Manager.



   (N)   Town Council decisions shall be final. Any decision of the
Town Council concerning award of an initial license pursuant to this chapter
shall be final.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.024  DURATION OF LICENSE.



   The duration of the rights, privileges, and authorizations granted in
an initial or a renewal license shall not exceed 15 years. A license may be
renewed by the town pursuant to the procedure established in § 113.025 and
in accordance with the then applicable law.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.025  RENEWAL.



   (A)   Proceedings. During the six-month period that begins with the
thirty-sixth month before the expiration of an existing license, the town
may, on its own initiative, and shall, at the request of the licensee,
commence proceedings that afford the public appropriate notice and
participation for the purpose of:




      (1)   Identifying the future cable-related community needs and
interests; and




      (2)   Reviewing the performance of the licensee under the
license during the then current license term.




   (B)   Proposal.




      (1)   Upon completion of a proceeding under division (A)
above, the licensee seeking a renewal license may, on its own initiative or
at the request of the town, submit a proposal for renewal license.



      (2)   Subject to § 624 of the Cable Act, such proposal shall
contain such material as the town may require, including proposals for an
upgrade of the cable system.




      (3)   The town may establish a date by which such proposal
shall be submitted.





   (C)   Renewal assessment.




      (1)   Upon submittal by the licensee of a proposal to the town
for renewal license, the town shall provide prompt notice of such proposal
for renewal license and, during the four-month period that begins on the
completion of any proceedings under division (A) above, issue a renewal
license or issue a preliminary assessment that the license should not be
renewed and, at the request of the licensee or on its own initiative,
commence an administrative proceeding, after providing prompt public notice
of such proceeding in accordance with division (C)(2) below to consider
whether:



         (a)   The licensee has substantially complied with the
material terms of the existing license and with applicable law;



         (b)   The quality of the licensee’s service, including
signal quality, response to consumer complaints, and billing practices, but
without regard to the mix, quality, or level of cable services or other
services provided over the cable system, has been reasonable in light of
community needs;



         (c)   The licensee has the financial, legal, and
technical ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment as set
forth in the licensee’s proposal; and



         (d)   The licensee’s proposal is reasonable to meet
the future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account
the cost of meeting such needs and interests.



      (2)   In any proceeding under division (C)(1), the licensee
shall be afforded adequate notice and the licensee and the licensor shall be
afforded fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to
introduce evidence (including evidence related to issues raised in the
proceeding under division (A) above), require the production of evidence, and
to question witnesses. A transcript shall be made of any such proceeding.



      (3)   At the completion of a proceeding under this division
(C), the town shall issue a written decision granting or denying the proposal
for renewal license based upon the record of such proceeding, and transmit a
copy of such decision to the licensee. Such decision shall state the reasons
therefor.



   (D)   Denial. Any denial of a proposal for renewal license shall be
based on one or more adverse findings made with respect to the factors
described in divisions (C)(1)(a) through (C)(1)(d) above, pursuant to the
record of the proceeding under division (C) above. The town may not base a
denial of a renewal license on a failure to substantially comply with the
material terms of the license under division (C)(1)(a) or on events
considered under division (C)(1)(b) unless the town has provided the licensee
with notice and the opportunity to cure, or in any case in which it is
documented that the town has waived its right to object, or has effectively
acquiesced.



   (E)   Appeal. Any licensee whose proposal for renewal license has
been denied by a final decision of the town made pursuant to this chapter, or
has been adversely affected by a failure of the town to act in accordance
with the procedural requirements of this chapter, may appeal such final
decision or failure pursuant to the provisions of §§ 626 and 635 of the
Cable Act.



   (F)   Informal process. Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions
(A) through (E) above, the licensee may submit a proposal for renewal
license, together with the required fee, pursuant to this division (F) at any
time, and the town may, after affording the public adequate notice and
opportunity for comment, grant or deny such proposal at any time (including
after proceedings pursuant to this section have commenced). The provisions of
divisions (A) through (E) above shall not apply to a decision to grant or
deny a proposal under this division (F). The denial of a renewal license
pursuant to this division (F) shall not affect action on a proposal for
renewal license that is submitted in accordance with divisions (A) through
(E) above.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.026  TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   A license shall not be sold, assigned, or
transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased, sublet, or mortgaged in
any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable or any right,
interest, or property therein, pass to or vest in any person, except an
affiliate of licensee, without prior written consent of the town, which
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.



      (2)   Such consent shall not be required for a transfer in
trust, mortgage, or other hypothecation in whole or in part to secure an
indebtedness.



      (3)   The proposed assignee must show the transfer will not
cause any increased risks of nonperformance of the license or any loss to the
town of its bargained for consideration in the license. The assignee’s
showings must at a minimum detail facts sufficient to show the assignee’s
technical ability, financial capability, legal qualifications, and general
character qualifications and such other qualifications as determined by the
town, and the assignee must agree to comply with all provisions of the
license.



   (B)   No change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the licensee
shall occur without prior written consent of the town, which consent shall
not be unreasonably withheld. The licensee shall promptly notify the town of
any actual or proposed change in, or transfer to, or acquisition by any other
party of control of the licensee. The word CONTROL as used herein is not
limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever
manner exercised. The sale or transfer of the license to an affiliate of a
licensee does not require prior approval of the town as long as:



      (1)   The sale or transfer of the existing or newly created
equity interest in the licensee does not result, directly or indirectly, in a
transfer of control of the licensee; and



      (2)   The transferee already holds an ownership interest in
the licensee of 25% or more.



   (C)   A rebuttable presumption that transfer of control has occurred
shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person, or group of
persons (other than an affiliate of licensee), of more than 25% of the voting
interest of the licensee or of the person exercising management authority
over the licensee.



   (D)   Except in the case of an assignment of the license to an
affiliate of licensee, upon written notification by the licensee to the town
of a proposed assignment of the license, or transfer of control or ownership
of the licensee company, the Town Manager shall issue his or her written
notice fixing and setting forth the day, hour, and place certain when and
where any persons having any interest therein may appear and be heard. The
Town Manager/Clerk shall cause such notice to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the town. The Town Manager/Clerk also shall cause
a copy of such notice to be mailed to the licensee at least ten days prior to
the date specified for the hearing. At the time set for such hearing, or at
any adjournment thereof, the Town Manager shall proceed to hear the matter.
Following the close of such hearing, the Town Manager shall prepare and file
with the Council a report of the hearing, the findings, and an opinion
containing his or her recommendations and the reasons therefor. If, after the
expiration of ten days following receipt of the Town Manager’s report and
opinion, the Council shall find that the assignment of the license or
transfer of control or ownership of the licensee company will not be
detrimental or injurious to the best interests and welfare of the subscribers
and users, and of the town, then the Council by resolution shall consent to
the assignment of the license or transfer of control or ownership of the
licensee company. Such resolution shall thereupon become and shall be a part
of any license granted under this chapter and affected thereby.



   (E)   The consent or approval of the Town Council to any transfer of
a license shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the town
in and to the streets, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly
subordinate to the terms and conditions of the license.



   (F)   In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the Town
Council will not approve any transfer or assignment of a license within three
years of and in no event prior to substantial completion of construction of a
proposed cable system.



   (G)   Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter, each
applicant for a transfer or assignment must furnish with its request a
nonrefundable filing fee in the amount established by the Council, by cash,
certified or cashier’s check, wire transfer, or in any other manner
acceptable to the Town Manager made payable to the town. No proposal for a
transfer or assignment of a license shall be considered without receipt of
said fee. The fee will be used for the purpose of covering the town’s cost
in consideration of a transfer or assignment of a license. The fee shall be
handled in the same manner as provided for an initial license fee in §
113.022 and shall, upon granting the assignment or transfer, be a credit
against license fees under this chapter.



   (H)   The town may reserve in the license a right of first refusal
to purchase a licensee’s cable system.



   (I)   In no event shall a transfer of ownership be approved without
the successor-in-interest becoming a signatory to the license.



   (J)   As long as a grant, rent, or lease does not amount to a
transfer as defined in this chapter and is made in the ordinary course of
business with prior notice to the town, a licensee in the normal course of
providing cable services or other telecommunication services may grant, rent,
or lease use of its cable system to other persons. Any such use shall be
restricted to and consistent with such uses as the licensee is authorized in
this chapter and the license or under other applicable law. Any such use
shall be in compliance with applicable federal and state law. Any such grant,
lease, or rent by the licensee shall not, however, thereby relieve licensee
of any requirement or obligation under its license as to its use of the
streets and public ways, and any such grant, rent, or lease shall require
that such other person comply with the appropriate provisions of this chapter
and the license as such use warrants. The grant, lease, or rent shall
expressly provide for the authority of the town under applicable law to
regulate the use provided by the grant, lease, or rent (including, but not
limited to, the authority to protect the public welfare, safety, and health)
and to enforce compliance with any applicable standards established by this
chapter or the license.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)




INITIAL AND RENEWAL LICENSE REQUIREMENTS




§ 113.040  EFFECT OF AWARD OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Code binding. Upon award of an initial or a renewal license
pursuant to this code, a licensee shall agree to be bound by all the terms
and conditions contained herein.



   (B)   Incorporation by reference of proposal for initial or renewal
license.



      (1)   A licensee under an initial or renewal license also
agrees to provide all of the cable services specifically set forth in its
proposal, if provided, to provide cable services within the license area and
by its acceptance of the initial or renewal license, the licensee
specifically agrees that its proposal is hereby incorporated by reference and
made a part of the initial or renewal license.



      (2)   If such proposal and the provisions of this chapter
conflict with the applicable initial or renewal license, that provision that
provides the greatest benefit to the town, in the opinion of the Town
Council, shall prevail; provided that, the town, having chosen or accepted
one of the conflicting provisions, may not thereafter elect to require
compliance with a different alternative of the conflicting provisions.



      (3)   Failure to provide services as promised in licensee’s
proposal or agreed to in its license may be deemed a breach of this chapter
to which the provisions of §§ 113.128 and 113.129 of this chapter shall
apply.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.041  PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   For the reasons that the streets and other public
rights-of-way that are used by the licensee in the operation of its cable
system within the boundaries of the town are valuable public properties
acquired and maintained by the town at great expense to its taxpayers, and
that the grant to the licensee for the use of said streets is a valuable
property right without which the licensee would be required to invest
substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, and because the
town will incur costs in regulating and administering the license, the
licensee shall pay to the town an amount no less than 5% of licensee’s
gross revenues (the “license fee”).



   (B)   Should federal regulations be amended in the future to allow
the town to receive a greater fee than the fee set forth in division (A)
above, then in that event, the town shall have the right to increase the fee
as specified in the license.



   (C)   The payment of the license fee by the licensee to the town
shall be made quarterly by delivery of the same to the Town Manager on or
before the twentieth day of the following month, with a ten-day grace period.
If such payment is not made by the next to the last business day of the
following month, the town may impose interest at a rate of 1.5% per month
commencing from the date payment should have been made and continuing until
the payment is made. Fractions of a month shall be considered to constitute a
full month for the purpose of computing interest. In addition to interest
that may be assessed under this division (C), if licensee fails to pay any
license fee before the end of such grace period, licensee shall be subject to
the following civil penalties.



      (1)   A licensee who fails to pay the license fee or any
portion thereof within the time prescribed shall pay a penalty of 10% of the
unpaid fee, unless the licensee shows that the failure is due to reasonable
cause and not due to willful neglect.



      (2)   A licensee who fails or refuses to pay a license fee or
any portion thereof after notice and demand by the town shall pay a penalty
of 25% of the unpaid fee, unless licensee shows that the failure is due to
reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect.



      (3)   If the cause of failure to pay the licensee fee or any
portion thereof is determined by the town to be due to civil fraud or evasion
of the license fee, the licensee shall pay a penalty of 50% of the amount of
deficiency.



   (D)   Under terms specified in the license, there shall be allowed
as an offset against the license fee due under this chapter any amounts
licensee paid to the town during the prior quarter in privilege license
taxes; provided, however, that there shall be no offset to the extent that
licensee made payments of privilege license taxes on any gross income (within
the meaning of the privilege license tax ordinance) that is not included in
gross revenues under this chapter.



   (E)   The town shall have the right to inspect the licensee’s
income records and the town and licensee shall each have the right to audit
and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this chapter;
provided, however, that such audit shall take place within 36 months
following the close of the licensee’s fiscal year for which the audit is
desired.



      (1)   Additional amounts due to the town discovered in the
audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the licensee
by the town, and said notice shall include a copy of the audit report;
provided, however, that licensee shall not be required to pay such deficiency
until 30 days after completion of the administrative review process if
licensee commences such process pursuant to § 113.106(A). If there is a
deficiency in the payment of license fees to the town of 10% or more, the
town may assess the cost of the audit to the licensee.



      (2)   Amounts owed to licensee as a result of overpayment(s)
of license fees shall bear interest and shall be refunded within 30 days
following written notice to the town by licensee.



      (3)   In lieu of direct refund to licensee under division
(E)(2) above, the town may elect to grant licensee a credit against
subsequent quarterly license fee payments due pursuant to this chapter until
licensee has recovered the amount of the overpayment.



   (F)   The cost to licensee of any town right-of-way construction
permit, encroachment permit, inspection, zoning review, pavement restoration,
and any other fee that town imposes, under town code requirements or
otherwise, on licensee’s construction activities shall be included in the
license fee paid to the town.



   (G)   Licensee shall be entitled to offset against license fees due
to the town all costs that the licensee incurs for repair, renovation,
restoration, or reconstruction to comply with any requirements of the town 
that exceed the repair and restoration requirements set forth in § 113.086,
including, but not limited to, repair, renovation, restoration, or
reconstruction required by any pavement restoration ordinance or similar
ordinance adopted by the town and applicable to licensee. At the time license
fees are due pursuant to this chapter, licensee shall provide to the town an
itemized report detailing:



      (1)   The amount of license fees that would otherwise be due
to the town without offset;



      (2)   A detailed report of all costs incurred by licensee and
the portion of such costs that exceed the repair and restoration requirements
of § 113.086 and that are being offset; and



      (3)   The amount of license fees, if any, being paid to the
town after accounting for the offset.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.042  USE OF TELEPHONE FACILITIES.



   When and if a licensee of any license granted hereunder uses a
telephone company’s cable system distribution channels furnished to the
licensee pursuant to tariff or contract on file with a regulatory body having
jurisdiction and said licensee makes no use of the streets independent of
such telephone company furnished facilities, said licensee remains fully
bound by the terms of its license and this chapter.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.043  REQUIRED SERVICES AND FACILITIES.



   (A)   A license shall include a description of proposed cable system
design and a description of the initial programming and cable services to be
offered, a description of facilities proposed for local programming, and
facilities to be offered to various community institutions.



   (B)   A licensee shall maintain the mix, level, and quality of
programming within the broad categories of video programming or other
services set forth in its license. Where there has been a substantial failure
to maintain the mix, level, or quality of services within the broad
categories of video programming or other services as set forth in the
licensee’s license, the town may, following due notice and public hearing
as provided in §§ 113.130 and 113.131, direct the licensee to comply with
its obligations in this regard. Written notice of such hearing shall be
provided to the licensee and to the public at least 30 days prior to such
hearing.



   (C)   A license shall include a provision for the licensee to
provide channel capacity for community programming on terms and conditions
specified in the license.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.044  SUBSCRIBER SERVICES; RATES.



   (A)   Initial rates. A licensee under an initial or renewal license
may establish initial rates for its cable services in accordance with the
rates contained in such licensee’s proposal for an initial or renewal
license.



   (B)   Authority to regulate rates. To the extent permitted, the town
may regulate the rates for cable service in accordance with federal and state
law.



   (C)   Notice of rates. Notice of rates shall be given in accordance
with § 113.103.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.045  ACCESS AND PUBLIC SAFETY CHANNELS.



   (A)   Channel capacity. As provided in the license, the licensee
shall provide channel capacity for a minimum one public safety channel
dedicated to the Town Fire and Police Departments, one government access
channel dedicated to the town, and one education access channel dedicated to
all schools within the town.



   (B)   Channel management. The operation of the public safety
channel, the government access channel, and the education access channel
shall be the responsibility of the town.



   (C)   Excess capacity. The licensee may be permitted to utilize
unused access channel capacity under rules and procedures established by the
town.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.046  CHANGES IN CABLE TECHNOLOGY.



   (A)   The licensor and licensee shall meet at periods not exceeding
three years or upon request of either to discuss changes in cable television
laws, regulations, technology, competing services, the needs of the
community, and other factors impacting cable television. As a result of these
discussions, the license may be modified by the town and the licensee to
respond to the change in laws, regulations, technology, competing services,
the needs of the community, or other factors impacting cable television.



   (B)   If any of the following conditions occur, and upon written
request of either licensee or licensor, the Town Manager and licensee agree
to meet and discuss in good faith the terms of a mutually agreeable license
amendment:



      (1)   Cable service similar to cable television service
offered by licensee is provided by any entity using the streets and public
ways, which is not subject to similar licensing requirements of the licensor;
or



      (2)   Any other significant event occurs, including, but not
limited to, changes of federal or state law or a final non-appealable order
or judgment by a court of competent jurisdiction, which either licensee or
licensor believes may impact the current terms and conditions of the license.



   (C)   The purpose of the meeting and discussion is to use best
efforts to reach mutually acceptable agreement for recommendation to the Town
Council for proposed Town Council action, within 90 days of such written
request, on how to amend the license to relieve licensor or the licensee from
any commercial impracticability which arises from the condition in question.
This provision shall not require that the license be amended, however it is
intended to facilitate a process whereby the parties may reach a mutually
acceptable agreement.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.047  TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE.



   For any license or contract entered into pursuant to this chapter, time
shall be deemed of the essence and any failure of the licensee to perform
within the time allotted, or within a reasonable time if a period is not
specified, shall be sufficient grounds for the town to invoke liquidated
damages or revocation of a license in accordance with §§ 113.129 and
113.132.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.048  ACCEPTANCE AND EFFECTIVE DATE.



   (A)   No license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall become effective unless and until all provisions required in this
subchapter and §§ 113.127(A), 113.127(B), and 113.128 are done and
completed, all of such provisions being hereby declared to be conditions
precedent to the effectiveness of any such license granted hereunder. If any
of such provisions are not done and completed in the time and manner
required, the license shall be null and void.



   (B)   Within 20 days after the effective date of the ordinance
awarding any license, or within such extended period of time as the Town
Council in its discretion may authorize, the licensee shall file with the
Town Manager/Clerk its written acceptance of the license, in form
satisfactory to the Town Attorney, together with the letter of credit,
construction bond, and insurance policies required by §§ 113.127(B) and
113.128, respectively, and its license to be bound by and to comply with and
to do everything that is required of the licensee by the provisions of this
chapter and the applicable license. Such acceptance shall be acknowledged by
the licensee before a notary public, and shall, in form and content, be
satisfactory to and approved by the Town Attorney.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)




CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS




§ 113.060  PERMITS, INSTALLATION, AND SERVICE.



   Within 60 days after acceptance of any initial or renewal license, the
licensee shall proceed with due diligence to apply for necessary permits and
authorizations that are required in the conduct of its business, including,
but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave
carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses, and authorizations to be
granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the
operation of cable systems, or their associated microwave transmission
facilities.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.061  LINE EXTENSION.



   (A)   Residential service. The licensee shall make cable services
available to dwelling units within the town and shall extend its cable system
as contemplated under this chapter as follows. Each unit in an MDU shall be
counted as a dwelling unit in determining the residential density, provided a
mutually acceptable agreement granting licensee reasonable access to the MDU
has been executed and delivered. The licensee shall not be required to make
service available to residents of multiple dwelling units where the owner of
the property has not granted licensee such reasonable access to the property.



      (1)   When requested by a resident or developer in the town,
the licensee shall, at the licensee’s sole expense, extend the cable system
to any single-family residence or dwelling within the town, provided that
such extension involves density of 25 existing homes per mile as measured in
linear trench or aerial strand footage from the nearest technically feasible
point of connection on the cable system. Such extension(s) shall include
cutting in one or more taps and extending cable as necessary.



      (2)   When a resident or developer in the town requests an
extension of service to an area that does not meet the minimum density of 25
existing homes per mile as measured in linear trench or aerial strand footage
from the nearest technically feasible point of connection on the cable
system, licensee shall be required to comply with such request only if the
resident or developer agrees to pay to the licensee an amount equal to all
incremental costs incurred beyond those for an extension otherwise involving
a density of 25 existing homes per mile. The incremental costs to be paid
shall be licensee’s costs (reasonable labor and materials) of extending the
cable system consistently with the licensee’s overall system design to the
residence, or to and throughout the development, from the nearest technically
feasible point of connection on the cable system. The costs shall include
splicing in one or more taps and extending cable.



      (3)   Where there is a request by a developer for an extension
to a development that does not meet the minimum density test in division
(A)(2) above and where, instead of proceeding under division (A)(2) above,
the developer agrees to pay licensee’s full costs (reasonable labor and
materials) of extending the cable system from the nearest technically
feasible point of connection on the cable system to the nearest street access
to the development, licensee shall then extend the cable system within the
development, at the licensee’s sole cost, if it has a density of 25
existing homes per mile, as measured in linear trench or aerial strand
footage from the nearest street access to the development to which the
developer paid to have the cable system extended.



      (4)   Absent a showing by licensee to the Town Manager of
circumstances beyond the licensee’s reasonable control, an extension of
service pursuant to divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) above shall be
accomplished within 120 days of the developer’s or resident’s request.



   (B)   Commercial service. The licensee shall make cable services
available to commercial establishments as follows except that the licensee
shall not be required to make service available to commercial establishments
where the owner of the property has not granted the licensee reasonable
access to the property:



      (1)   When requested by the owner of a commercial
establishment, provided that no plant extension and nothing more than a
standard drop is required to make such cable services available; or



      (2)   When the owner of a commercial or industrial
establishment within the town requests an extension of service that does not
meet a minimum 100 hook ups per cable plant mile, licensee shall be required
to comply with such request only if such owner pays to licensee an amount
equal to the reasonable actual labor and material costs incurred by the
licensee over and above the cost of a standard drop in making cable services
available to such owner’s commercial establishment. Absent a showing by the
licensee to the Town Manager of unusual circumstances, including without
limitation street crossings, an extension of service pursuant to this
division (B)(2) shall be accomplished within 120 days of the owner’s
execution of any necessary easement documents and capital contribution
agreements.




   (C)   Service drops.




      (1)   The licensee shall make service available to any
single-family residence or any commercial establishment within the town at
the standard connection charge if the connection requires a standard drop.



      (2)   If making service available requires more than a
standard drop, the licensee shall not be required to make such service
available unless the person or entity requesting such service pays to
licensee:



         (a)   The standard connection charge; and



         (b)   An amount equal to the reasonable, actual labor
and material costs incurred by licensee for the additional facilities and
work.



      (3)   The licensee may offer bulk billing service, but shall
not require a bulk billing agreement as a condition of providing service, if
the person or entity requesting service pays to the licensee the applicable
amount(s) set forth in divisions (C)(1) or (C)(2) above.



      (4)   Absent a showing by the licensee to the Town Manager of
unusual circumstances, including without limitation street crossings, any
standard drop to a single-family residence or dwelling shall be accomplished
within ten days of the request for service and any drop that is not a
standard drop shall be accomplished within 20 days of such request. Line
extensions shall be done as provided in division (A)(4) above.



      (5)   Absent a showing by the licensee to the Town Manager of
unusual circumstances, including without limitation street crossings:



         (a)   Any standard drop to a commercial establishment
shall be accomplished within ten days after the owner of such commercial
establishment executes any necessary easement documents and capital
contribution agreements; and



         (b)   Any commercial drop that is not a standard drop
shall be accomplished within 20 days of the owner’s execution of such
documents and agreements.



   (D)   Discrimination prohibited. No person, firm, or corporation in
the existing cable service area of the licensee shall be arbitrarily refused
cable services; provided, however, that the licensee shall not be required to
provide cable services to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable line
extension connection fee and/or cable service charge(s).



   (E)   Annexed territory. Newly annexed territory shall be subject to
the terms of this chapter and specifically this subchapter.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.062  PLACEMENT OF TRANSMISSION FACILITIES.



   Except as provided in the license, facilities shall be placed in
accordance with the town code and the zoning code.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.063  CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS.




   (A)   Compliance with construction and technical standards.




      (1)   As provided in the license, the licensee shall
construct, install, operate, and maintain its system in a manner such that it
operates at all times consistent with all laws, this chapter, construction
standards of the town, the FCC rules and regulations, part 76 subpart K
(Technical Standards), as amended from time to time and detailed standards
submitted by an initial or renewal licensee as part of its proposal, which
standards are to be incorporated by reference in an initial or renewal
license. In addition, the town may at any time conduct independent
measurements of the system. If inaccurate proof of performance reports are
shown to have been the result of the licensee’s willful neglect, the
licensee shall pay the costs reasonably incurred by the town in obtaining
independent verification of technical compliance with all standards.



      (2)   When there have been multiple, similar complaints by
subscribers, or when there exists other evidence that suggests that licensee
is not in substantial compliance with the technical standards, the Town
Manager shall have the right and authority to compel licensee to test,
analyze, and report on the performance of the cable system under the
supervision of the Town Manager. Such report shall be delivered to the Town
Manager no later than 30 days after the Town Manager requests such test(s) in
writing and shall include the following information: the nature of the
complaints that precipitated the test(s); which cable system component(s)
was/were tested; the equipment used and procedure(s) employed in such
testing; the result(s) of such test(s); and the manner in which such
complaints were resolved. If such report indicates licensee is in substantial
compliance with the technical standards, but there exists evidence suggesting
that the licensee is nonetheless not in substantial compliance, the Town
Manager may require that the test(s) be repeated within 30 days of the
delivery of such report, under the supervision of a professional engineer who
is not on the permanent staff of licensee. Such engineer shall sign all
records of such repeated test(s) and shall forward to the Town Manager such
records, a report interpreting the results, and recommended corrective
actions, if any. The fees of such engineer shall be paid by licensee, if the
repeated test(s) show(s) licensee is not in substantial compliance with the
technical standards of this chapter or the town, if the repeated test(s)
show(s) licensee is in substantial compliance with said standards.



   (B)   Additional specification. Construction, installation, and
maintenance of a cable system shall be performed in an orderly and
professional manner. All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible,
parallel with and in a manner similar to the installation of electric and
telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel
and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. Underground
installations shall be in conformance with all applicable codes. Each cable
system shall include equipment capable of providing stand-by power as
specified in the license. The equipment shall be so constructed as to
automatically revert to the stand-by mode when the electrical utility power
returns. The system shall incorporate safeguards necessary to prevent injury
to technicians resulting from licensee’s standby power sources. The
licensee shall at all time comply with applicable sections of:




      (1)   National Electrical Safety Code (ANSI) C2-1990;





      (2)   National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire
Underwriters);




      (3)   The Uniform Building Code as may be adopted and amended
by the town, together with applicable portions of all other uniform codes, as
may be adopted and amended by the town, promulgated by the International
Conference of Building Officials;



      (4)   Town zoning code and subdivision regulations, all as
from time to time amended and revised, and all other applicable rules and
regulations now in effect or hereinafter adopted by the town; and



      (5)   The Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction, including the latest town
supplement thereto.



   (C)   Emergency service. In accordance with the provisions of FCC
rules and regulations part 11, subpart D, § 11.51(h)(1), and as such
provisions may from time to time be amended, every licensee shall install and
maintain an Emergency Alert System (EAS) and shall transmit all Emergency Act
Notifications (EAN) and Emergency Act Terminations (EAT) relating to local
and state-wide situations as may be designated to be an emergency by the
Local Primary (LP), the State Primary (SP) and/or the State Emergency
Operations Center (SEOC), as those authorities are identified and defined
within FCC rules and regulations, part 11. In any event, the cable system
shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the
license area or other areas where the licensee may have equipment located.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.064  UTILITY LOCATING SYSTEM.



   All licensees shall be required to be a participant in the regional one
call utility locating system (Blue Stake).



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.065  RESIDENT NOTIFICATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY REQUIRED.



   All licensees shall provide reasonable advance notice to all affected
residents prior to system construction crews entering the right-of-way in
front of their property; provided, that the licensee shall not be required to
provide such notice in emergencies or for normal system repair and
maintenance work.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.066  CABLE SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION MAP AND SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Within 120 days after acceptance of any license, a licensee
that is required in its license to construct or reconstruct the cable system
shall submit a specific construction plan or reconstruction plan, which shall
be incorporated as an exhibit in the license. The plan shall include an
overall time schedule of any construction or reconstruction effort and system
design criteria.



   (B)   Within 90 days after obtaining necessary permits, licenses,
and authorizations, such licensee shall commence construction and
installation of the cable system.



      (1)   The licensee shall comply with the time schedule for
construction required in § 113.061(A).



      (2)   Installation and operation of the new or rebuilt cable
system by licensee shall proceed on a nondiscriminatory basis, without regard
for subscriber affluence or other discriminatory factors.



      (3)   Immediately following commencement of construction and
installation of the cable system under an initial or renewal license, the
licensee shall diligently proceed to deliver cable services, as described in
the license.



   (C)   Failure on the part of the licensee to commence and diligently
pursue each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters
set forth herein, shall be grounds for liquidated damages and/or revocation
of such license pursuant to §§ 113.129 and 113.132; provided, however, that
the Council, in its discretion, may extend the time for the commencement and
completion of construction and installation for additional periods if the
licensee acting in good faith experiences delays by reason of circumstances
beyond its control.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)




REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO USE OF TOWN STREETS AND PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY




§ 113.080  LOCATION OF PROPERTY OF LICENSEE.



   (A)   Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits, or other properties
of a licensee to be constructed or installed in streets shall be so
constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall
be approved by the Town Manager acting in the exercise of his or her
reasonable discretion consistent with the town’s technical and permitting
regulations.



   (B)   Except as provided by the town, a licensee shall not install
or erect any facility or apparatus in or on any privately-owned area within
the town that has not yet become a public street, whether or not designated
or delineated as a proposed public street on any preliminary subdivision
approved by the town.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter or any
license granted pursuant thereto, all facilities of a licensee in any public
street or in any public or private easement, and cable service lines to
subscribers off the main lines, shall be located underground as per the
town’s subdivision regulations as may be amended from time to time and at
such depths and locations as shall be approved by the Town Manager.



   (D)   Except as provided in the license, upon the undergrounding of
other utility lines or shared overhead facilities, the licensee shall
concurrently (or earlier) place its facilities underground, at its own
expense (when the undergrounding is at the expense of the other utilities
involved), at depths and locations approved by the Town Manager.



   (E)   All new underground wires or cable of the licensee placed
after the effective date of this chapter shall be placed in conduit except
for service drop lines.



   (F)   As required by the Town Manager or other appropriate
departments, the licensee or its authorized contractors will obtain permits,
prior to any physical work being performed in the town’s rights-of-way, or
on town-owned property. All work will be done in accordance with the town’s
technical and permitting specifications. A licensee shall make maps of the
applicable portion of the cable system showing amplifier and power supply
locations available for inspection and review at the office where licensee
maintains such records. The licensee shall provide the town with up-to-date
route maps of a suitable scale showing all transmitting and receiving pickup
locations and cable route and pedestal locations.



   (G)   To prevent unnecessary disruption and damage to streets,
rights-of-way, and other property, the installation of cable system shall be
accomplished in new subdivisions at the same time, and in the same trench as
other communications, electric, and other permanent services to structures.
Except as federal law may grant them other rights, developers of new
residential buildings or mobile homes within a new or undeveloped
subdivision, new residential units within new multiple occupancy residential
developments, and new commercial and industrial buildings and structures
shall treat cable facilities as they treat other communication facilities,
utilities, and other underground facilities, in regards to availability and
cost of trenching for undergroundings.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.081  EMERGENCY WORK.



   The town reserves the right to move any portion of the licensee’s
equipment and facilities as may be required in any emergency as determined by
the town without liability for interruption of cable service. However, prior
to taking any action pursuant to this subchapter, the town shall provide, if
feasible, reasonable notice to licensee of the emergency to allow the
licensee the opportunity to protect or repair licensee’s facilities
involved in the emergency.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.082  REMOVAL AND ABANDONMENT OF PROPERTY OF LICENSEE.



   (A)   If the use of a substantial part of the cable system is
discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of 12 months, or if such
cable system or property has been installed in any street or public place
without complying with the requirements of the licensee’s license or this
chapter, or the license has been terminated, canceled, or has expired without
renewal, the licensee shall promptly, upon being given ten days’ notice
from the Town Manager, remove from the streets or public places all such
property and poles of such cable system other than any underground cable or
any other underground property that the Town Manager may permit to be
abandoned in place. Upon such removal, the licensee shall promptly restore
the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a
condition satisfactory to the Town Manager.



   (B)   Any property of the licensee remaining in place 180 days after
the termination or expiration of the license shall be, at the option of the
town, considered permanently abandoned. The town may extend such time.



   (C)   Any property of the licensee permitted to be abandoned in
place shall be abandoned in such a manner as the Town Manager shall
prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of the licensee in
place, the property shall become that of the town, and the licensee shall
submit to the town an instrument in writing, to be approved by the Town
Attorney, transferring to the town the ownership of such property.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.083  TEMPORARY REMOVAL OF WIRE FOR BUILDING IMPROVEMENTS.



   The licensee, on the request of any person, firm, or corporation
holding a building moving permit issued by the town, shall temporarily raise
or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such
temporary removal, raising, or lowering of wires shall be paid to the
licensee by the person, firm, or corporation requesting the same, and the
licensee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The
licensee shall be given not less than 48 hours’ advance notice to arrange
for such temporary wire changes.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.084  CHANGES REQUIRED BY PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   The licensee shall from time to time protect, support, temporarily
dislocate, temporarily or permanently, as may be required, remove or
relocate, without expense to the town, any facilities installed, used, or
maintained under the license, if and when made necessary by any lawful change
of grade, alignment, or width of any street, by the town or made necessary by
any other public improvement or alteration in, under, on, upon, or about any
street, when such public improvement or alteration is at the instance of the
town, when such improvement or alteration is for a governmental or
proprietary function, or made necessary by traffic conditions, public safety,
street vacation, or any other public project or purpose of town, and when the
licensee has substantially the same obligations with respect to the cost
thereof as all other users of the public rights-of-way.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.085  METHODS AND MATERIALS OF STREET REPAIR.



   The town shall have the right to specify the methods and materials of
street repair or restoration, together with the horizontal and vertical
location of any underground facility proposed by licensee within any public
property or right-of-way. The town shall also have the right to control and
regulate the work of the licensee to assure a minimum of inconvenience to the
traveling public and to impose traffic control requirements, as specified in
the town’s subdivision regulations and the town code. The licensee will be
required to obtain permits from the town, allowing the licensee to work in
the public right-of-way.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.086  FAILURE TO PERFORM STREET REPAIR.



   (A)   If the licensee causes damage to pavement, sidewalks,
driveways, landscaping, or other property during construction, installation,
or repair of its facilities, licensee or its authorized agent shall replace
and restore such places as nearly as may be possible to the condition that
existed before the damage occurred. All repair and restoration necessary to
meet the requirements set forth in this section shall be at the licensee’s
expense and in a manner acceptable to the town. The licensee shall further
maintain all such repair and restoration related to the licensee’s
activities, in the condition approved by the town, for one year following
repair or restoration.



   (B)   Upon failure of the licensee to complete any work required by
law or by the provisions of this chapter to be done in any street, within ten
days following due notice and to the satisfaction of the Town Manager, the
town may, at its option, cause such work to be done through its own forces or
through a hired contractor. The licensee shall pay to the town the cost
thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the Town Manager to the licensee
within 15 days after receipt of such itemized report; or, at the town’s
option, the town may demand of licensee the estimated cost of such work as
estimated by the Town Manager, and the licensee shall pay the amount to town
within 15 days of such demand. Upon award of any contract or contracts
therefor, the licensee shall pay to town, within 15 days after demand, any
additional amount necessary to provide for cost of such work. Upon completion
of such work, the licensee shall pay to town or town shall refund to licensee
such sums so that the total received and retained by town shall equal the
cost to the town of such work. COST, as used herein, shall include 15% of all
other costs for its own personnel and equipment and materials or for a
contractor to compensate the town for its overhead, including inspection and
supervision, and any interest charges incurred by town arising out of the
licensee’s late payment to town under this section.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)




SUBSCRIBER SERVICE PROVISIONS




§ 113.100  LOCAL BUSINESS OFFICE REQUIREMENTS.



   The licensee shall maintain at least one physical office located within
ten miles of the town limits. The physical office of the company shall be a
place(s) conveniently located where subscribers may pay their bills and
register complaints and have them resolved; schedule installations and
service calls; obtain assistance on technical problems; obtain and return
converter boxes, remotes, and other customer premises information; and
receive information on the company and its services. Said office(s) shall be
open throughout normal business hours.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.101  EFFICIENT TELEPHONE COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.



   A licensee shall render efficient telephone communication service to
subscribers and, at a minimum, meet all of the standards set forth below.



   (A)   The licensee shall have a publicly listed, local or toll-free
telephone number and receive complaints, requests for repairs, service calls,
billing inquiries, and other subscriber information 24 hours, seven days a
week.



   (B)   Trained licensee representatives shall be available to respond
to subscriber telephone inquires during normal business hours.



   (C)   After normal business hours, the access line may be answered
by a service or an automated response system; provided, however, that such
service or automated system shall notify licensee personnel immediately in
the case of an interruption of service. Inquires received after normal
business hours must be responded to by a licensee representative on the next
business day.



   (D)   Under normal operating conditions, the mean average telephone
answer time by a subscriber representative receiving calls on the
licensee’s billing and repair line shall not exceed 60 seconds after the
connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, the mean average
transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds under normal operating conditions.
These standards shall be met no less than 90% of the time under normal
operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. A caller on hold shall
be informed at least every 60 seconds of the status of the call.



   (E)   Under normal operating conditions, the subscribers shall not
receive a busy signal more than 5% of the time.



   (F)   The licensee will not be required to acquire equipment or
perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards
above unless a historical record of compliance indicates a clear failure to
comply.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.102  SUBSCRIBER SERVICE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Each licensee shall at all times satisfy federal customer
service standards and the subscriber service standards set forth in the
license and this chapter. If there is a conflict among standards, the
standard set forth in the license and this chapter shall prevail, unless
federal law has preempted such standard, in which case the federal standard
shall apply to the extent required by federal law.



   (B)   Upon termination of cable services to any subscriber, the
licensee shall promptly remove its converter equipment from the premises of
such subscriber upon the subscriber’s request.



   (C)   The licensee shall render efficient cable services, make
repairs promptly, and interrupt cable services only for good cause and for
the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall
occur during periods of minimum cable system use.



   (D)   The licensee shall not knowingly allow its cable or other
operations to interfere with television reception of persons not serviced by
licensee, nor shall the cable system interfere with, obstruct, or hinder in
any manner, the operation of the various utilities serving the residents of
the town.



   (E)   The licensee shall continue, through the term of the license,
to maintain the technical, operational, and maintenance standards and quality
of cable service set forth in the license and this chapter.



   (F)   Under normal operating conditions, each of the following four
standards for subscribers shall be met not less than 95% of the time,
measured on a quarterly basis.



      (1)   Standard drops (including reconnects) shall be installed
within seven days after an order has been placed.



      (2)   Under normal operating conditions, the licensee will
begin working on service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24
hours after the service interruption becomes known.



      (3)   The “appointment window” alternatives for
installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be
either a specific time or, at a maximum, a four-hour time block during normal
business hours. The licensee may schedule service calls and other
installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express
convenience of the subscriber.



      (4)   If a licensee representative is running late for an
appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as
scheduled, the licensee will attempt to contact the subscriber. The
appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time that is convenient
for the subscriber.



   (G)   In addition to the service interruption requirements set forth
above, whenever it has been determined that an outage exists, the licensee
shall respond immediately. It shall be deemed a violation if licensee exceeds
a four-hour average response time to outages during any consecutive
three-month period.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.103  SUBSCRIBER AND TOWN NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   Licensee shall meet the following subscriber and town notification
requirements.



   (A)   The license shall provide written information in
easy-to-understand language on each of the following areas prior to or at the
time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers and the
town, and at any time upon request:




      (1)   Products and services offered;




      (2)   Prices and options for programming services and
conditions of subscription to programming and other services;




      (3)   Installation and service maintenance policies;





      (4)   Instructions on how to use the cable service;




      (5)   Information on a parental control feature that will
permit a subscriber to lock out any objectionable programming from the cable
services entering subscriber’s home.




      (6)   Channel positions of programming carried on the system;
and




      (7)   A description of the full billing and subscriber
complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the
town’s designated office for handling cable television matters. The
description of the complaint procedures shall delineate the process for
submitting a subscriber complaint and shall specify:



         (a)   The telephone number and address of the licensee
that the subscriber can use to make a complaint;



         (b)   A statement indicating that a dissatisfied
subscriber should exhaust its efforts with the licensee before submitting a
complaint to the town; and



         (c)   The address and title of the official in the town
designated by the Town Manager to review complaints.



   (B)   Subscribers and the town will be notified of any changes in
rates, programming, services, or channel positions as soon as possible in
writing. Notice must be given to the town and subscribers a minimum of 30
days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the
licensee, unless the town concurs that notice is not necessary. In addition,
the licensee shall notify the town and subscribers 30 days in advance of any
significant changes in the other information required by division (A) above.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.104  BILLING PRACTICES; INFORMATION AND PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Bills to subscribers shall be clear, concise, and
understandable. Bills to subscribers must be fully itemized, with
itemizations including, but not limited to, basic service and premium service
charges and equipment charges. Bills to subscribers will also clearly
delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges,
rebates, and credits.



   (B)   The licensee shall bill all subscribers to its cable system in
a uniform manner, regardless of subscriber’s level of service. In no case
shall any subscriber be billed for services in excess of 30 days prior to
receipt of such service. Payment shall be due no sooner than the fifteenth
day of each billing period, and due date shall be listed on each bill. Bills
shall be mailed no later than the first day of the billing period.



   (C)   In case of a subscriber dispute, the licensee must respond to
a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. The licensee shall
follow a written internal appeal procedure for resolution of subscriber
disputes.




   (D)   Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than
either:




      (1)   The subscriber’s next billing cycle following
resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier;



      (2)   For equipment deposits, upon the return of the equipment
supplied by the licensee if service is terminated; or




      (3)   For payment deposits, after 12 months of satisfactory
customer payments.




   (E)   Credits for service will be issued no later than the
subscriber’s next billing cycle following the determination that a credit
is warranted.



   (F)   Any subscriber shall be entitled, upon oral or written request
to the licensee, to a refund equal to one day’s service for each
subscriber’s loss of service caused by licensee:



      (1)   For each continuous 24-hour period; or



      (2)   For each period of two or more hours of any four days
within a monthly billing period.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.105  CHANGES TO SUBSCRIBER SERVICE OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   The town shall enforce the subscriber service standards as set
forth in this subchapter. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to
prevent or prohibit the town from establishing or enforcing subscriber
service standards that impose requirements that exceed, or that apply to
matters not addressed by, the standards set forth in this subchapter.



   (B)   Before adopting new subscriber service standards that impose
requirements that exceed, or address matters not addressed by, the standards
set forth in this subchapter, the town shall propose new subscriber service
standards and meet with the licensee to discuss the specific areas of concern
and negotiate a mutually acceptable resolution of such areas. If no
resolution is reached, the town shall provide licensee with 90 days’
written notice of its intent to adopt proposed new subscriber service
standards.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.106  SUBSCRIBER COMPLAINT PROCEDURES.



   A licensee shall comply with the following subscriber complaint
procedures. A subscriber complaint is any written or oral complaint by a
subscriber to the town that the subscriber did not receive the service the
subscriber requested consistent with the requirements of the license.



   (A)   The licensee shall ensure that all subscribers have recourse
to a satisfactory process for submitting any complaints. Licensee shall
respond to and resolve all subscriber complaints within a reasonable time. In
case of written subscriber complaint, the licensee shall respond within 30
days. The licensee shall follow a written internal appeal procedure for
resolution of disputes over subscriber complaints.



   (B)   Every licensee shall establish and maintain a written log
listing all subscriber complaints. The written log shall include the name and
telephone number, if given, of the subscriber making the complaint and the
action taken by the licensee on the complaint. The record shall be maintained
by the licensee for three years and to the extent permitted by federal law
shall be available to the Town Manager and the public for inspection upon
request during the licensee’s normal business hours. The licensee shall
also report specific complaint categories that the licensee tracks as a
reasonable measure of subscriber service response standards and is required
to report in the license.



   (C)   A licensee shall provide, in writing, upon request of the Town
Manager, a detailed description of any subscriber complaint and the action
taken by the licensee.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.107  SUBSCRIBER SOLICITATION PROCEDURES.



   A licensee shall comply with the following subscriber solicitation
procedures.



   (A)   All personnel, agents, and representatives of the licensee,
including subcontractors, shall wear a cable uniform or clearly display a
photo-identification badge when acting on behalf of the licensee in the town.



   (B)   The licensee shall afford each subscriber of the cable system
a three-day right of rescission for ordering installation of cable service
from the cable system, provided that such right of rescission shall end upon
initiation of physical installation of cable system equipment on such
subscriber’s premises.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.108  DISCONNECTION AND TERMINATION OF CABLE SERVICES.



   A licensee shall only disconnect or terminate a subscriber’s cable
service for good and just cause. In no event shall a licensee disconnect said
cable service for nonpayment without the prior written notification to the
affected subscriber at least seven days before such disconnection or
termination. In no event shall such disconnection or termination for
nonpayment occur in less than 30 days after a subscriber’s failure to pay a
bill due. Where the licensee has improperly discontinued cable system service
to any such subscriber, it shall provide free reconnection to the cable
system to such subscriber.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.109  RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS.



   (A)   A licensee shall not deny cable service, deny access, or
otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general
citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, or
disability. A licensee shall comply at all times with all other applicable
federal, state, and local laws and regulations, and as amended from time to
time, relating to nondiscrimination.



   (B)   A licensee shall strictly adhere to applicable equal
employment opportunity requirements of federal, state, and local regulations,
and as amended from time to time.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)  Penalty, see § 113.999



§ 113.110  PROTECTION OF SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.



   (A)   At the time of entering into an agreement to provide any cable
service to a subscriber and at least once a year thereafter, a licensee shall
provide notice in the form of a separate, written statement to such
subscriber that clearly and conspicuously informs the subscriber of:



      (1)   The nature of personally identifiable information
collected or to be collected with respect to the subscriber and the nature of
the use of such information;



      (2)   The nature, frequency, and purpose of any disclosure
that may be made of such information, including any identification of the
types of persons to whom the disclosure may be made;




      (3)   The period during which such information will be
maintained by the licensee;




      (4)   The times and place at which the subscriber may have
access to such information in accordance with division (F) below;



      (5)   The limitations provided by this section with respect to
the collection and disclosure of information by a licensee and the right of
the subscriber under divisions (I) and (J) below to enforce such limitations;
and



      (6)   For purposes of this section, the term PERSONALLY
IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION does not include any record aggregate data that does
not identify particular persons.



   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) below, a licensee shall not
use the cable system to collect personally identifiable information
concerning any subscriber without the prior written or electronic consent to
the subscriber concerned.




   (C)   A licensee may use the cable system to collect such
information in order to:




      (1)   Obtain information necessary to render a cable service
or other service provided by the licensee to the subscriber; or




      (2)   Detect unauthorized reception of cable communications.




   (D)   Except as provided in division (F) below, a licensee shall not
disclose personally identifiable information concerning any subscriber
without the prior written or electronic consent of the subscriber concerned.




   (E)   A licensee may disclose such information if the disclosure is:




      (1)   Necessary to render or conduct a legitimate business
activity related to a cable service or other service provided by the licensee
to the subscriber;



      (2)   Subject to division (J) below, made pursuant to a court
order authorizing such disclosure, if the subscriber is notified of such
order by the person to whom the order is directed; or



      (3)   A disclosure of the names and addresses of subscribers
to any cable service or other service, if:



         (a)   The licensee has provided the subscriber the
opportunity to prohibit or limit such disclosure; and




         (b)   The disclosure does not reveal, directly or
indirectly, the:




            1.   Extent of any viewing or other use by the
subscriber of a cable service or other service provided by the licensee; or



            2.   The nature of any transaction made by the
subscriber over the cable system of the licensee.



   (F)   A subscriber shall be provided, free of charge, access to all
personally identifiable information regarding that subscriber that is
collected and maintained by a licensee. Such information shall be made
available to the subscriber at reasonable times and at a convenient place
designated by such licensee. A cable subscriber shall be provided reasonable
opportunity to correct any error in such information.



   (G)   A licensee shall destroy personally identifiable information
if the information is no longer necessary for the purpose for which it was
collected and there are no pending requests or orders for access to such
information under division (F) above or pursuant to a court order.



   (H)   Any person aggrieved by any act of a licensee in violation of
this section may bring a civil action in a court of general jurisdiction, as
provided in § 631 of the Cable Act.



   (I)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the
town from enacting or enforcing additional laws consistent with this section
for the protection of subscriber privacy.



   (J)   A governmental entity may obtain personally identifiable
information only if, in the court proceeding relevant to such court order:



      (1)   Such entity offers clear and convincing evidence that
the subject of the information is reasonably suspected of engaging in
criminal activity and that the information sought would be material evidence
in the case; and



      (2)   The subject of the information is afforded the
opportunity to appear and contest such entity’s claim.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)




ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS




§ 113.125  REPORTS.



   (A)   Each year, the licensee shall brief the offices of the Town
Manager, no later than 120 days after the end of the licensee’s fiscal
year. The briefing shall include a description of all major activities
applicable to its operation during the preceding 12-month period. At the
briefing, the licensee shall submit a written report that includes the
following information, specific to the town: number of homes passed, number
of cable plant miles, number of subscribers for each type of cable service
offered and the gross revenues from each source attributable to the
operations of the licensee from within the town. This report shall be
verified as being correct by an officer of the company. There shall be
submitted along with this report such other information reasonably related to
license compliance as the town shall reasonably request.



   (B)   Upon request, there shall be provided to the town, copies of
any communications and reports submitted by the licensee to the FCC or any
other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in
respect to any manners affecting construction or operation of a cable system
in the town.



   (C)   The licensee shall provide the town with monthly reports, as
needed, to establish the licensee’s compliance with the various standards
and other provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.126  INSPECTION OF PROPERTY AND RECORDS.



   (A)   At all reasonable times, the licensee shall permit any duly
authorized representative of the town to examine all property of the
licensee, together with any appurtenant property of the licensee situated
within or without the town, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps
and other records kept or maintained by the licensee or under its control
that relate to license compliance and deal with the operations, affairs,
transactions, or property of the licensee.



   (B)   The licensee shall at all times make and keep full and
complete plans and records showing the exact location of all cable system
equipment installed or in use in streets, public rights-of-way, and other
places in the town and make them available to the town for review upon
request.



   (C)   The licensee shall provide the Town Manager maps or sets of
maps drawn to scale, showing the location of the licensee’s underground and
aboveground facilities. Upon request, such maps or sets of maps shall be
provided in an electronic format compatible with the current town electronic
format.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.127  PROTECTION OF TOWN AGAINST LIABILITY.




   (A)   Indemnification.




      (1)   The licensee shall fully indemnify, defend, and hold
harmless the town, its officers, boards, commissions, elected officials,
agents, attorneys, representatives, servants, and employees against any and
all costs, damages, expenses, claims, suits, actions, liabilities, and
judgments for damages, including but not limited to, expenses for legal fees,
whether suit be brought or not, and disbursements and liabilities incurred or
assumed by town in connection with:



         (a)   Damage to persons or property, in any way arising
out of or through the acts or omissions of licensee, its servants, officials,
agents, attorneys, representatives, or employees;



         (b)   Requests for relief arising out of any licensee
action or inaction that results in a claim for invasion of right of privacy,
for defamation of any person, firm, or corporation; for the violation or
infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark, or
patent; or of any other right of any person, firm, or corporation;



         (c)   Any and all claims arising out of the licensee’s
failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or a license or any
federal, state, or local law, or regulation applicable to licensee or the
cable system; or



         (d)   Any and all disputes arising out of a claim by any
party other than town wherein damages or other relief is sought as a result
of the town’s cable system licensing of licensee or as a result of the
renewal or non-renewal of the licensee’s cable system license.



      (2)   If a lawsuit covered by the provisions of division
(A)(1) above be brought against town, either independently or jointly with a
licensee, or with any other person or municipality, the licensee, upon notice
given by town, shall defend the town at the cost of the licensee. If final
judgment is obtained against the town, either independently or jointly with
licensee or any other defendants, the licensee shall indemnify the town and
pay such judgment with all costs and attorneys’ fees and satisfy and
discharge the same.



      (3)   The town shall cooperate with the licensee and reserves
the right to participate in the defense of any litigation.



      (4)   The town is in no manner or means waiving any
governmental immunity it may enjoy or any immunity for its agents, officials,
servants, attorneys, representatives, and/or employees.



      (5)   A licensee shall make no settlement in any matter
identified above without the town’s written consent, which shall not be
unreasonably withheld. Failure to inform the town of settlement shall
constitute a breach of the license and the town may seek any redress
available to it against the licensee; whether set forth in this chapter or
under any other municipal, state, or federal laws.



      (6)   All rights of town, pursuant to indemnification,
insurance, letter of credit, or performance bond(s), as provided for by this
chapter, are in addition to all other rights the town may have under this
chapter or any other code, rule, regulation, or law.



      (7)   The town’s exercise of, or failure to exercise all
rights pursuant to, any section of this chapter shall not affect in any way
the right of the town subsequently to exercise any such rights or any other
right of town under this code or any other code, rule, regulation, or law.



      (8)   It is the purpose of this section to provide maximum
indemnification to the town under the terms and conditions expressed and, if
there is a dispute, this section shall be construed (to the greatest extent
permitted by law) to provide for the indemnification of the town by the
licensee.



      (9)   The provisions of this section shall not be dependent or
conditioned upon the validity of this chapter or the validity of any of the
procedures or agreements involved in the award or renewal of a license, but
shall be and remain a binding right and obligation of the town and a licensee
even if part or all of this chapter, or the grant or renewal of a license, is
declared null and void in a legal or administrative proceeding. It shall be
expressly stated in a license that it is the intent of the licensee and town,
upon the effective date of the license, that the provisions of this section
survive any such declaration and shall be a binding obligation of and inure
to the benefit of the licensee and town and their respective successors and
assigns, if any.




   (B)   Comprehensive liability insurance.




      (1)   Upon acceptance of a license, the licensee shall file
with the Town Manager/Clerk and shall thereafter during the entire term of
such license maintain in full force and effect, at its own expense, a general
comprehensive liability insurance policy or policies that shall insure
licensee and provide primary coverage for the town, its officers, boards,
commissions, agents, and employees, against liability for loss or liability
for personal injury, death, property damage (both automobile and
non-automobile caused), or other damages. Such policy or policies shall
include insurance against damages from unfair competition, copyright
infringement (common law or statutory), and a failure of licensee to secure
consents, occasioned by any activity or operation of licensee under such
license, and regardless of any claimed or actual activities of town, its
officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees.



      (2)   The Town Council, in any license granted, may waive the
requirement for insurance from one or more perils mentioned in the last
preceding sentence upon a finding that such insurance cannot be procured or
cannot be procured at a reasonable cost, and in connection therewith may
reduce the otherwise required limits on coverage hereafter set forth. Such
policy or policies shall be issued by a company approved by the Town Manager
and shall be in a form approved by the Town Attorney, with minimum combined
single limits of liability coverage in the amount of $3,000,000. The policy
or policies shall name the town, its officers, boards, commissions, agents,
and employees as additional insured and contain a provision that a written
notice of any cancellation, modification, or reduction in coverage of said
policy shall be delivered to the Town Manager/Clerk 30 days in advance of the
effective date thereof.



      (3)   No license granted under this chapter shall be effective
unless and until each of the foregoing policies of insurance as required in
this division (B) has been delivered to the Town Manager/Clerk. Any
substitute policy or policies shall be subject to the same approvals and
shall comply with all of the provisions of this division (B).



      (4)   The Town Council may require increases in the amount of
types of coverage no more frequently than every three years, based on
increases in the CPI, so as to ensure full protection of the town and the
public. The licensee shall have six months from the date of notification from
the Town Manager to comply with any increase.



      (5)   A licensee may self-insure the above-described policy
overages if such licensee or its parent is of sufficient financial standing
to reasonably provide such insurance. A licensee that elects to self-insure
shall file with the town a certificate of insurance as specified by the town.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.128  LETTER OF CREDIT.



   (A)   Within 30 days after the award or renewal of a license, a
licensee shall deposit with the town an irrevocable letter of credit in an
amount not to exceed $5,000 issued by a federally insured commercial lending
institution. The form and substance of said letter of credit shall be used to
assure the faithful performance by a licensee of all provisions of this and
resulting license; and compliance with all orders, permits, and directions of
any agency, commission, board, department, division, or office of the town
having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under a license and the payment
by the licensee of any penalties, liquidated damages, claims, liens, and
taxes due to the town that arise by reason of the construction, operation, or
maintenance of the cable system, including cost of removal or abandonment of
any property of the licensee.



   (B)   The letter of credit may be drawn upon by the town by
presentation of a draft at sight on the lending institution, accompanied by a
written certificate signed by the Town Manager certifying that the licensee
has been found, pursuant to §§ 113.131(C) or 113.132, to have failed to
comply with its license, stating the nature of noncompliance, and stating the
amount being drawn. Examples of the nature of the noncompliance for drawing
upon the letter of credit include, but are not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Failure of the licensee to pay to the town any license
fees or taxes after ten days’ written notice of delinquency;



      (2)   Failure of the licensee to pay to the town, after ten
days’ written notice, after all judicial remedies have been exhausted, any
amounts due and owing the town by reason of the indemnity provisions of §
113.127; and



      (3)   Failure of the licensee to pay to the town any
liquidated damages due and owing to the town pursuant to the license.



   (C)   The letter of credit shall be structured in such a manner so
that if the town at any time draws upon the letter of credit, upon notice to
the licensee by the issuing lending institution, licensee shall increase
immediately the amount of available credit to the extent necessary to
replenish that portion of the available credit exhausted by the honoring of
the town’s draft. The lending institution shall notify the town of the
replenishment by licensee. The intent of this division (C) is to make
available to the town at all times a letter of credit in the amount of $5,000.



   (D)   The rights reserved to the town with respect to the letter of
credit are in addition to all other rights of the town, whether reserved by a
license or authorized by law, and no action proceeding against a letter of
credit shall affect any other right the town may have.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.129  LIQUIDATED DAMAGES.



   (A)   If the town notifies the licensee, in writing, of an alleged
violation of the subscriber service standards in §§ 113.100 through
113.110, the licensee shall have 90 days to correct or cure the alleged
violation. If the alleged violation is not corrected or cured within 90 days,
the town and the licensee shall meet to discuss the alleged violation and
negotiate a mutually acceptable resolution. If no resolution is reached
within 90 days, the licensee is subject to liquidated damages pursuant to
this section.



   (B)   Each license granted by the town shall state that a licensee
understands and shall agree that failure to comply with any time and
performance requirements as stipulated in this chapter and the license will
result in damage to the town, and that it is and will be impracticable to
determine the actual amount of such damage caused by delay or nonperformance;
the license shall include provisions for liquidated damages to be paid by the
licensee, in amounts set forth in the license and chargeable to the letter of
credit for the following concerns:



      (1)   Failure to provide cable service within the time(s)
specified in § 113.062;



      (2)   Failure to properly restore the public right-of-way or
to correct related violations of specifications, code, ordinance, or
standards after having been notified by the town to correct such defects;




      (3)   Failure to comply with subscriber service provisions of
this chapter;




      (4)   Failure to test, analyze, and report on the performance
of the cable system following a written request pursuant to § 113.063(A);



      (5)   Failure to provide in a continuing manner the type of
services proposed in the accepted proposal for initial license or in the
initial or renewal license unless the Town Council specifically approves
modification of a licensee’s obligation;



      (6)   Failure to cure any violation of § 113.102, following
notice and an opportunity to cure pursuant to the provisions of that section;
and



      (7)   Any other action or non-action by the licensee to which
none of the above reasonably apply and damages cannot be estimated on a daily
basis.



   (C)   If the Town Manager concludes that a licensee is in fact
liable for liquidated damages pursuant to this section, he or she shall issue
to licensee by certified mail a notice of intention to assess liquidated
damages. The notice shall set forth the nature of the violation and the
amount of the proposed assessment. The licensee shall, within 30 days of
receipt of such notice:



      (1)   Respond to the town in writing, contesting the town’s
assertion of violation and providing such information or documentation as may
be necessary to support licensee’s position; or



      (2)   Cure any such violation (and provide written evidence of
the same) or, if, by the nature of the violation, such violation cannot be
cured within such 30-day period, take reasonable steps to cure said violation
and diligently continue such efforts until said violation is cured. The
licensee shall report to the town, in writing, at 30-day intervals as to the
licensee’s efforts, indicating the steps taken by the licensee to cure said
violation and reporting the licensee’s progress until such violation is
cured.



   (B)   If the licensee contests the town’s assertion of violation
or fails to respond to the town’s notice of intent to assess liquidated
damages, within 15 days the town shall schedule a hearing in accordance with
the procedures set forth in § 113.130.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.130  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.



   (A)   Within 15 days of receipt of notice of contest pursuant to §
113.129(C)(1), expiration of the response time referred to in § 113.102(G)
or division (C) below, or notice from the licensee that it contests an audit
determination of license fees under § 113.041(E), an administrative hearing
shall be scheduled by the Town Manager. This shall be a public hearing and
the licensee shall be afforded full due process, including, without
limitation, an opportunity to be heard, to present evidence, and to cross-
examine witnesses. Within 15 days after the conclusion of such hearing, the
Town Manager shall issue a determination. In that determination, the Town
Manager may:



      (1)   Find that the licensee is not in violation of the terms
of the license;



      (2)   Find that the licensee is in violation, but that such
violation was with just cause and waive any liquidated damages that might
otherwise be imposed;



      (3)   Find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the
license, take corrective action, and foreclose on all or any appropriate part
of the letter of credit provided pursuant to § 113.128;



      (4)   Find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the
license and impose liquidated damages; or



      (5)   In the case of a material violation, recommend that the
Town Council terminate the license, provided that the Town Council may take
action on any such recommendation only after a public hearing as set forth in
§ 113.131.



   (B)   If the Town Manager determines that the licensee has committed
a violation, the determination shall be accompanied by a detailed statement
of reasons for the determination, including findings of fact.



   (C)   The decision of the Town Manager shall become final unless the
licensee requests a public hearing before the Town Council within 15 days of
its receipt of the statement of reasons and findings of fact by the Town
Manager.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.131  HEARING BY TOWN COUNCIL.



   (A)   If a public hearing before the Town Council is requested by
licensee or is held pursuant to § 113.130(A)(5) or (C), it shall be de novo
and it shall convene within 30 days of the request therefor. The Town Council
may designate three of its members to act as a hearing subcommittee to
collect all evidence in the matter and to present written findings of fact
and conclusions of law to the entire Town Council. All witnesses shall be
sworn and shall be subject to cross-examination; however, formal rules of
evidence shall not apply. The Town Council’s decision, which shall include
findings of fact, shall be made not later than 45 calendar days after the
conclusion of the hearing.




   (B)   In that decision, the Town Council may:





      (1)   Find that the licensee is not in violation of the terms
of the license;




      (2)   Find that the licensee is in violation but that such
violation was with just cause and waive any liquidated damages or penalty
that may otherwise to imposed;



      (3)   Find that the licensee is in violation of the terms of
the license, take corrective action, and foreclose on all of any appropriate
part of the letter of credit provided pursuant to § 113.128 to pay the cost
thereof;



      (4)   Find that the licensee is in violation of the terms of
the license and impose liquidated damages; or



      (5)   In the case of a material violation of the license
within the meaning of § 113.132, declare the licensee in violation and
revoke the license.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.132  REVOCATION.



   (A)   In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the
Town Council under this chapter or otherwise, the Council shall have the
right to revoke the license and all rights and privileges of the licensee
thereunder upon a recurring or protracted substantial breach of the license
terms and conditions, or this chapter, which substantially affects the
provision or quality of cable services, the ability of the town to
effectively regulate the licensee, or the town’s collection of all fees and
charges. The power of revocation shall not be used if the breach is a result
of force majeure.



   (B)   The breaches appearing on the list set forth below in this
section shall be considered substantial breaches. The list is not exhaustive:



      (1)   Willful or grossly negligent repeated violations of this
chapter, the license, or the representations made in the proposal process, or
any rule, order, or regulation of the town made pursuant to this chapter;



      (2)   An attempt to dispose of any of the facilities or
property of the system authorized by the license to prevent the town from
acquiring it, as provided for herein;



      (3)   Attempt to evade any material provision of the license
or practice any fraud or deceit upon the town or its subscribers or customers;



      (4)   Failure to begin or complete cable system construction,
reconstruction, or cable system extension as provided under the license;




      (5)   Failure to provide the types of categories of
programming and cable services promised;




      (6)   Recurrent failures to restore service on the entire or a
substantial portion of the cable system after 96 consecutive hours of
interrupted service except cable services promised;



      (7)   Recurrent service outages of the entire cable system or
a substantial portion thereof that, in the aggregate, exceed ten days in any
30-day period;



      (8)   Recurrent failures after notice by the Town Manager to
provide service to any part of the licensee service area, consistent with §
113.061; and



      (9)   Unlawful acts or omissions by licensee or its servants,
officials, agents, representatives, or employees, which result in the
town’s refusal to award a license to any other person, partnership,
corporation, or other legal entity.



   (C)   (1)   Before proceeding with a revocation hearing, the Town
Manager shall make a written demand that the licensee comply.



      (2)   If a violation by the licensee continues for a period
beyond that set forth in the written demand without written proof that the
corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously
pursued, the Town Council may revoke the license as provided in this section.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.133  CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY.



   (A)   It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving
cable service insofar as their financial and other obligations to a licensee
are honored.



   (B)   If the license terminates, the licensee shall cooperate with
the town to ensure continuity of cable service to all subscribers for a
period not to exceed 90 days. Said period may be extended by mutual agreement
between the town and the licensee. During such period, the licensee shall be
entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the cable
system.



   (C)   If the licensee fails to operate the cable system for 96
consecutive hours without prior approval of the town or without just cause,
the town may, at its option, operate the cable system or designate an
operator until such time as licensee restores cable services under conditions
acceptable to the town or a new permanent operator is selected. If the town
is required to fulfill this obligation for a licensee, the licensee shall
reimburse the town for all reasonable costs or damages that are the result of
the licensee’s failure to perform.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.134  FAILURE OF TOWN TO ENFORCE A LICENSE; NO WAIVER OF THE TERMS
THEREOF.



   A licensee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms
and conditions of a license or this chapter by any failure of the town upon
any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such
terms or conditions.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.135  WAIVERS.



   (A)   Any provision of this chapter may be waived, at the sole
discretion of the town, by resolution of the Town Council.



   (B)   The licensee may submit a request for waiver to the Town
Council at any time during the license term. Such request for waiver may, at
the sole discretion of the Town Council, be set for public hearing and a
decision shall be made within 120 days following its submission.



   (C)   The Town Council may authorize the economic, technical, or
legal evaluation of such licensee’s waiver request and the licensee shall
be required to reimburse the town for all expenditures incurred by the town
in connection with such evaluation. The town may require that the licensee
deposit with the town an amount estimated by the town to cover the town’s
expenditures incurred in connection with such evaluation.



   (D)   This section is enacted solely for the convenience and benefit
of the town and shall not be construed in such a manner as to create any
right or entitlement for the licensee.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.136  VALIDITY OF LICENSE.



   The licensee shall acknowledge, as a condition of acceptance of a
license, that licensee was represented throughout the negotiations of any
license award or renewal by its own attorneys and had opportunity to consult
with its own attorneys about its rights and obligations regarding the license.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.137  CONSTRUCTION BOND.



   (A)   (1)   Within 30 days after the award of a license requiring
construction or reconstruction of the cable system, a licensee shall obtain
and maintain throughout the period of system construction and/or
reconstruction, at its cost and expense, and file with the Town
Manager/Clerk, a corporate surety bond issued by a company authorized to do
business in the state, and found acceptable by the Town Attorney, in the
amount of $20,000 solely for the purpose of guaranteeing the timely
construction and/or reconstruction of the cable system and the safeguarding
of private property during construction and/or reconstruction. After one-half
of the cable system is constructed or reconstructed, the licensee may reduce
the construction bond to $10,000 until construction or reconstruction of the
cable system is complete. Upon completion of the construction or
reconstruction of the cable system, a construction bond shall no longer be
required.



      (2)   The bond shall provide, but not be limited to, the
following condition. There shall be recoverable by the town, jointly and
severally from the principal and surety, any and all damages, losses, or
costs suffered by the town resulting from the failure of a licensee to
satisfactorily complete any required construction and/or reconstruction of
its cable system throughout the license area pursuant to the terms and
conditions of this chapter and such licensee’s license.



   (B)   Any extension of the prescribed construction or reconstruction
time limit must be authorized by the town. The construction bond shall be
available throughout any such extension period.



   (C)   The construction bond shall be terminated only after the Town
Council finds that a licensee has satisfactorily completed initial
construction and activation or reconstruction of its cable system pursuant to
the terms and conditions of this chapter and such licensee’s license.



   (D)   The rights reserved to the town with respect to the
construction bond are in addition to all other rights of the town, whether
reserved by this chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding, or
exercise of a right with respect to such construction bond shall affect any
other rights the town may have.



   (E)   The construction bond shall contain the following endorsement.
It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the
surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until 60 days
after receipt by the town, by registered mail, or written notice of such
intent to cancel or not to renew.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.138  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   (A)   When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein
required to be filed with the town shall be filed with the office of the Town
Manager/Clerk.



   (B)   Neither licensee nor any of its officers or employees shall
receive referral fees or gratuities from any television or radio sales or
repair business.



   (C)   Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, all notices
that the town may give to a licensee or that a licensee may give to the town
shall be given in writing and may be given by certified first class mail,
postage prepaid addressed to licensee’s most recent address on file with
the town and addressed to town. Such notices, when sent by mail and if
received, shall be deemed given one day after deposit in the U.S. mail.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.139  FORCE MAJEURE.



   With respect to any provision of this chapter or any license granted
pursuant hereto, the violation or noncompliance with which could result in
the imposition of a financial penalty, liquidated damages, forfeiture, or
other sanction upon a licensee, such violation or noncompliance shall be
excused where such violation or noncompliance is the result of acts of God,
war, civil disturbance, strike or other labor unrest, or similar events, the
occurrence of which was not reasonable foreseeable by licensee and is beyond
its reasonable control.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



§ 113.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.




   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any part of § 113.016 shall be
guilty of a Class 1 Misdemeanor.




      (2)   Any person violating any part of § 113.016 shall also
be subject to any fees required in this chapter as though it were a licensee.



(Ord. 2003-07, passed 9-25-2003)



 



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



      131.   ALCOHOL AND DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Interference with religious, cultural, civic, or other
events



   130.02   Dangerous constructions



   130.03   Excavations to be covered



   130.04   Explosives



   130.05   Fences - barbed wire or electric



   130.06   Curfew



   130.07   Noise



   130.08   Obstruction of view



   130.09   Offensive premises



   130.10   Prostitution



   130.11   Searchlights



   130.12   Signs and banners



   130.13   Water flow upon streets prohibited



   130.14   Storage of refrigerators and the like



 



   130.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Fireworks, see Ch. 91



   Health and sanitation, see Ch. 92



§ 130.01  INTERFERENCE WITH RELIGIOUS, CULTURAL, CIVIC, OR OTHER EVENTS.



   (A)   The following acts are hereby declared to be unlawful:



      (1)   Intentionally disturbing by any loud utterance or other
unreasonable noise or otherwise interfering with the normal performance or
progress of a play, parade, march, pageant, ceremonial dance, or other
religious, patriotic, or civic event, whether on public or private property;



      (2)   Refusing to leave private property when asked to do so
by the owner or other person with lawful authority or control of said
property after intentionally creating an unreasonable disturbance or
otherwise disrupting a play, parade, march, pageant, ceremonial dance, or
other religious, patriotic, or civic event;



      (3)   Deliberately blocking or otherwise unreasonably
interfering with the progress or performance of a play, parade, march,
pageant, ceremonial dance, or other religious, patriotic, or civic event;



      (4)   Continuing to take photographs, electronic images, or
sound recordings on private property of a play, parade, march, pageant,
ceremonial dance, or other religious, patriotic, or civic event after being
given reasonable notice by the owner of the private property or one in lawful
control of the private property that photography and sound recording is not
allowed on the private property;



      (5)   The taking of photographs or electronic images in a
public place (such as a street) where the person taking the photographs or
electronic images is doing so in a manner to be offensive to the subject of
the photograph or electronic image such as repeated light flashes from a
camera, cell phone, or other device taken in such close proximity to cause
fear or significant disturbance to the subject of the photograph or
electronic image, or to disrupt the performance of the play, parade, march,
pageant, ceremonial dance, or other religious, patriotic, or civic event; and



      (6)   Refusing to follow the lawful directions of a peace
officer or other public official concerning walking, sitting, standing in or
near a play, parade, march, pageant, ceremonial dance, or other religious,
patriotic, or civic event where such refusal interferes, hinders, or causes
disruption of the performance of the play, parade, march, pageant, ceremonial
dance, or other religious, patriotic, or civic event.



   (B)   It is not the intent of the Town Council to infringe on the
rights of anyone as set forth in the first amendment of the United States
Constitution, nor is it their intent to pass any ordinance favoring or
impeding any particular religious group in the free exercise of its religious
beliefs; rather, it is the Town Council’s intent to protect the safety of
its residents and the public who are participating in or observing outdoor
performance of a play, parade, march, pageant, ceremonial dance, or other
religious, patriotic, or civic event.



(Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-12-2015)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  DANGEROUS CONSTRUCTIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any signs,
billboards, awnings, and other similar structures over or near streets,
sidewalks, public grounds, or places frequented by the public, so situated or
constructed as to endanger the public safety.



(1989 Code, § 12-1-2)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  EXCAVATIONS TO BE COVERED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation or dig
any hole, drain, or ditch in any highway or thoroughfare in the town without
providing a sufficient light at night and a temporary fence or suitable
obstruction around or in front of such excavation to protect the public
during the day.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to maintain a well, cellar, pit,
or other excavation of more than two feet in depth on any unenclosed lot,
without substantial curbing, covering, or protection of such excavation.



(1989 Code, § 12-1-3)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  EXPLOSIVES.



   It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the town to blast or
use gunpowder or other explosives without a permit from the Fire Chief or his
or her designee in writing.



(1989 Code, § 12-1-4)  (Ord. 2010-02, passed 11-10-2010)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 130.05  FENCES - BARBED WIRE OR ELECTRIC.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain within the
town any electric fence. Fences constructed in whole or in part of barbed
wire are unlawful in all areas zoned residential under provisions of the
zoning ordinance of the town. In other areas, barbed wire fencing shall be
permitted only by special exception under provisions of said zoning ordinance
and under the following conditions:



      (1)   The barbed portion of the fence shall be attached to the
top of fences which are constructed of permitted materials and reach a height
of at least six feet prior to the beginning of the barbed wire section;



      (2)   A maximum of three strands of barbed wire may be used;
and



      (3)   Barbs must be directed inward and upward.



   (B)   Any electric or barbed wire fence constructed contrary to the
provisions of this section is a public nuisance and subject to abatement by
order of the town court.



(1989 Code, § 12-1-5)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  CURFEW.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any juvenile under the age of 16
years of age to be, remain, or loiter in, about, or upon any place in the
town away from the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the juvenile
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. of the following day; provided,
that the provisions of this section do not apply to the juvenile when
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
care, custody, or supervision of the juvenile; or where the juvenile is on an
emergency errand; or where the juvenile is on reasonable, legitimate, and
specific business or activity (including returning directly to home from
legitimate religious celebrations and cultural events) directed or permitted
by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person who, by operation of
law, has or should have had the care, custody, or supervision of the juvenile
at the time of such violation.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any juvenile 16 years of age or older
and under the age of 18 years to be, remain, or loiter in, about, or upon any
place in the town away from the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the
juvenile between the hours of 12:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. Saturday, and 12:00
a.m. to 5:00 a.m. Sunday, and 10:00 p.m. on each Sunday through Thursday,
inclusive, until 5:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, that the
provisions of this section do not apply to the juvenile when accompanied by
his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care, custody,
or supervision of the juvenile; or where the juvenile is on an emergency
errand; or where the juvenile is on reasonable, legitimate, and specific
business or activity (including returning directly to home from legitimate
religious celebrations and cultural events) directed or permitted by his or
her parent, guardian, or other adult person who, by operation of law, has or
should have had the care, custody, or supervision of the juvenile at the time
of such violation.



   (C)   Each violation of divisions (A) or (B) above shall constitute
a separate offense.



   (D)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:



      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian; 



      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or
guardian, without any detour or stop;



      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;



      (5)   Involved in an emergency;



      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the Police Department about the minor’s presence;



      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar
entity that takes responsibility for the minor;



      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or



      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of
minority removed in accordance with state law.



   (E)   It shall not constitute a defense hereto that such parent,
guardian, or other adult person who, by operation of law, has or should have
had the care, custody, or supervision of such juvenile, coming within the
provisions of divisions (A) or (B) above, did not have actual knowledge of
the presence of such juvenile in, about, or upon any place in the town away
from the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the juvenile, if the
parent, guardian, or other adult person who, by operation of law, has or
should have had the care, custody, or supervision of such juvenile, in the
exercise of reasonable care and diligence, should have known of the
aforementioned unlawful acts of such juvenile.



   (F)   (1)   In addition to any other powers he or she may have,
any law enforcement officer who arrests a juvenile for violating any of the
provisions of divisions (A) or (B) above is also hereby empowered to demand
of the parent, guardian, or other person having the care, custody, or
supervision of such juvenile that such parent, guardian, or other person come
and take said juvenile into custody.



      (2)   Should there be a failure of the parent, guardian, or
other person to take custody of such juvenile, the officer may then be
empowered to take such juvenile home.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any such parent, guardian, or
other person having the care, custody, or supervision of said juvenile to
fail or refuse to take such juvenile into custody after such demand is made
upon him or her.



   (G)   Any juvenile who violates the provisions of divisions (A) or
(B) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and in addition to any ether
available punishment, proceedings may be taken in accordance with and
pursuant to the juvenile code as contained in the A.R.S. §§ 8-201 et seq.



(1989 Code, § 12-1-6)  (Ord. 2003-08, passed 9-25-2003; Ord. 2010-01,
passed 4-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.07  NOISE.



   (A)   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and it is
unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation owning or operating or in
control of any restaurant, hotel, dance hall, show, store, or any place of
public amusement, entertainment, or accommodation, to play or permit to be
played any music or musical instrument whether played by individuals,
orchestra, radio, phonograph, music box, or other mechanical device or means
in such a loud or unusual manner as to be offensive to the senses, or so as
to disturb the slumber, peace and quiet, or otherwise interfere with or annoy
the comfortable enjoyment of life or property of any person and is no less a
nuisance because the extent of the annoyance inflicted is unequal.



   (B)   It is unlawful to play, operate, or use any device known as a
sound truck, loud speaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph with loud
speaker or sound amplifier, or any instrument of any kind or character which
emits loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle unless
such person in charge of such vehicle shall have first applied to and
received permission from the Chief of Police to operate any such vehicle so
equipped.



   (C)   The factors which will be considered in determining whether a
violation of the provisions of this section exists will include, but not be
limited to, the following:



      (1)   The volume of noise;



      (2)   The intensity of the noise;



      (3)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;



      (4)   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;



      (5)   The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any;



      (6)   The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping
facilities;



      (7)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise
emanates;



      (8)   The density of the inhabitation of the area within which
the noise emanates;



      (9)   The time of day or night the noise occurs;



      (10)   The duration of the noise;



      (11)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or
constant;



      (12)   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or
noncommercial activity;



      (13)   Whether it is a pure tone noise;



      (14)   Whether the noise is live or recorded; or



      (15)   Whether it is an impulse noise.



(1989 Code, § 12-1-7)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.08  OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW.



   It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any tree, hedge,
billboard, or other obstruction which prevent persons driving vehicles on
public streets, alleys, or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic
when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.



(1989 Code, § 12-1-8)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.09  OFFENSIVE PREMISES.



   It is unlawful for any person to suffer, or permit any premises
belonging to or occupied by him or her, or any cellar, privy, vault, pool,
sewer, or private drain therein to become nauseous, foul, or offensive to the
senses or prejudicial to the public health or comfort.



(1989 Code, § 12-1-10)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.10  PROSTITUTION.



   It is unlawful for any person to practice prostitution, to patronize a
prostitute, or to solicit any person to visit or patronize a prostitute or
place of prostitution.



(1989 Code, § 12-1-11)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.11  SEARCHLIGHTS.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate within the town any
incandescent or arc-type searchlight, beacon light or similar lighting device
designed to and capable of projecting a beam of light into the sky for a
distance in excess of one-half mile unless permission is obtained from the
Council. The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency
searchlights or beacons operated pursuant to public authority.



(1989 Code, § 12-1-12)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.12  SIGNS AND BANNERS.



   It is unlawful for any person to place any banner or sign upon any
streetlight pole, traffic signal pole, or utility pole within the town
without first obtaining authorization from the Council.



(1989 Code, § 12-1-13)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.13  WATER FLOW UPON STREETS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently
permit or cause the escape or flow of water in such quantity as to cause
flooding, or to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous
condition to such traffic or to cause damage to the public streets of the
town.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently
permit or cause the escape or flow of irrigation water in such quantity as to
cause flooding, to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a
hazardous condition to such traffic, or to cause damage to the public streets
of the town through the failure or neglect to properly operate or maintain
any irrigation structure, delivery ditch, or waste ditch in which said person
has a vested right or interest or through the willful or negligent failure of
said person to accept irrigation water after it has been ordered by him or
her.



(1989 Code, § 12-1-15)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.14  STORAGE OF REFRIGERATORS AND THE LIKE.



   It is unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of
any dwelling, building, or other structure, or within any unoccupied or
abandoned building, dwelling, or other structure, under the control of any
person, and in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended, or
discarded ice box, refrigerator, or other container which has an air-tight
door or lid, snaplock, or other locking device which may not be released from
the inside, without first removing such door or lid, snaplock, or other
locking device from such ice box, refrigerator, or container.



(Ord. 98-04, passed 3-26-1998)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Anyone convicted of a violation of any portion of § 130.01
shall be guilty of a Class 1 Misdemeanor and may be subject to:



      (1)   A fine not to exceed $2,500 plus any applicable
surcharges;



      (2)   Imposition of a jail sentence not to exceed six months;
and/or



      (3)   If the court deems it appropriate upon sentencing, the
court may impose probation.



   (C)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of §
130.06 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished by a fine of not to exceed $2,500 or by imprisonment for a period
not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day
that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein
above described.



   (D)   Any person found guilty of violating § 130.14 shall be guilty
of a Class 1 Misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a
separate offense punishable as herein described.



(Ord. 97-02, passed 3-13-1997; Ord. 98-04, passed 3-26-1998; Ord. 2003-08,
passed 9-25-2003; Ord. 2015-02, passed 2-12-2015)



CHAPTER 131:  ALCOHOL AND DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES



Section




Alcohol Regulations




   131.01   Alcohol in vehicles



   131.02   Drinking alcoholic beverages in or around commercial
establishments




Vapor-Releasing Substances




   131.15   Definitions



   131.16   Possession of vapor-releasing substances



 



   131.99   Penalty




ALCOHOL REGULATIONS




§ 131.01  ALCOHOL IN VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage while in a motor
vehicle upon a street or highway within the town limits.



   (B)   No person shall have in his or her possession on his or her
person, while driving a motor vehicle upon a street or highway within the
town limits, any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing alcoholic
beverages which has been opened, or the seal broken or the contents of which
have been partially removed.



   (C)   No person shall have in his or her possession, while in a
motor vehicle upon a street or a highway within the town limits, any bottle,
can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been
opened, the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed.



   (D)   It is unlawful for the registered owner of any motor vehicle,
or the driver if the registered owner is not then present in the vehicle,
when such vehicle is upon a street or highway within the town limits, to have
any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which
has been opened, the seal broken, or the contents of which have been removed,
unless such container is kept in the trunk of the vehicle, or kept in some
other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers,
if the vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. A utility compartment or glove
compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver and
passengers.



(1989 Code, § 12-3)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.02  DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN OR AROUND COMMERCIAL
ESTABLISHMENTS.



   No person is allowed to consume any alcoholic beverages with or without
owner’s or lessor’s permission from an open container in any commercial
establishment, free standing or within a center, that does not have an
on-sale liquor license from the state and town.



(Ord. 90-03, passed 6-28-1990)  Penalty, see § 131.99




VAPOR-RELEASING SUBSTANCES




§ 131.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MINOR. An individual younger than the “legal drinking age” as
defined by the state. This age is 21 years as of date of passage of this
section.



   VAPOR-RELEASING SUBSTANCE CONTAINING TOXIC SUBSTANCE. Paint or varnish
dispensed by the use of aerosol spray, or any glue, which releases vapors or
fumes containing acetone, volatile acetates, benzene, butyl alcohol, ethyl
alcohol, ethylene dichloride, isopropyl alcohol, methyl alcohol, methyl ethyl
ketone, pentachlorophenol, petroleum ether, toluene, volatile ketones,
isophorone, chloroform, methylene chloride, mesityl oxide, xylene, cumene,
ethylbenzene, trichloroethylene, mibk, miak, mek or diacetone alcohol or
isobutyl nitrite.



(Ord. 90-06, passed 9-13-1990)



§ 131.16  POSSESSION OF VAPOR-RELEASING SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any minor to possess, breathe, inhale, or
drink a vapor-releasing substance containing a toxic substance.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any minor to sell, transfer, or offer to
sell or transfer a vapor-releasing substance containing a toxic substance if
such a person is not at the time of sale, transfer, or offer, employed by or
engaged in operating a commercial establishment at a fixed location regularly
offering such substance for sale and such sale, transfer, or offer is made in
the course of employment or operation.



(Ord. 90-06, passed 9-13-1990)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   If a minor is arrested for the possession,
inhalation, or consumption of a vapor-releasing substance containing a toxic
substance and is not charged with any other offense, the arresting officer
may prepare a written notice or citation to appear in either juvenile court
or municipal court depending on the minor’s age. Said notice or citation
shall contain the name and address of the minor, the offense charged, and the
time and place the minor shall appear in court.



      (2)   In the event the minor is under 18 years of age, the
arrested minor, in order to secure release, shall give his or her written
promise to appear in juvenile court by signing at least one copy of the
written notice prepared by the arresting officer. The officer shall deliver a
copy of the notice to the minor promising to appear. The officer shall
immediately release the person from custody.



      (3)   In the event the minor is over 18 years of age, the
matter shall be handled as any other misdemeanor.



      (4)   The juvenile court shall not dispose of a citation for
the possession of a vapor-releasing substance unless the parent, guardian, or
custodian of the minor appears in court with the minor at the time of
disposition of the charge.



      (5)   A minor, under the age of 18 years, and upon finding of
guilt by a judge, may be subject to one or more of the penalties listed:



         (a)   Reprimand;



         (b)   Suspension of driving privileges or restriction of
same for not more than 90 days;



         (c)   Order the payment of not less than $100 or not
more than $250 to the public agency processing the violation;



         (d)   Order the performance of not less than 80 hours of
community service under the jurisdiction of the court; or



         (e)   Order the matter transferred to an adult court.



      (6)   Any minor over the age of 18 years and found violating
this section shall be guilty of a Class 2 Misdemeanor.



(Ord. 90-06, passed 9-13-1990)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING CODES



      151.   HOUSING



      152.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



      153.   STRAW BALE STRUCTURES



      154.   ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING CODES



Section




Adoption of Building Code




   150.01   Adoption of Uniform Building Code



   150.02   Conformance with zoning ordinance




Additional Codes




   150.15   Electrical Code



   150.16   Mechanical Code



   150.17   Plumbing Code



   150.18   Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings



   150.19   Building official



   150.20   Building permit and fees



   150.21   Dwelling unit standards



 



   150.99   Penalty




ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE




§ 150.01  ADOPTION OF UNIFORM BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   The certain code entitled Uniform Building Code, 2012 Edition,
(UBC 2012) copyrighted by the International Conference of Building Officials
is hereby adopted as the Uniform Building Code of the town and made a part of
this subchapter, the same as though said code were specifically set forth in
full herein; and at least three copies of said code shall be filed in the
Town Manager/Clerk’s office and kept available for public use and
inspection.



   (B)   The fee schedule for construction set forth in Table 1-A of
the 2012 Uniform Building Code is not adopted and instead the following fees
for residential and commercial construction are hereby adopted as set forth
in the following table.

 


Total Valuation

 

Fee





$1 to $500
 
$50


$501 to $2,000
 
$50 for the first $500 plus $5 for each additional $100 or fraction thereof
to and including $2,000


$2001 to $25,000
 
$150 for the first $2,000 plus $25 for each additional $1,000 or fraction
thereof to and including $25,000


$25,001 to $50,000
 
$850 for the first $25,000 plus $20 for each additional $1,000 or fraction
thereof to and including $50,000


$50,001 to $100,000
 
$1,450 for the first $50,000 plus $10 for each additional $1,000 or fraction
thereof to and including $100,000


$100,001 to $500,000
 
$2,150 for the first $100,000 plus $10 for each additional $1,000 or fraction
thereof to and including $500,000


$500,001 to $1,000,000
 
$6,000 for the first $500,000 plus $10 for each additional $1,000 or fraction
thereof to and including $1,000,000


$1,000,001 and up
 
$9,700 for the first $1,000,000 plus $10 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof




 




Other Inspections and Fees



Inspections outside of normal business hours, minimum charge = 2 hours
 
$50 per hour*


Reinspection fees
 
$50 per hour*


Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated, minimum charge = 1
hour
 
$120 per hour*


Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to plans
 
$120 per hour*


For use of outside consultants for plan checking and inspections or both
 
Actual costs**


*Or the total hourly cost to the town, whichever is greater. This cost shall
include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and fringe benefits
of the employees involved.


**Actual costs include consultant, town administrative and overhead costs at
a rate of $100 per hour with a minimum charge of one hour or normal plan
review fees, whichever is greater.




 



(1989 Code, § 7-1-1)  (Ord. 2001-01, passed 1-25-2001; Ord. 2006-01, passed
3-9-2006; Ord. 2012-02, passed 7-27-2012)



§ 150.02  CONFORMANCE WITH ZONING ORDINANCE.



   Whenever a building permit is issued to any person or entity and a
building inspection performed, such building must conform to the provisions
of the zoning ordinance of the town in addition to the provisions of this
chapter.



(1989 Code, § 7-1-2)




ADDITIONAL CODES




§ 150.15  ELECTRICAL CODE.



   The certain Code entitled National Electrical Code, 2012 Edition, (NEC
2012) copyrighted by the National Fire Protection Association is hereby
adopted as the Electrical Code of the town and made a part of this chapter
the same as though said Code were specifically set forth in full herein, and
at least three copies of said Code shall be filed in the office of the Town
Manager/Clerk and kept available for public use and inspection.



(1989 Code, § 7-2)  (Ord. 2001-01, passed 1-25-2001)



§ 150.16  MECHANICAL CODE.



   The certain Code entitled Uniform Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, (UMC
2012) copyrighted by the International Conference of Building Officials is
hereby adopted as the Uniform Mechanical Code of the town and made a part of
this chapter the same as though said Code were specifically set forth in full
herein, and at least three copies of said Code shall be filed in the office
of the Town Manager/Clerk and kept available for public use and inspection.



(1989 Code, § 7-3)  (Ord. 2001-01, passed 1-25-2001)



§ 150.17  PLUMBING CODE.



   The certain Code entitled Uniform Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, (UPC
2012) copyrighted by the International Conference of Building Officials is
hereby adopted as the Uniform Plumbing Code of the town and made a part of
this chapter the same as though said Code were specifically set forth in full
herein, and at least three copies shall be filed in the office of the Town
Manager/Clerk and kept available for public use and inspection.



(1989 Code, § 7-4)  (Ord. 2001-01, passed 1-25-2001)



§ 150.18  UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.



   The certain document known as “The Uniform Code for the Abatement of
Dangerous Buildings”, most current edition, three copies of which are on
file in the office of the Town Manager/Clerk, which document was made a
public record by Res. 95-17, is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this section.



(Ord. 95-02, passed 8-24-1995)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.19  BUILDING OFFICIAL.



   The building official and administrative authority, as such may be
referenced in any section of this chapter for all matters pertaining to any
building, plumbing, electrical, or any other inspections, shall be vested in
the office of the manager, provided that the Council may authorize such
deputies as needed to perform any inspection work or other functions that may
be required by this chapter.



(1989 Code, § 7-5)



§ 150.20  BUILDING PERMIT AND FEES.



   Prior to constructing any improvement which is either new construction
or which involves more than 25% of any existing structure, a building permit
must be obtained from the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall
review all plans for any improvement prior to issuing a building permit and
shall collect a fee for such permit. The building permit fee shall be
computed according to a schedule to be adopted from time to time by the
Council.



(1989 Code, § 7-6)



§ 150.21  DWELLING UNIT STANDARDS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      DWELLING UNIT. Includes a room or suite of two or more rooms that
is designed for or is occupied by one family doing its own cooking therein
and having only one kitchen. DWELLING UNIT includes a manufactured home, a
modular home, or a site-built home which is of conventional construction (a
building constructed pursuant to the Uniform Building Code, as adopted by the
town, on a permanent site using individual structural components and
requiring normal phase inspection by the town building official).



      MANUFACTURED HOME. Includes a structure (built in accordance with
the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974,
42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq. and Title VI of the Housing and Community
Development Act of 1974, Pub. Law 93-383, 42 U.S.C. §§ 13611 et seq. as
amended by Pub. Laws 95-128, 95-557, 96-153, and 96-339), transportable in
one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more
in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site is 320
or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed
to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein.



      MOBILE HOME. Includes a structure built prior to June 15, 1976,
on a permanent chassis, capable of being transported in one or more sections
and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation as a dwelling
when connected to on-site utilities except recreational vehicle and
factory-built buildings (A.R.S. § 41-4001(25)).



      MODULAR BUILDING. A factory-built residential or nonresidential
building including a dwelling unit or habitable room thereof which is wholly
or in substantial part manufactured at an off-site location to be assembled
on-site, except that it does not include a manufactured home, recreational
vehicle, or mobile home as defined in this section.



      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Includes (A.R.S. § 41-4001(30)) a
vehicular type unit which is:



         (a)   A portable camping trailer mounted on wheels and
constructed with collapsible partial side walls which fold for towing by
another vehicle and unfold for camping;



         (b)   A motor home designed to provide temporary living
quarters or recreational, camping, or travel use and built on or permanently
attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or on a chassis cab or van
that is an integral part of the completed vehicle;



         (c)   A park trailer/model built on single chassis,
mounted on wheels and designed to be connected to utilities necessary for
operation of installed fixtures and appliances and has a gross trailer area
of not less than 320 square feet and not more than 400 square feet when it is
set up, except that it does not include fifth-wheel trailers;



         (d)   A travel trailer mounted on wheels, designed to
provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use,
of a size or weight that may or may not require special highway movement
permits when towed by a motorized vehicle and has trailer area of less than
320 square feet. This division (d) includes fifth-wheel trailers. If a unit
requires a size or weight permit, it shall be manufactured to the standards
for park trailers in § 119.5 of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) Code; or



         (e)   A portable truck camper constructed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, travel, or camping use and
consisting of a roof, floor, and sides designed to be loaded onto and
unloaded from the bed of a pickup truck.



   (B)   It is unlawful to install, transport, or construct any
dwelling unit which does not comply with the provisions of this section, or
with applicable zoning regulations, or with applicable local building codes,
or with the requirement that the owner or the licensed contractor obtain a
building permit prior to construction, installation, or transportation of the
unit. Installations or construction not in compliance with these provisions
must be brought into compliance. An investigation/penalty fee equivalent to
the permit application fee shall be assessed against the applicant for
violations.



   (C)   Except as may be provided by an approved development plan
within a Planned Development Zoning District, no dwelling unit shall be
installed or constructed which has a livable space less than 24 feet,
excluding carports, garages, and porch areas.



   (D)   The roof of a dwelling unit proposed for construction or
installation shall have a pitch of not less than three feet of vertical rise
for each 12 feet of horizontal run, or have a roof parapet, mansard shape, or
other similar roofline treatment which screens the roof from street view. If
a sloping roof is provided, the roof shall provide material overhang of 16
inches and be covered with a roofing material commonly used in site-built
residential construction other than continuous rolled material.



   (E)   Except as may be provided by an approved development plan
within a Planned Development Zoning District, a dwelling unit shall be
oriented on a parcel so that the wide side of the dwelling unit faces the
narrow street frontage and so that all setback requirements have been met.
The Board of Adjustment has the authority to hear variance requests for those
dwelling units that cannot comply with the setback requirements.



   (F)   The exterior building facade of a dwelling unit including the
trim, doors, windows, roof facias, but excluding patio covers and detached
storage buildings, shall consist of wood, stucco, horizontal siding, brick
masonry veneer, or other facsimile of a building material commonly used in
site-built residential construction; provided, however, that corrugated or
reflected metal siding, other than aluminum lap siding, shall be prohibited.



   (G)   If the dwelling unit has steps leading to any entry visible
from any street, the steps and any enclosure surrounding the steps shall be
attached to a permanent foundation and designed and constructed as an
integral part of the exterior of the dwelling unit.



   (H)   Approved number or addresses shall be provided by the property
owner for all new buildings in such a position as to be plainly visible and
legible from the street or road fronting the property and shall contrast with
their background and be minimum of four inches in height.



   (I)   Dwelling units proposed for installation or construction shall
be set on a permanent foundation of concrete or masonry for the purpose of a
permanent installation. Dwelling units shall be valued and assessed for tax
purposes in the same manner. The homeowner shall execute and file all
documents necessary to comply with this requirement. This foundation
requirement may be modified by the building official in consultation with the
Town Engineer/Floodplain Administrator in order to comply with flood plan
requirements.



   (J)   Manufactured homes proposed for installation shall have
affixed thereto either a State of Arizona insignia of approval as defined by
A.R.S. Title 41, Chapter 37 or a decal certifying that the dwelling unit has
been inspected and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) in effect at the date
of manufacture wherein such date shall not have been prior to five years from
the date of installation.



   (K)   Manufactured homes proposed for installation shall have the
hitch/tongue, axles, and wheels removed at the time of installation.



   (L)   This section shall not prohibit the continued occupancy of
non-certified mobile/manufactured homes currently located and occupied as a
private residence within the city. A parcel currently developed with a
mobile/manufactured home may have its units replaced only with another unit
that is in compliance with relevant provisions of this section. Division (C)
above shall not be applicable to manufactured homes proposed for installation
in manufactured home parks approved prior to the effective date of this
section.



   (M)   Modifications to or repairs of a mobile/manufactured home
shall be prohibited unless such modifications are made pursuant to applicable
federal, state, or local regulations. The building official may inspect a
manufactured home proposed for installation only for gross modification.
GROSS MODIFICATIONS included are those modifications which can be observed
from a visual inspection of the interior and exterior of the subject unit, or
which become apparent to the building official while performing those safety
and installation inspections and test as are required by the most current
intergovernmental agreement between the town and the state’s Department of
Building and Fire Safety, Office of Manufactured Housing. When such
violations or gross modifications are made known, it shall be the duty of the
building official to order modifications to be brought into compliance before
the manufactured unit is occupied. Repairs or modifications which exceed 50%
of the unit’s floor area, wall area, or roof area shall be prohibited and
the necessity for said repairs shall be grounds for removal of the
manufactured unit. Modifications or repairs, which are non-structural and do
not adversely affect any structural member or any part of the manufactured
home, may be made with the same materials of which the manufactured home is
constructed.



(Ord. 2001-09, passed 11-8-2001)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of the
Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings (see § 150.20) shall
be guilty of a Class 1 Misdemeanor subject to a maximum fine of $2,500 and
imprisonment for a maximum of six months for each violation. Each day that a
violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove
described.



(Ord. 95-02, passed 8-24-1995)



CHAPTER 151:  HOUSING



Section




Fair Housing




   151.01   Policy



   151.02   Definitions



   151.03   Unlawful practice



   151.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing



   151.05   Discrimination in the financing of housing



   151.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services



   151.07   Exemption



   151.08   Administration



   151.09   Education and conciliation



   151.10   Enforcement



   151.11   Investigations; subpoenas; giving of evidence



   151.12   Enforcement by private persons



   151.13   Interference, coercion, or intimidation



   151.14   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases




Housing Authority




   151.25   Created; composition; terms of office



   151.26   Advisory Committee



   151.27   Powers and duties



   151.28   Additional powers and duties




Low Rent Housing




   151.40   Definitions



   151.41   Projects; federal funds



   151.42   Cooperation for vacating or dedicating streets; zoning



   151.43   Contract with bond holders; amendment of chapter



 



   151.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Subdivision regulations, see Ch. 152



   Zoning, see Ch. 154




FAIR HOUSING




§ 151.01  POLICY.



   It is the policy of the town to provide, within constitutional
limitations, for fair housing throughout the town.



(1989 Code, § 11-1-1)



§ 151.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
151.04, 151.05, or 151.06.



   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied
as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more
families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion
thereof.



   FAMILY. Includes a single individual.



   PERSON. One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries.



   TO RENT. To lease, sublease, let, or otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant.



(1989 Code, § 11-1-2)



§ 151.03  UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.



   (A)   Subject to the provisions of § 151.07(B), the prohibitions
against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth in this
subchapter shall apply to all dwellings except as exempted by division (B)
below.



   (B)   Nothing in § 151.04 shall apply to:



      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner;
provided, that such private individual owner does not own more than three
such single-family houses at any one time; provided further, that in the case
of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not
residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most
recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by
this division (B)(1) shall apply only with respect to one such sale within
any 24-month period; provided further, that such bona fide private individual
owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his or
her behalf under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to
all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three
such single-family houses at any one time; provided further, that the sale or
rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application
of this subchapter only if such house is sold or rented without the use in
any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services
of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson, or of such facilities or
services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of
any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesperson, or person and
without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice of any
advertisement or written notice in violation of § 151.04(C), but nothing in
this division (B)(1) shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents,
abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as
necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or



      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters
occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one
of such living quarters as his or her residence.



   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be
deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:



      (1)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months,
participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or
rental of any dwelling or any interest therein;



      (2)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months,
participated as agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal
residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services
in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or
any interest therein; or



      (3)   He or she is the owner of any dwelling designed or
intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.



(1989 Code, § 11-1-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.04  DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.



   As made applicable by § 151.03 and except as exempted by §§
151.03(B) and 151.07, it is unlawful:



   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide
offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, or national origin;



   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions,
or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provisions of
services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color,
religion, or national origin;



   (C)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or
published, any notice, statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale
or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, or national origin, or an
intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination;



   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion,
or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale,
or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; and/or



   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell
or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color,
religion, or national origin.



(1989 Code, § 11-1-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.05  DISCRIMINATION IN THE FINANCING OF HOUSING.



   It is unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance
company or other corporation, association, firm, or enterprise whose business
consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans,
to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor
for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or
maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him or her in the fixing
of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such
loan or other financial assistance because of the race, color, religion, or
national origin of such person or of any person associated with him or her in
connection with such loan or other financial assistance, or the purposes of
such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective
owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling in relation to which
such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; provided,
that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or
effectiveness of the exception contained in § 151.03(B).



(1989 Code, § 11-1-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.06  DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.



   It is unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers
organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or
her in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation
on account of race, color, religion, or national origin.



(1989 Code, § 11-1-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.07  EXEMPTION.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization
operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or
occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such
persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race,
color, or national origin. Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit a
private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its
primary purpose provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to
its members or from giving preference to its members.



(1989 Code, § 11-1-7)



§ 151.08  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   The authority and responsibility for administering this
subchapter shall be in the Town Manager/Clerk of the town.



   (B)   The Town Manager/Clerk may delegate any of these functions,
duties, and powers to employees of the town or to boards of such employees,
including functions, duties, and powers with respect to investigating,
conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting, or
otherwise acting as to any work, business, or matter under this subchapter.
The Town Manager/Clerk shall by rule prescribe such rights of appeal from the
decisions of his or her hearing examiners to other hearing examiners or to
other officers in the town, to boards of officers, or to himself or herself,
as shall be appropriate and in accordance with law.



   (C)   All executive departments and agencies shall administer their
programs and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner
affirmatively to further the purposes of this subchapter and shall cooperate
with the Town Manager/Clerk to further such purposes.



(1989 Code, § 11-1-8)



§ 151.09  EDUCATION AND CONCILIATION.



   The Town Manager/Clerk shall commence such educational and conciliatory
activities as will further the purposes of this subchapter. He or she shall
call conferences of persons in the housing industry and other interested
parties to acquaint them with the provisions of this subchapter and his or
her suggested means of implementing it, and shall endeavor with their advice
to work out programs of voluntary compliance and of enforcement.



(1989 Code, § 11-1-9)



§ 151.10  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory
housing practice or who believes that he or she will be irrevocably injured
by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter
“person aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the Town Manager/Clerk.
Complaints shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in
such form as the Town Manager/Clerk requires. Upon receipt of such a
complaint, the Town Manager/Clerk shall furnish a copy of the same to the
person who allegedly committed or is about to commit the alleged
discriminatory housing practice. Within 30 days after receiving a complaint,
or within 30 days after the expiration of any period of reference under
division (C) below, the Town Manager/Clerk shall investigate the complaint
and give notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether he or she intends
to resolve it. If the Town Manager/Clerk decides to resolve the complaint, he
or she shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged
discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of conference,
conciliation, and persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of such
informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent
proceeding under this subchapter without the written consent of the persons
concerned. It is unlawful for any employee of the Town Manager/Clerk to make
public any information in violation of this provision.



   (B)   A complaint under division (A) above shall be filed within 180
days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints
shall be in writing and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a
discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and
fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint
against him or her and, with the leave of the Town Manager/Clerk, which shall
be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his
or her answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified.



   (C)   If within 30 days after a complaint is filed with the Town
Manager/Clerk, the Town Manager/Clerk has been unable to obtain voluntary
compliance with this subchapter, the person aggrieved may, within 30 days
thereafter, file a complaint with the Secretary of the Department of Housing
and Urban Development. The Town Manager/Clerk will assist in this filing.



   (D)   If the Town Manager/Clerk has been unable to obtain voluntary
compliance within 30 days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may, within
30 days hereafter, commence a civil action in any appropriate court against
the respondent named in the complaint to enforce the rights granted or
protected by this subchapter, insofar as such rights relate to the subject of
the complaint. If the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has
occurred or is about to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent from
engaging in such practice or order such affirmative action as may be
appropriate.



   (E)   In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden
of proof shall be on the complainant.



   (F)   Whenever an action filed by an individual shall come to trial,
the Town Manager/Clerk shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain
voluntary compliance.



(1989 Code, § 11-1-10)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.11  INVESTIGATIONS; SUBPOENAS; GIVING OF EVIDENCE.



   (A)   In conducting an investigation, the Town Manager/Clerk shall
have access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents,
individuals, and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may
examine, record, and copy such materials and take and record the testimony or
statements of such persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of
the investigation; provided, however, that the Town Manager/Clerk first
complies with the provisions of the Fourth Amendment relating to unreasonable
searches and seizures. The Town Manager/Clerk may issue subpoenas to compel
his or her access to or the production of such materials, or the appearance
of such persons, and may issue interrogatories to a respondent, to the same
extent and subject to the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or
interrogatories were issued or served in aid of a civil action in the United
States District Court for the district in which the investigation is taking
place. The Town Manager/Clerk may administer oaths.



   (B)   Upon written application to the Town Manager/Clerk, a
respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of
subpoenas by and in the name of the Town Manager/Clerk to the same extent and
subject to the same limitations as subpoenas issued by the Town Manager/Clerk
himself or herself. Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall
show on their face the name and address of such respondent and shall state
that they were issued at his or her request.



   (C)   Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the Town Manager/Clerk shall
be entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in
proceedings in United States District Courts. Fees payable to a witness
summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by
him or her.



   (D)   Within five days after service of a subpoena upon any person,
such person may petition the Town Manager/Clerk to revoke or modify the
subpoena. The Town Manager/Clerk shall grant the petition if he or she finds
that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable time
or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to
any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient
particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly
onerous, or for other good reason.



   (E)   In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the Town
Manager/Clerk or other person at whose request it was issued may petition for
its enforcement in the magistrate or justice court for the precinct in which
the person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was served, or
transacts business.



   (F)   It is unlawful for any person, with intent thereby to mislead
the Town Manager/Clerk, to make or cause to be made any false entry or
statement of fact in any report, account, record, or other document submitted
to the Town Manager/Clerk pursuant to his or her subpoena or other order, or
to willfully neglect or fail to make or cause to be made full, true, and
correct entries in such reports, accounts, records, or other documents, or to
willfully mutilate, alter, or by any other means falsify any documentary
evidence.



   (G)   The Town Attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the
Town Manager/Clerk participates as a party or as amicus pursuant to this
subchapter.



(1989 Code, § 11-1-11)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.12  ENFORCEMENT BY PRIVATE PERSONS.



   (A)   The rights granted by §§ 151.03, 151.04, 151.05, and 151.06
may be enforced by civil actions in state or local courts of general
jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within 180 days after the
alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred; provided, however, that the
court shall continue such civil case brought pursuant to this section or from
time to time before bringing it to trial under § 151.10(D) if the court
believes that the conciliation efforts of the Town Manager/Clerk are likely
to result in satisfactory settlement of the discriminatory housing practice
complained of in the complaint made to the Town Manager/Clerk and which
practice forms the basis for the action in court; and provided, however, that
any sale, encumbrance, or rental consummated prior to the issuance of any
court order issued under the authority of this subchapter, and involving a
bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer, or tenant without actual notice of the
existence of the filing of a complaint or civil action under the provisions
of this subchapter shall not be affected.



   (B)   The court may grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any
permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other
order, and may award to the plaintiff actual damages and not more than $1,000
punitive damages, together with court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees
in the case of a prevailing plaintiff; provided, that the said plaintiff in
the opinion of the court is not financially able to assume said attorneys’
fees.



(1989 Code, § 11-1-12)



§ 151.13  INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION.



   It is unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§ 151.03, 151.04, 151.05, or 151.06. This section may be
enforced by appropriate civil action.



(1989 Code, § 11-1-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.14  PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.



   It is unlawful for any person whether or not acting under color of law,
by force or threat of force to willfully injure, intimidate, or interfere
with, or attempt to injure, intimidate, or interfere with:



   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, or
national origin and because he or she is or has been selling, purchasing,
renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or negotiating for the sale,
purchase, rental, financing, or occupation of any dwelling, or applying for
or participating in any service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings;



   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to
intimidate such person or any other person or any class of persons from:



      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, or national origin, in any of the activities,
services, organizations, or facilities described in division (A) above; or



      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity
or protection so to participate.



   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, or national origin, in any of the activities,
services, organizations, or facilities described in division (A) above or
participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of
the opportunity to so participate.



(1989 Code, § 11-1-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99




HOUSING AUTHORITY




§ 151.25  CREATED; COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE.



   There is hereby created the Housing Authority of the town. The
Authority shall be composed of five members, to be appointed by the Mayor,
who shall serve for terms of five years as specified in the municipal housing
law of the state.



(1989 Code, § 11-2-1)



§ 151.26  ADVISORY COMMITTEE.



   There shall be a three-member advisory committee for the Authority,
which members shall be tenants of the Authority and shall hold office for
terms of three years from July 1 in the year of their appointment, unless
sooner removed for good cause. The Advisory Committee shall receive
notification of each meeting, shall be entitled to attend such meetings, and
shall be allowed to participate in the proceedings, but shall not have any
vote therein.



(1989 Code, § 11-2-2)



§ 151.27  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   There are hereby delegated to the Authority, as agent of the town, all
powers conferred upon municipalities within the state by the municipal
housing laws, subject to the restrictions and conditions hereinafter stated,
except the power to borrow money, issue bonds, and acquire real property,
including, but not limited to the following:



   (A)   To construct, maintain, operate, and manage any housing
projects within the town pursuant to the municipal housing laws of the state
and this code;



   (B)   To employ a secretary, who shall be executive director,
technical experts, and such other officers, attorneys, agents, and employees,
permanent or temporary as may be required. Any and all personnel employed by
the authority shall be certified eligible through the normal recruitment and
testing procedures of the town for employment;



   (C)   To arrange or contract for the furnishing by any person or
agency, public or private, of services, works, or facilities for or in
connection with a housing project for the occupants thereof;



   (D)   To execute contracts and other instruments herein authorized
to be executed by the authority, to be so executed by the chairperson of the
authority and attested to by the secretary, or by such officers as the
authority shall by resolution provide;



   (E)   To requisition funds from the United States, or any agency
thereof, pursuant to the terms of a contract for loan and annual
contributions which may be entered into hereafter;



   (F)   To negotiate for and let contracts for the construction of
housing projects and the demolition of buildings and to include in any
construction contract let in connection with a housing project, stipulations
requiring that the contractor and any subcontractors comply with employment
requirements, including those in the constitution and laws of the state as to
the minimum wage and maximum hours of labor, and those conditions which the
federal government has attached to its financial aid of the project;



   (G)   To execute all instruments and agreements required by the
United States or any agency thereof;



   (H)   To select and make agreements with depositories for funds
received from the United States, or any agency thereof, and others from the
administration of the project, and to receive and disburse such funds,
subject to the conditions governing their use; and



   (I)   To do and perform such other acts as may become necessary for
the construction, maintenance, and operation of the housing projects.



(1989 Code, § 11-2-3)



§ 151.28  ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commissioners of the Authority shall, in addition to the duties set
forth by state law and this subchapter, be responsible to the town for the
following.



   (A)   A monthly fiscal report shall be made to the Town Treasurer
and to the Council in a form and in such detail as may be prescribed by the
Council.



   (B)   The Council may prescribe additional reports, which shall be
made to the Town Manager and the Council, including, but not limited to, the
furnishing of minutes and any changes in operational procedures, and which
shall be in such form and detail as may be prescribed by the Council.



   (C)   The Council shall at any time have the right to appoint an
inspector to determine that the authority is in compliance with state law and
this subchapter.



   (D)   Any Commissioner who shall be appointed and qualified shall be
required to attend each meeting of the authority, and in the event any
Commissioner is absent from three consecutive meetings without the consent of
the Council or is absent from five meetings during any fiscal year of the
town without consent of the Council, then such Commissioner shall be deemed
to have resigned and his or her position shall thereupon be deemed vacant.



   (E)   The Chairperson of the Authority and the secretary thereof
shall be required to file with the Town Manager/Clerk fidelity bonds in such
amounts as the authority shall determine necessary and proper.



(1989 Code, § 11-2-4)




LOW RENT HOUSING




§ 151.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   UNSAFE OR UNSANITARY DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit, whenever by reason
of dilapidation, faulty arrangement or design, lack of ventilation, light, or
sanitation facilities, or any combination of these factors, is detrimental to
safety, health, or morals.



   USEFUL LIFE OF SUCH PROJECT. The period of physical usefulness of the
particular project for the purpose of providing dwelling accommodations, but
in no event less than the number of years during which any of the bonds shall
remain outstanding.



(1989 Code, § 11-3-1)



§ 151.41  PROJECTS; FEDERAL FUNDS.



   The town, by and through the authority, shall undertake, develop, and
administer a low-rent housing project in the town and endeavor to obtain a
contract to obtain federal annual contributions from the United States or any
agency thereof.



(1989 Code, § 11-3-2)



§ 151.42  COOPERATION FOR VACATING OR DEDICATING STREETS; ZONING.



   The town shall cooperate with the authority by vacating such streets
and alleys within the area of any project or adjacent thereto as may be
necessary in the development of such project, by dedicating land for new
streets and alleys, by zoning or rezoning to a proper reclassification any
area in the town within lawful ways as may be found necessary by the town and
the authority in connection with the development and construction of the
project.



(1989 Code, § 11-3-3)



§ 151.43  CONTRACT WITH BOND HOLDERS; AMENDMENT OF CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall constitute a contract by and
between the town and the holders of any bonds, notes, debentures, or other
obligations issued to refund such bonds or other obligations to assist in the
development of any project, and this subchapter shall not be repealed,
amended, or otherwise modified so long as any bonds issued to aid in
financing the development of any project to which this subchapter relates or
any bonds issued to refund such bonds shall remain outstanding and unpaid and
so long as the title to such project is held by the town or some other public
body or governmental agency authorized by law to engage in the development or
administration of housing projects.



(1989 Code, § 11-3-4)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and
testify or to answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents, or
other evidence, if in his or her power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena
or lawful order of the Town Manager/Clerk shall be fined not more than $1,000
or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. Any person who, with intent
thereby to mislead the Town Manager/Clerk, shall make or cause to be made any
false entry or statement of fact in any report, account, record, or other
document submitted to the Town Manager/Clerk pursuant to his or her subpoena
or other order, or shall willfully neglect or fail to make or cause to be
made full, true, and correct entries or willfully mutilate, alter, or by any
other means falsify any documentary evidence, shall be fined not more than
$1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.



(1989 Code, § 11-1-11)



CHAPTER 152:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



   152.01   Purpose



   152.02   Short title



   152.03   Jurisdiction



   152.04   Definitions



   152.05   Submission and consideration of preliminary plats



   152.06   Submission and consideration of final plats



   152.07   Public improvement and design standards



   152.08   Variances, exceptions, and appeals



   152.09   Fees



   152.10   Violations and enforcement



   152.11   Floodplain management



 



   152.99   Penalty



§ 152.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these regulations is to provide for the harmonious
development of the town to include the location and width of streets,
building lines, open spaces, utilities, or other physical improvements.



(1989 Code, § 15-1-1)



§ 152.02  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as “The Land Subdivision
Regulations of the Town of Guadalupe”.



(1989 Code, § 15-1-2)



§ 152.03  JURISDICTION.



   Except as may otherwise be provided by law, these regulations shall
apply to all plats or subdivisions of all land within the corporate limits of
the town.



(1989 Code, § 15-1-3)



§ 152.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY. A public way which provides secondary means of access to
abutting property, usually to the side or rear of lots.



   BLOCK. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public
highways, streets, streams, railroad, rights-of-way, or parks or a
combination thereof.



   BUILDING LINE. A line on a plat indicating the limit beyond which
buildings or structures may not be erected.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The duly adopted plan for the long-range
development of the community which includes maps, charts, illustrations, and
texts.



   DEPARTMENT. The Town Manager or his or her agent.



   EASEMENT. A permanent or temporary grant of right by a property owner
to the public, a corporation or other persons of the use of a strip of land
for specified purposes. Ownership of said strip of land shall remain with the
property owner.



   FINAL PLAT. A plan or map prepared in accordance with the provisions of
these regulations and those of any other applicable town ordinances, which
plat is prepared to be placed on record in the office of the County Recorder.



   GOVERNING BODY. The Council of the Town of Guadalupe.



   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for
building development.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT. The drawings and documents showing the character and
proposed layout of the subdivision to indicate its suitability in relation to
the community’s comprehensive plan.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire way between the property lines of abutting
owners.



   SIDEWALK. A pedestrian walkway with permanent surfacing constructed to
town standards.



   STREET. A right-of-way dedicated to the public use which provides
principal vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties, including
the right-of-way but not limited to streets, avenues, boulevards, roads,
lanes, parkways, places, bridges, viaducts, alleys, or easements for public
or private vehicular use.



   SUBDIVIDER. A person, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
estate, syndicate, trust, or other legal entity that files application and
initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the
provisions of these regulations.



   SUBDIVISION.



      (1)   Improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the
purpose of financing, sale, or lease, whether immediate or future, into four
or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land, or, if a new street is involved,
any such property which is divided into more than two parts. SUBDIVISION also
includes any condominium, cooperative, community apartment, townhouse, or
similar project containing four or more parcels in which an undivided
interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any
unit located thereon, but plats of such projects need not show the buildings
or the manner in which the buildings or air space above the property shown on
the plat are to be divided.



      (2)   SUBDIVISION does not include the following:



         (a)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land to or
between adjoining property owners if such sale or exchange does not create
additional lots;



         (b)   The partitioning of land in accordance with state
statutes regulating the partitioning of land held in common ownership; or



         (c)   The leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or
similar space within a building or trailer park, nor to mineral, oil, or gas
leases.



(1989 Code, § 15-2)



§ 152.05  SUBMISSION AND CONSIDERATION OF PRELIMINARY PLATS.



   (A)   Any subdivider desiring to subdivide land that is subject to
the provisions of these regulations shall file with the Department ten copies
of an application, together with supporting documentation which contains the
following:



      (1)   The name and address of the owner or owners of land to
be subdivided, the name and address of the subdivider if other than the
owner, and the name of the land surveyor and certified engineer;



      (2)   Names of the subdivision and all new streets;



      (3)   General layout of adjacent unsubdivided property to show
how streets and other public facilities, in the proposed subdivision, relate
to the unsubdivided property;



      (4)   The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the
property to be expressed in feet;



      (5)   The location of existing streets, easements, water
bodies, streams, and other pertinent features such as washes, railroads,
buildings, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, or bridges. Generally such
data should be shown on topographic maps with contour intervals of not less
than two feet;



      (6)   The location and width of proposed streets and
easements, alleys, and other public ways and building setback lines;



      (7)   The locations, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or
existing lots;



      (8)   Indication of the use of any lot (single-family,
two-family, or multi-family) and uses other than residential proposed by the
subdivider with existing and proposed zoning district classification and
boundaries; or



      (9)   The general plan of sewage disposal and water supply in
areas where approved public sewer or water systems are proposed to serve the
subdivision. In other cases, a notation shall be made on the plat indicating
type of sewage disposal or water system proposed.



   (B)   Upon receipt of properly prepared application and accompanying
fee as provided in § 152.09, the Department shall promptly conduct reviews
of data submitted. Such review shall include opportunity for comment by
representatives of private utilities, the state’s Department of
Transportation, County Health Department, school districts, United States
Postmaster, soil conservation service, and various town departments. These
agencies shall check the plat for conformance with the regulations and
standards of their agencies and shall render a written report to the
Department. If no report is received within 15 days, the Department may
assume that the agency has no objections regarding the proposed plat, and
such agency’s approval shall be assumed. After staff reviews and comments
of technical agencies are received, a meeting shall be held between the
Department staff and developer regarding changes deemed advisable.



   (C)   The developer shall submit ten copies of a revised (if
necessary) preliminary plat to the Department. Upon receipt of such plat and
accompanying documents, the Council shall schedule a hearing within 30 days
of such request. After such hearing, the Council shall approve as submitted,
as modified or disapprove the preliminary plat and express its reasons
therefor. The action of the Council shall be noted on the preliminary plat.
One copy shall be returned to the subdividers.



   (D)   If the Council fails to approve or disapprove the preliminary
plat within the period of time set by this regulation, then such preliminary
plat shall be deemed to have been approved unless the subdivider shall have
consented to extend or waive such time limitation.



   (E)   Approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute
acceptance of the subdivision but authorizes preparation of the final plat.
No grading or improvements shall take place in the subdivision prior to
approval, endorsement, and filing of the final plat.



   (F)   The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a
period of one year, at the end of which time final approval on the
subdivision must have been obtained from the Council, although the plat need
not yet be signed and filed with the County Recorder. Any plat not receiving
final approval within the period set forth herein shall be null and void, and
the subdivider shall be required to resubmit a new plat for preliminary
approval subject to all new zoning restrictions and subdivision regulations.



(1989 Code, § 15-3)



§ 152.06  SUBMISSION AND CONSIDERATION OF FINAL PLATS.



   (A)   Final plats shall be submitted to the Department within one
year of approval of the preliminary plat unless an extension is granted by
the Council. The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved
and to the requirements of all applicable ordinances and state laws; and, if
desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the
approved preliminary plat which he or she proposes to record and develop at
the time, provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements
of these regulations.



   (B)   The original and ten copies of the final plat and other
exhibits required for approval shall be submitted. The final plat shall be
drawn in ink on tracing cloth, Mylar, or similar material and shall be at a
scale of one inch to 100 feet.



   (C)   The final plat shall show the following:



      (1)   The correct legal description of the property being
subdivided;



      (2)   True north point, graphic scale, and date;



      (3)   The boundary lines of the area being subdivided with
accurate distances and angles (maximum closure error of one in 5,000);



      (4)   The lines of all proposed highways, streets, and alleys
with their width and names;



      (5)   The accurate outline of any portion of the property
intended to be dedicated or granted to public use;



      (6)   The lines of all adjoining property and the lines of the
adjoining highways, streets, and alleys with their widths and names;



      (7)   All lots designated by numbers;



      (8)   The location and widths of building lines on front and
side streets and the location and widths of utility easements, easements for
possible future construction, and easements for drainage purposes;



      (9)   All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for
locating the boundaries of the subdivision, lots, streets, alleys, easements,
and any other areas for public or private use. Linear dimensions are to be
given to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot;



      (10)   The radii, arcs, chords, points of tangency, and
central angles for all curvilinear streets and radii for rounded corners;



      (11)   The location of all survey monuments and benchmarks
together with their descriptions;



      (12)   The names of the subdivision and the owner or owners or
subdividers; and



      (13)   Acknowledgment of the owner or owners of the land being
subdivided as to restrictions including dedication to public use of all
streets, alleys, parks, or other open spaces shown thereon and the granting
of easements required.



   (D)   The following certificates are to be provided with the final
plat in accordance with § 152.07:



      (1)   Acknowledgment of ownership by owner or owners, and
statements, by a notary public authorized to take the acknowledgments of
deeds, to the effect that all previous taxes have been paid and that all
highways, streets, alleys, and public grounds shown on the plat are dedicated
for public use;



      (2)   Surveyor or licensed professional engineer of the state,
certifying that he or she has accurately surveyed such subdivision and the
correct location of all monuments shown, and all lots, blocks, highways,
streets, avenues, alleys, public ways and grounds, and other grounds are well
and accurately staked off and marked;



      (3)   Space for approval of Council Planning Commission; and



      (4)   Space for the County Recorder to state the day, month,
year, time, book, and page that said plat was recorded.



   (E)   Upon receipt of a properly prepared final plat and
accompanying fee as provided in § 152.09, the Department shall promptly
conduct reviews of data submitted for its conformity to the approved
preliminary plat and as to its conformity to these land subdivision standards
and other applicable town and state laws.



   (F)   The Council shall approve or disapprove the final plat within
30 days of receipt. Before a final plat is recorded, the Council shall
approve and accept streets and other public ways, service, and utility
easements and land dedicated for public use. Approval of the plat shall be
shown over the signature of the Mayor and attested to by the Town
Manager/Clerk. If the Council disapproves the plat, it shall advise the
subdivider in writing of the reason for such disapproval.



   (G)   If the governing body fails to act on the final plat within 60
days of its submittal to the Department, the Council shall be deemed to have
approved unless the subdivider shall have consented to extend or waive such
time limitation.



(1989 Code, § 15-4)



§ 152.07  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   The subdivider of land shall be required to install or
otherwise provide for certain improvements within the subdivision. Such
improvements shall not be installed prior to proper endorsement of the final
plat by the Council.



   (B)   The proper installation of such improvements, other than those
by a private utility company, shall be assured by provision of surety in the
form of bond or cash escrow in favor of the town. All improvements installed
by the developer shall comply with specifications and standards approved by
the town.



   (C)   Such surety shall be properly executed prior to any grading or
construction and shall be released in segments upon written approval of the
Department. A building permit shall not be issued for a lot or tract in any
subdivision for which such surety has not been furnished.



   (D)   The minimum width for any street right-of-way shall be 50 feet
except by special permit approved by the Council for purely local drives. All
streets and other public spaces and easements shall conform in effect to the
comprehensive plan, both as to location and as to width or size. When
adjoining undeveloped property, a full street shall be dedicated.



   (E)   The minimum width of any alley, wherever provided, shall be 15
feet. Where alleys are not provided, easements may be required along lot
lines of or across lots where necessary for the extension of water mains,
sewers, and similar purposes; such easement shall be a minimum width of eight
feet along the appropriate property lines.



   (F)   The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make
provision for the direct continuation of the principal existing streets in
adjoining subdivisions (or their proper projection where adjoining property
is not subdivided) insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements.
In general, such streets shall be a width at least as great as the existing
streets or 50 feet, whichever is greater. The street and alley arrangement
must also be such as to provide opportunity for access and use by adjoining
property owners.



   (G)   Wherever a street will not open into another street, an
adequate circular turn around shall be provided. Grades of streets shall be
the lowest feasible, and no grade shall be in excess of 5% on through traffic
streets nor in excess of 10% on any other street. Streets shall be paved with
such paving of a type and strength suitable for the volume and character of
traffic to be expected and should meet town specifications. All improvements
shall conform to the best engineering standards. Due consideration shall be
given throughout to the appearance of the subdivision and the various
features thereof within its own boundaries and also in its environment in the
town.



   (H)   The subdivider shall install street signs at all intersections
within the subdivision. Such street signs shall follow the street names
designated on the approved final plat and shall comply with the
specifications of the town.



   (I)   The subdivider shall be responsible for the proper
installation of all utilities including sanitary sewers and connection to
approved treatment facilities and water supply approved by the state’s
Department of Health Services. Such utilities shall be installed according to
the specifications and minimum standards of the controlling utility company
or public agency.



   (J)   Sidewalks are required unless exempted by the Council.



(1989 Code, § 15-5)



§ 152.08  VARIANCES, EXCEPTIONS, AND APPEALS.



   (A)   Whenever it is found that the land included in a subdivision
plat, presented for approval, is of such size or shape, or is subject to, or
is affected by such topographical location or conditions, or is to be devoted
to such usage that full conformity to the provisions of these regulations is
impossible or impractical, the Council may set forth particular variation
from these regulations, if, in their opinion, the variation will effect
substantial justice and promote the public interest.



   (B)   The subdivider may appeal to the Council decisions made in the
enforcement or interpretation of these regulations by the Department. Such
appeals shall be filed within 30 days with the Town Manager/Clerk. If the
Council sustains such decisions, the prior enforcement or interpretation
shall be final, except as otherwise provided by law. If the Council overrules
such decision, such decision shall be final.



   (C)   The subdivider may request that permission be granted to
commence construction on a model or showhome prior to completion of public
facilities required by these regulations. Such permission may be granted by
the Council after filing of the final plat with the County Recorder and upon
satisfactory assurances by the developer that improvements will proceed in a
timely manner. Such model or showhome shall not be occupied for residential
purposes until public improvements have been completed in accordance with
these regulations and other laws of the town.



(1989 Code, § 15-6)



§ 152.09  FEES.



   (A)   Preliminary plat. At the time of filing a preliminary plat, a
subdivider shall pay to the town a flat rate of $750 plus $20 per lot.



   (B)   Final plat. At the time of filing a final plat, a subdivider
shall pay to the town a flat rate of $750 plus $20 per lot.



(1989 Code, § 15-7)



§ 152.10  VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   No building permit shall be issued for any structure upon a
lot or tract in a subdivision that has not been subdivided and approved in
the manner provided in these regulations, and no such plat, replat, or
dedication of a street or public way shall be filed with the County Recorder,
as provided by law, until such plat, replat, or dedication shall have
endorsed on it that it has been approved in accordance with these regulations.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to offer to sell or lease or to
contract to sell or lease, or to sell or lease any subdivision or part
thereof until a final plat thereof, in full compliance with provisions
herein, is recorded in the office of the County Recorder, except that this
shall not apply to any parcel of a subdivision offered for sale or lease,
contracted for sale or lease or sold or leased in compliance with any law or
subdivision regulations regulating the subdivision plat design and
improvement of subdivision in effect at the time the subdivision was
established. The County Recorder shall not record a plat located in the town
unless the plat has been approved by the Council.



(1989 Code, § 15-8)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.11  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   The town designates the Maricopa County Flood Control District
as the enforcement authority for all floodplain management activities within
its corporate limits. The District is hereby authorized to exercise the
powers and duties set forth in A.R.S. Title 45, Chapter 10, Article 1402,
within all areas of the town.



   (B)   (1)   The town elects not to assume the responsibility of
floodplain management from the County Flood Control District as provided for
in A.R.S. §§ 48-3609 and 48-3610. The Town Manager is designated as the
NFIP Floodplain Administrator for the town, is responsible for coordinating
with the County Flood Control District, and will serve as the community point
of contact on NFIP issues for county, state, and federal officials.



      (2)   Those public records entitled “Flood Insurance Study
for Maricopa County, Arizona and Incorporated Areas” dated October 16, 2013
with accompanying FIRMs dated October 16, 2013 and all subsequent amendments
and/or revisions, copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the
Town Manager/Clerk, are hereby adopted by reference as the basis for
establishing the special flood hazard areas in the town. The special flood
hazard areas documented in the FIS and FIRMs are the minimum area of
applicability of the floodplain management regulations and may be
supplemented by studies for other areas as allowed in the regulations.



      (3)   The public record designated as the “Floodplain
Regulations for Maricopa County”, dated June 25, 2014, and all subsequent
amendments and/or revisions, copies of which shall be kept on file in the
office of the Town Manager/Clerk, is hereby adopted as the legal basis for
implementing floodplain management in this community.



(1989 Code, § 15-9)  (Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-16-2017)  Penalty, see §
152.99



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
to be a public offense and any person, firm, association, partnership, or
corporation convicted thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $300.
The town shall further have the authority to maintain suits or actions in any
court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing any provisions
of this chapter and to abate nuisances maintained in violation thereof; and
in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus, or other
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use, or
to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of the
building, structure, or land. Each day any violation of this chapter shall
continue constitutes a separate offense.



   (B)   Providing for penalties as per the County Flood Control
District “Floodplains Regulations for Maricopa County”, dated June 25,
2014, and all subsequent amendments and revisions that currently reads as
follows.



      (1)   It is a Class 2 Misdemeanor to engage in any development
or to divert, retard, or obstruct the flow of waters in a watercourse without
first securing the written authorization of the District. A violator may be
subject to jail and fines.



      (2)   The penalty for the civil offense of violation of Flood
Control District’s regulations, ordinances, or rules is a fine not in
excess of that which is chargeable for a Class 2 Misdemeanor. Each day the
violation continues constitutes a separate offense.



      (3)   All development located or maintained within any special
flood hazard area since August 8, 1973, in violation of the flood control
statutes or regulations without authorization from the Floodplain
Administrator is a public nuisance per se and may be abated, prevented, or
restrained by action of this political subdivision.



      (4)   Nothing in this section precludes any private right of
action by any person damaged by another’s unauthorized diversion,
retardation, or obstruction of a watercourse. Further, the District is not
precluded by anything in these regulations from pursuing injunctive and other
remedies as provided by law.



(1989 Code, § 15-8)  (Ord. 2017-01, passed 2-16-2017)



CHAPTER 153:  STRAW BALE STRUCTURES



Section




General Provisions




   153.01   Purpose



   153.02   Scope



   153.03   Definitions



   153.04   Specifications for bales




Construction and General Requirements




   153.15   General



   153.16   Wall thickness



   153.17   Wall height



   153.18   Unsupported wall length



   153.19   Allowable loads



   153.20   Foundations




Wall and Roof Bearing Assembly Anchorage




   153.35   General



   153.36   Intersecting walls



   153.37   Anchor bolts



   153.38   Moisture barrier



   153.39   Stacking and pinning



   153.40   Alternative pinning method



   153.41   Roof-bearing assembly



   153.42   Openings and lintels



   153.43   Moisture protection



   153.44   Wall finishes



   153.45   Electrical



   153.46   Plumbing




Privacy/Landscape Walls




   153.60   General



   153.61   Foundations



   153.62   Reinforcement



   153.63   Moisture barrier



   153.64   Stucco mesh



   153.65   Wall finish




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 153.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum prescriptive
standards of safety for the construction of structures which use baled straw
as a load-bearing or non-load-bearing material.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.02  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all structures utilizing
straw bales in the construction of wall systems. Load bearing structures
shall be limited to Occupancy Groups R, Division 3 and U.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BALES. Rectangular compressed blocks of straw, bound by strings or wire.



   FLAKES. Slabs of straw removed from an untied bale. FLAKES are used to
fill small gaps between the ends of stacked bales.



   LAID FLAT. Refers to stacking bales so that the sides with the largest
cross-sectional area are horizontal and the longest dimension of this area is
parallel with the wall plane.



   LAID ON-EDGE. Refers to stacking bales so that the sides with the
largest cross-sectional area are vertical and the longest dimension of this
area is horizontal and parallel with the wall plane.



   STRAW. The dry stems of cereal grains left after the seed heads have
been removed.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.04  SPECIFICATIONS FOR BALES.



   (A)   Type of straw. Bales of various types of straw, including, but
not limited to, wheat, rice, rye, barley, oats, and similar plants, shall be
acceptable if they meet the minimum requirements for density, shape, moisture
content, and ties.



   (B)   Shape. Bales shall be rectangular in shape.



   (C)   Dimensions. Bales used within a continuous wall shall be of
consistent height and width to ensure even distribution of loads within wall
systems.



   (D)   Ties. Bales shall be bound with ties of either polypropylene
string or baling wire. Bales with broken or loose ties shall not be used
unless the broken or loose ties are replaced with ties which restore the
original degree of compaction of the bale.



   (E)   Moisture content. Moisture content of bales, at time of
installation, shall not exceed 20% of the total weight of the bale. Moisture
content of bales shall be determined by one of the following.



      (1)   Field method. A suitable moisture meter, designed for
use with baled straw or hay, and equipped with a probe of sufficient length
to reach the center of the bale, shall be used to determine the average
moisture content of five bales randomly selected from the bales to be used.



      (2)   Laboratory method. A total of five samples, taken from
the center of each of five bales randomly selected from the bales to be used,
shall be tested for moisture content by a recognized testing lab.



   (F)   Density. Bales in load-bearing structures shall have a minimum
calculated dry density of seven pounds per cubic foot. The calculated dry
density shall be determined after reducing the actual bale weight by the
weight of the moisture content, as determined in division (E) above. The
calculated dry density shall be determined by dividing the calculated dry
weight of the bale by the volume of the bale.



   (G)   Custom size bales. Where custom-made partial bales are used,
they shall be of the same density, same string or wire tension, and, where
possible, use the same number of ties as the standard size bales.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)




CONSTRUCTION AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS




§ 153.15  GENERAL.



   Bale walls, when covered with plaster, drywall, or stucco shall be
deemed to have the equivalent fire-resistive rating as wood frame
construction with the same wall-finishing system.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.16  WALL THICKNESS.



   Nominal minimum bale wall thickness shall be 14 inches.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.17  WALL HEIGHT.



   (A)   Height limitation. Bale walls shall not exceed one story in
height and the bale portion shall not exceed a height to width ratio of 5.6:1
(for example, the maximum height for the bale portion of a 23 inch thick wall
would be ten feet, eight inches), unless the structure is designed by an
engineer or architect licensed by the state to practice as such, and approved
by the building official.



   (B)   Exception. In the non-load-bearing exterior end walls of
structures with gable or shed roofs, an approved continuous assembly shall be
required at the roof bearing assembly level.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.18  UNSUPPORTED WALL LENGTH.



   The ratio of unsupported wall length to thickness, for bale walls,
shall not exceed 13:1 (for a 23-inch thick wall, the maximum unsupported
length allowed is 25 feet), unless the structure is designed by an engineer
or architect licensed by the state to practice as such, and approved by the
building official.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.19  ALLOWABLE LOADS.



   The allowable vertical load (live and dead load) on the top of bale
walls shall not exceed 360 pounds per square foot (psf) and the resultant
load shall act at the center of the wall. Bale structures shall be designed
to withstand all vertical and horizontal loads.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.20  FOUNDATIONS.



   Foundations shall be sized to accommodate the thickness of the bale
wall and the load created by the wall and roof live and dead loads.
Foundation (stem) walls which support bale walls shall extend to an elevation
of not less than six inches above adjacent ground at all points. The minimum
width of the footing shall be the width of the bale it supports, except that
the bales may overhang the exterior edge of the foundation by not more than
three inches to accommodate rigid perimeter insulation. Footings shall extend
a minimum of 12 inches below natural, undisturbed soil or to frost line,
whichever is lower.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)




WALL AND ROOF BEARING ASSEMBLY ANCHORAGE




§ 153.35  GENERAL.



   Vertical reinforcing bars with a minimum diameter of one-half inch
shall be embedded in the foundation a minimum depth of six inches, and shall
extend above foundation a minimum of 12 inches. These vertical bars shall be
located along the centerline of the bale wall, spaced not more than two feet
apart. A vertical bar shall also be located within one foot of any opening or
corner, except at locations occupied by anchor bolts.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.36  INTERSECTING WALLS.



   Walls of other materials intersecting bale walls shall be attached to
the bale wall by means of one or more of the following methods or an
acceptable equivalent.



   (A)   Wooden dowels at least five-eights of an inch in diameter of
sufficient length to provide 12 inches of penetration into the bale, driven
through holes bored in the abutting stud, and spaced to provide one dowel
connection per bale.



   (B)   Pointed wooden stakes, at least 12 inches in length and one
and one-half inch by three and one-half inch at the exposed end, fully driven
into each course of bales as anchorage points.



   (C)   Bolted or threaded rod connection of the abutting wall,
through the bale wall, to a steel nut and steel or plywood plate washer, a
minimum of six inches square and a minimum thickness of three-sixteenths inch
for steel and one-half inch for plywood, in at least three locations.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.37  ANCHOR BOLTS.



   (A)   Load bearing bale walls shall be anchored to the foundation by
one-half inch diameter steel anchor bolts embedded at least seven inches in
the foundation at intervals of six feet or less. A minimum of two anchor
bolts per wall shall be provided with one bolt located within 36 inches of
each end of each wall. Sections of one-half inch diameter threaded rod shall
be connected to the anchor bolts, and to each other, by means of threaded
coupling nuts and shall extend through the roof bearing assembly and be
fastened with a steel washer and nut. Bale walls and roof-bearing assemblies
may be anchored to the foundation by means of other methods which are
adequate to resist uplift forces resulting from the design wind load. There
shall be a minimum of two points of anchorage per wall, spaced not more than
six feet apart, with one located within 36 inches of each end of each wall.



   (B)   The dead load of the roof and ceiling systems will produce
vertical compression of the bales. Regardless of the anchoring system used to
attach the roof-bearing assembly to the foundation, prior to installation of
wall finish materials, bolts or straps shall be re-tightened to compensate
for this compression.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.38  MOISTURE BARRIER.



   (A)   A moisture barrier shall be used between the top of the
foundation and the bottom of the bale wall to prevent moisture from migrating
through the foundation into the bottom course of bales. This barrier shall
consist of one of the following:



      (1)   Cementitious waterproof coating;



      (2)   Type 30 asphalt felt over an asphalt emulsion;



      (3)   Sheet metal flashing, sealed at joints; or



      (4)   Other approved building moisture barrier.



   (B)   All penetrations through the moisture barrier, as well as all
joints in the barrier, must be sealed with asphalt, caulking or an approved
sealant.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.39  STACKING AND PINNING.



   (A)   Bales in load-bearing walls shall be laid flat and stacked in
running bond where possible, with each bale overlapping the two bales beneath
it. Bales in non-load-bearing walls may be laid either flat or on-edge and
stacked in running bond where possible. For non-load-bearing walls, bales may
be laid either flat or on-edge. Bales in load-bearing walls shall be laid
flat and stacked in a running bond, where possible, with each bale
overlapping the two bales beneath it. Overlaps shall be a minimum of 12
inches. Gaps between the ends of bales which are less than six inches in
width can be filled by an untied flake inserted snugly into the gap.



   (B)   The first course of bales shall be laid by impaling the bales
on the vertical bars or threaded rods, if any, extending from the foundation.
When the fourth course has been laid, #4 rebar pins, or an acceptable
equivalent, long enough to extend through all four courses, shall be driven
down through the bales, two in each bale, located so that they do not pass
within six inches of, or through the space between the ends of any two bales.
The layout of these pins shall approximate the layout of the vertical bars
extending from the foundation. As each subsequent course is laid, two such
pins, long enough to extend through the course being laid and the three
courses immediately below it, shall be driven down through each bale. This
pinning method shall be continued to the top of the wall in walls seven or
eight courses high, pinning at the fifth course may be eliminated.



   (C)   Only full-length bales shall be used at corners of
load-bearing walls, unless exceptions are designed by an engineer or
architect licensed by the state to practice as such, and approved by the
building official.



   (D)   Vertical #4 rebar pins, or an acceptable alternative, shall be
located within one foot of all corners or door openings.



   (E)   Staples, made of #3 or larger rebar formed into a shape, at
least 18 inches long with two six-inch legs, shall be used at all corners of
every course, driven with one leg into the top of each abutting corner bale.
In lieu of staples, corner bales may be tied together by a method approved by
the building official.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.40  ALTERNATIVE PINNING METHOD.



   When the third course has been laid, vertical #4 rebar pins, or an
acceptable equivalent, long enough to extend through all three courses, shall
be driven down through the bales, two in each bale, located so that they do
not pass within six inches of, or through the space between the ends of any
two bales. The layout of these rebar pins shall approximate the layout of the
rebar pins extending from the foundation. As each subsequent course is laid,
two such pins, long enough to extend through that course and the two courses
immediately below it, shall be driven down through each bale. This pinning
method shall be continued to the top of the wall.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.41  ROOF-BEARING ASSEMBLY.



   (A)   Load-bearing bale walls shall have a roof-bearing assembly at
the top of the wall to bear the roof load and to provide a means of
connecting the roof structure to the foundation. The roof-bearing assembly
shall be continuous along the tops of structural walls.



   (B)   An acceptable roof-bearing assembly option consists of two
double two-inch by six-inch, or larger, horizontal top plates, one located at
the inner edge of the wall and the other at the outer edge. Connecting the
two doubled top-plates and located horizontally and perpendicular to the
length of the wall shall be two-inch by six-inch cross members spaced no more
than 72 inches center to center, and as required to align with the threaded
rods extending from the anchor bolts in the foundation. The double two-inch
by six-inch top plates shall be face nailed with 16d nails staggered at 16
inches on center, with laps and intersections face nailed with four 16d
nails. The cross members shall be face nailed to the top plates with four 16d
nails at each end. Corner connections shall include overlaps nailed as above
or an acceptable equivalent such as plywood gussets or metal plates.
Alternatives to this roof-bearing assembly option must provide equal or
greater vertical rigidity and provide horizontal rigidity equivalent to a
continuous double two by four top plate.



   (C)   The connection of roof-framing members to the roof-bearing
assembly shall comply with the appropriate sections of the UBC.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.42  OPENINGS AND LINTELS.



   All openings in load-bearing bale walls shall be a minimum of one full
bale length from any outside corner, unless exceptions are designed by an
engineer or architect licensed by the state to practice as such, and approved
by the building official.



   (A)   Openings. Openings in exterior bale walls shall not exceed 50%
of the total wall area, based on interior dimensions, where the wall is
providing resistance to lateral loads, unless the structure is designed by an
engineer or architect licensed by the state to practice as such, and approved
by the building official.



   (B)   Lintels. Wall and/or roof load present above any opening shall
be carried or transferred to the bales below by one of the following:



      (1)   A structural frame; or



      (2)   A lintel (such as an angle-iron cradle, wooden beam,
wooden box beam). Lintels shall be at least twice as long as the opening is
wide and extend at least 24 inches beyond either side of the opening. Lintels
shall be centered over openings and shall not exceed the load limitations of
§ 153.19 by more than 25%.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.43  MOISTURE PROTECTION.



   (A)   All weather-exposed bale walls shall be protected from water
damage. An approved building moisture barrier shall be used to protect at
least the bottom course of bales, but not more than the lower one-third of
the vertical exterior wall surface, in order to allow natural transpiration
of moisture from the bales.



   (B)   The moisture barrier shall have its upper edge inserted at
least six inches into the horizontal joint between two courses of bales, and
shall extend at least three inches below the top of the foundation. Bale
walls shall have special moisture protection provided at all window sills.
Unless protected by a roof, the tops of walls shall also be protected.



   (C)   This moisture protection shall consist of a waterproof
membrane, such as asphalt-impregnated felt paper, polyethylene sheeting, or
other acceptable moisture barrier, installed in such manner as to prevent
water from entering the wall system at window sills or at the tops of walls.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.44  WALL FINISHES.



   (A)   Interior and exterior surfaces of bale walls shall be
protected from mechanical damage, flame, animals, and prolonged exposure to
water. Bale walls adjacent to bath and shower enclosures shall be protected
by a moisture barrier.



   (B)   Cement stucco shall be reinforced with galvanized woven wire
stucco netting or an acceptable equivalent. Such reinforcement shall be
secured by attachment through the wall at a maximum spacing of 24 inches
horizontally and 16 inches vertically, using a method approved by the
building official.



   (C)   Where bales abut other materials, the plaster/stucco shall be
reinforced with galvanized expanded metal lath, or an acceptable equivalent,
extending a minimum of six inches onto the bales.



   (D)   Earthen and lime-based plasters may be applied directly onto
the exterior and interior surface of bale walls without reinforcement, except
where applied over materials other than straw. Weather-exposed earthen
plasters shall be stabilized using a method approved by the building official.



   (E)   Lime based plasters may be applied directly onto the exterior
surface of bale walls without reinforcement, except where applied over
materials other than straw.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.45  ELECTRICAL.



   (A)   All wiring within or on bale walls shall meet all provisions
of the National Electrical Code adopted by this jurisdiction. Type NM or UF
cable may be used, or wiring may be run in metallic or nonmetallic conduit
systems.



   (B)   Electrical boxes shall be securely attached to wooden stakes
driven a minimum of 12 inches into the bales, or an acceptable equivalent.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.46  PLUMBING.



   Water or gas pipes within bale walls shall be encased in a continuous
pipe sleeve to prevent leakage within the wall. Where pipes are mounted on
bale walls, they shall be isolated from the bales by a moisture barrier.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)




PRIVACY/LANDSCAPE WALLS




§ 153.60  GENERAL.



   This subchapter covers freestanding or attached bale privacy or
landscape walls, not exceeding six feet in height, from final grade to top of
wall. Bales may be stacked either flat or on-edge. Alternate methods, other
than those listed in this subchapter, may be approved by the building
official.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.61  FOUNDATIONS.



   The minimum foundation shall consist of an eight-inch thick reinforced
concrete stem wall, over an approved footing. Minimum width of the stem wall
shall be equal to the width of the bottom bale. Stem walls shall have
continuous horizontal reinforcement consisting of two #4 bars with 24
inches’ minimum lap at splices.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.62  REINFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Vertical reinforcing bars, a minimum three-eighths inch in
diameter, shall be placed in the center of the stem wall, two per bale, and
extend up a minimum of 24 inches, and be embedded a minimum of four inches
into the concrete stem wall. Bales shall be pinned, using two three-eighths
inch diameter bars per bale, and use pins long enough to provide at least one
vertical bar from stem wall to top of wall, with a minimum of one full bale
overlap where not continuous.



   (B)   For the purpose of attaching stucco mesh to the wall, 12d or
larger galvanized common double-headed nails shall be embedded in the
concrete a minimum of one inch below the top of the stem wall, with the heads
embedded a minimum of two inches into the concrete, and the points extending
a minimum of three-fourths inch from the face of the stem wall, and spaced a
minimum of six inches on center on both sides of the wall.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.63  MOISTURE BARRIER.



   A moisture barrier shall be used between the top of the stem wall and
the first course of bales. A moisture barrier shall also be used to protect
the tops of bales at the top of walls, and shall extend six inches down on
either side of the wall.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.64  STUCCO MESH.



   Stucco mesh, 20 gauge or heavier, shall be attached by means of
clinching the embedded nails on one side of the wall, stretching a continuous
piece of netting tightly over the top of the wall, and fastening the netting
in the same manner on the opposite side of the wall.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



§ 153.65  WALL FINISH.



   Walls shall be finished with cement stucco, or stabilized mud plaster,
with a minimum thickness of seven-eighths inch.



(Res. 96-17, passed 12-12-1996)



CHAPTER 154:  ZONING



Section




General Provisions




   154.001   Title



   154.002   Purpose



   154.003   Definitions




Administration




   154.015   Repeal, validity, and application



   154.016   Powers, duties, enforcement, interpretation, and conflict



   154.017   Injunction



   154.018   Nonconforming uses and buildings



   154.019   Conditional use permits




Procedures




   154.030   Amendments



   154.031   Variances



   154.032   Exceptions and modifications



   154.033   Appeals to administrative decisions



   154.034   Notification



   154.035   Site plan criteria, application, content, and review



   154.036   Applications and fees



   154.037   Building permits and certificates of occupancy




Establishment of Districts




   154.050   Purpose



   154.051   Establishment of districts



   154.052   Effect of establishment of districts



   154.053   Location and boundaries of districts



   154.054   Zoning map




Composition of Districts




   154.065   Single-family residential districts



   154.066   Two-Family R-2 District and Multi-Family R-3 and R-4
Districts



   154.067   Commercial Districts; C-1 Neighborhood Commercial, C-2
General Commercial, and C-M Mixed-Use Commercial



   154.068   Planned Area Development (PAD)




Medical Marijuana




   154.080   Purpose



   154.081   Location requirements



   154.082   Operation requirements



   154.083   Use acceptance



   154.084   Definitions



   154.085   Use regulations and effect of subchapter




Landscaping, Walls, Screening Devices, and Swimming Pools




   154.100   Purpose



   154.101   Applicability



   154.102   Procedure



   154.103   Definitions



   154.104   Design and development standards



   154.105   Pools and swimming pools




Off-Street Parking and Loading




   154.120   Purpose



   154.121   Definitions



   154.122   General regulations



   154.123   Parking design and standards



   154.124   Parking requirements



   154.125   Loading requirements




Sign Regulations




   154.140   Purpose



   154.141   Applicability



   154.142   General provisions



   154.143   Sign standards



   154.144   Sign construction, maintenance, and enforcement



   154.145   Sign permits and fees



   154.146   Definitions



   154.147   Billboard signs



   154.148   Fees for billboard signs




Citizen Review Process




   154.160   Process



   154.161   Procedure



 



   154.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 154.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as and referred to as “the Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of Guadalupe”.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part I)



§ 154.002  PURPOSE.



   (A)   This chapter is hereby adopted for the purposes of promoting
and protecting the public health, safety, morals, and welfare of the citizens
of the town and to provide for the social, physical, and economic advantages
resulting from a comprehensive and planned use of its limited land resources
in accordance with the laws of the state.



   (B)   In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the purpose of
implementing the comprehensive plan of the town.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part I)



§ 154.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby
defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the
singular number shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the
singular; the word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is
permissive; the word “persons” include individuals, partnerships,
corporations, clubs, or associations. The following words or terms may be
used interchangeably: lot, plot, parcel, or premises; used, arranged,
occupied, or maintained; building or structure; sold or dispensed; zone or
district.



   ABUTTING. The condition of two adjoining properties having a common
property line or boundary, including cases where two or more lots adjoin only
a corner or corners, but not including cases where adjoining lots are
separated by a street or alley.



   ACCESS or ACCESS WAY. The place, means, or way by which pedestrians and
vehicles shall have safe, adequate, and usable ingress and egress to a
property or use as required by this chapter.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A building, the use of which is customarily
incidental to that of the dominant use of the main building or premises
including bona fide household employees’ quarters.



   ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily incidental, related, appropriate, and
clearly subordinate to the main use of the lot or building, which accessory
use does not alter the principal use of the subject lot or building or
adversely affect other properties in the district.



   ACRE. A land area measuring 43,560 square feet.



   ADJACENT. The condition of being near to or close to, but not
necessarily having a common dividing line, i.e., two properties which are
separated only by a street or alley shall be considered as adjacent to one
another.



   ALLEY. A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic
circulation.



   AMENDMENT. A change in the wording, context, or substance of this
chapter, an addition or deletion, or a change in the district boundaries or
classifications upon the district map, which imposes any regulation not
heretofore imposed or removed or modifies any such regulation theretofore
imposed.



   AMUSEMENT PARK. A commercial amusement activity such as a carnival,
circus, miniature golf course, or similar establishment which does not
require an enclosed building.



   ANALOGOUS USE. Any use which is comparable to the permitted uses, is
similar in one or more important ways to the permitted uses, or resembles the
permitted uses in one or more aspects. ANALOGOUS USES shall not be anymore
deleterious, obnoxious, or harmful than the uses permitted.



   ANIMAL CLINIC or ANIMAL HOSPITAL. A place where animals or pets are
given medical or surgical treatment in emergency cases and are cared for
during the time of such treatment. Use as kennel shall be limited to short
time boarding and shall be only incidental to such hospital use and shall be
enclosed in a sound-proof structure.



   APARTMENT. A suite of rooms, with cooking facilities and private bath
and toilet facilities, used for living purposes. Each APARTMENT shall be
considered a dwelling unit.



   ATTACHED BUILDING. A building which has any parts of its exterior or
bearing wall in common with another building or which is connected to another
building by a roof.



   AUTO FULL SERVICE CAR WASH. A conveyor type car washing facility
providing the customer with full car washing service, including the vacuuming
and complete interior cleaning of the automobile by attendants.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A place of business having pumps and/or
storage tanks from which liquid fuel and/or lubricants are dispensed at
retail, directly into the motor vehicle. Sales and installation of auto
accessories, washing, polishing, inspections, and cleaning, but not steam
cleaning may be carried on incidental to the sale of such fuel and lubricants.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR. All aspects of the repair of motor vehicles
including, but not limited to, lubrication, tune up, and preventive
maintenance.



   BAR or COCKTAIL LOUNGE. An establishment whose primary business is the
serving of alcoholic beverages to the public for consumption on the premises.



   BASEMENT or CELLAR. The portion of a building between floor and
ceiling, which is partly below and partly above grade, but so located that
the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is equal to greater than
the vertical distance from grade to ceiling.



   BLOCK. Property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two
nearest intersecting street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage,
waterways, but not an alley, of such size as to interrupt the continuity of
development on both sides thereof.



   BOARDING HOUSE or LODGING HOUSE. A building where, for definite
periods, lodging with or without meals is provided for compensation for three
or more persons, not constituting a family, as defined hereafter, but not
exceeding 20 persons.



   BUILDING. Any structure for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind, with the exception of
dog houses, play houses, and similar structures. Each portion of a building
separated by dividing wall or walls without openings may be deemed a separate
BUILDING for the purpose of issuing building permits.



   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation at the top of the curb of the street or streets adjacent to the
property, or to the top of the crown of the roadway or roadways, if there is
no curb, to the highest point. In cases where drainage considerations
supersede this chapter, the point of reference elevation would be subject to
the approval of the Town Engineer.



   BUILDING SITE. The area of a building together with associated parking
areas and open space required by this chapter. A BUILDING SITE may encompass
more than one lot.



   CARPORT. An accessory building or portion of a main building with two
or more open sides designated or used for the parking of motor vehicles.
Enclosed storage facilities may be provided as part of a CARPORT.



   CHURCH, SYNAGOGUE, or TEMPLE. A permanently located building commonly
used for religious worship. CHURCHES, SYNAGOGUES, or TEMPLES shall conform to
the Uniform Building Code and are subject to development review approval.



   COMMERCIAL USE. A use operated for profit or compensation and provides
retail of goods or rendering of services.



   COMMON OPEN SPACE. Any meaningful open space, other than streets or
private yard setbacks, intended for use by all occupants of a development.
This space may include recreation-oriented areas.



   CONDOMINIUM. An estate in real property consisting of an undivided
interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a
separate interest in air space in a residential, industrial, or commercial
building on such real property, such as apartment, office, or store.



   CONVALESCENT HOME or NURSING HOME. See HOSPITAL.



   COUNCIL. The Town Council of Guadalupe.



   COURT. Any space other than a yard on the same lot with a building or
group of buildings, and which is unobstructed and open to the sky from any
above the floor level of any room having a window or door opening on such
court. The width of a COURT shall be its least horizontal dimension.



   CURB ELEVATION. The average elevation of a curb adjacent to a
development from which the height of a building is determined.



   DAY CARE SCHOOLS or NURSERY. A public or private establishment
providing care and supervision for five or more children not related to the
proprietor.



   DENSITY. A ratio of the number of dwelling units to the gross land area
unless otherwise stated.



   DISTRICT. Any zone as shown on the zoning map of the town for which
there are uniform regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or
the height and area of buildings.



   DISTRICT MAP. The official zoning map of the town, which is a part of
this chapter. (See § 154.054.)



   DWELLING. Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used
exclusively for residential purposes.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof designed for
occupancy by three or more families.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building designed for occupancy by one
family.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed for occupancy by two families.



   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a building designed for occupancy
by one family for living purposes and having its own cooking and sanitary
facilities.



   EFFICIENCY APARTMENT. A dwelling unit which has only one combined
living and sleeping room, said dwelling unit, however, may also have a
separate room containing only kitchen facilities and also a separate room
containing only sanitary facilities.



   FAMILY.



      (1)   An individual or two or more persons related by blood,
marriage, or adoption and usual servants, living together as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or



      (2)   Not more than four persons, who need not be related,
living together as a single housekeeping unit within a dwelling.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE. Any accessory building or portion of a main building
designed or used for the storage of not more than three motor-driven
vehicles, provided that no PRIVATE GARAGE may be used or rented for the
storage of commercial trucks having a capacity in excess of one ton.



   GARAGE, REPAIR. A building or portion thereof, other than a private or
storage garage, designed or used for servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring,
selling, or storing motor-driven vehicles.



   GRADE. The top of a curb, or top of a crown of a street where no curb
exists, as established at the midpoint of the front of the lot used for
establishing building heights. For establishing heights of walls, fences, or
other screening devices, see §§ 154.100 through 154.105.



   HOME OCCUPATIONS.



      (1)   Any occupation or profession carried on by a member of a
family, residing on the premises, and which is clearly incidental to the use
of the structure for dwelling purposes and which does not change the exterior
character of the premises in any way. This activity shall not generate
pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that normal to the district in which
it is located, and further there shall be no signs, buildings, or structures
other than those permitted in the district. Neither shall the occupation or
profession be advertised visually.



      (2)   A carport or garage may not be used for home occupations
without Town Council approval. There shall be no use of material or
mechanical equipment not recognized as being part of normal household or
hobby use. HOME OCCUPATION shall include the use of premises by a physician,
surgeon, dentist, lawyer, clergyman, or other professional persons for
consultation or emergency treatment, but not for the general practice of his
or her profession.



      (3)   No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat,
or glare shall be produced, and the activity shall be limited to the house
between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



   HOSPITAL. A facility for the general and emergency treatment of human
ailments, with bed care and shall include sanitarium and clinic, convalescent
or nursing home, maternity home, and homes for the aged.



   HOTEL. A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the
public for compensation for five or more persons and which is open to
transient guests.



   INSTITUTION. A building or buildings occupied by a nonprofit
corporation or a nonprofit establishment for public use.



   JUNKYARD. The use of a lot, or portion thereof, for the storage,
keeping, or abandonment of junk, dismantled automobiles, or other vehicles,
or machinery, or parts thereof including scrap metals, rags, or other scrap
materials.



   KENNEL. Any establishment at which dogs and cats are bred or raised for
sale, or boarded, cared for, commercially or on a nonprofit basis, exclusive
of dental, medical, or surgical care, or for quarantine purposes.



   LANDSCAPED AREA. An area which has been improved through the harmonious
combination and introduction of trees, shrubs, and ground cover, and which
may contain natural topping material such as boulders, rock, stone, granite,
or other approved material. The area shall be void of any asphaltic or
concrete pavement except where walks are allowed.



   LAUNDRY SELF-SERVICE. Establishments primarily engaged in the operation
of coin-operated or similar self-service laundry and dry cleaning equipment
for use on the premises.



   LOT. A legally created parcel of land occupied or intended for
occupancy by one main building together with its accessory building, and uses
customarily incidental to it, including the open spaces required by this
chapter and having its principal frontage upon a street as defined in this
chapter.



   LOT AREA. The area included within lot lines after all right-of-way
dedications have been made as required by the town’s right-of-way standards.



   LOT, CORNER. A lot adjoining two or more streets at their intersections.



   LOT, DEPTH OF. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.



   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.



   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot or key lot.



   LOT, KEY. A lot adjacent to a corner lot having its side lot line in
common with the rear lot line of the corner lot and facing on the street,
which forms the side boundary of the corner lot.



   LOT LENGTH. The length (or depth) of a lot shall be:



      (1)   If the front and rear lines are parallel, the shortest
distance between such lines;



      (2)   If the front and rear lines are not parallel, the
shortest distance between the midpoint of the front line and the midpoint of
the rear lot line; or



      (3)   If the lot is triangular, the shortest distance between
the front lot line and a line parallel to the front lot line, not less than
ten feet long lying wholly within the lot.



   LOT LINE.



      (1)   FRONT. The front property line of a lot shall be
determined as follows.



         (a)   CORNER LOT. The front property line of a corner
lot shall be the shorter of the two lines adjacent to the streets as
originally platted or laid out. Where the lines are equal, the front line
shall be that line which is obviously the front by reason of the prevailing
custom of the other buildings in the block. If such front is not evident,
then either may be considered the front of the lot but not both.



         (b)   INTERIOR LOT. The front property line of an
interior lot shall be the line bounding the street frontage.



         (c)   THROUGH LOT. The front property line of a through
lot shall be that line which is obviously the front line by reason of the
prevailing custom of the other buildings in the block. Where such front
property line is not obviously evident, the Board of Adjustment shall
determine the front property line. Such a lot over 200 feet deep may be
considered, for the purpose of this definition, as two lots each with its own
frontage.



      (2)   REAR. The rear property line of a lot is that lot line
opposite to the front property line. Where the side property lines of a lot
meet in a point, the rear property line shall be assumed to be a line not
less than ten feet long, lying within the lot and parallel to the front
property line. In the event that the front property line is a curved line,
then the rear property line shall be assumed to be a line not less than ten
feet long, lying within the lot and parallel to a line tangent to the front
property line at its midpoint.



      (3)   SIDE. The side property lines of a lot are those lot
lines connecting the front and rear property lines of a lot.



   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot.



   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of
which has been recorded in the office of the Clerk of Maricopa County
Recorder’s Office, or parcel of land, the deed of which is recorded in the
office of the County Recorder.



   LOT WIDTH.



      (1)   The width of a lot shall be:



         (a)   If the side property lines are parallel, the
shortest distance between these side lines; or



         (b)   If the side property lines are not parallel, the
width of the lot shall be the length of a line at right angles to the axis of
the lot at a distance equal to the front setback required for the district in
which the lot is located. The axis of a lot shall be a line joining the
midpoints of the front and rear property lines.



      (2)   LOT WIDTH shall mean, in the case of irregularly shaped
lots, lots having side lot lines not parallel, or lots on the curve of a
street, the distance between side lot lines measured 30 feet behind the
required minimum front setback line parallel to the street or street chord.



   MANUFACTURING. The fabricating or assembling of materials into finished
or partially finished products by hand or by the use of machinery.



   MEANINGFUL OPEN SPACE. Space which can be enjoyed by people. This could
include landscaped plazas, grass and trees, fountains, sitting areas, and the
like, and is meant to provide an open garden atmosphere. MEANINGFUL OPEN
SPACE does not include parking areas, vacant or undeveloped lots, or any
other space which does not contribute to the quality of the environment.



   MOBILE HOME. A movable dwelling over 40 feet in length and over eight
feet wide, constructed to be towed on its own chassis and designed so as to
be installed with or without a permanent foundation for human occupancy as a
residence.



   MOBILE HOME SPACE. A plot of ground within a mobile home park designed
for the accommodation of one mobile home or trailer coach.



   MOTEL. See HOTEL.



   NON-CLIMBABLE. Not easily climbed by a young child; not having a ladder
or horizontal rung effect by which a young child can gain uninvited access to
the top nor having vertical openings through which a four-inch sphere can
pass.



   NON-CONFORMING BUILDING. A building or portion thereof which was lawful
when established but which does not conform to a subsequently established
district or district regulations.



   NON-CONFORMING LOT. A parcel of land of record and legal prior to the
effective date of this chapter, having less area, frontage, or dimensions
than required in the district in which it is located.



   NON-CONFORMING USE. A legal use of any building or land at the time of
passage of this chapter or amendment thereto which does not conform after
passage of this chapter or amendment thereto with the use regulations of the
district in which located.



   NURSERY SCHOOL. See DAY CARE SCHOOL.



   PARKING. Off-street parking with access from streets or secondary means
or as approved by subdivision plat.



   PARKING LOT. A parcel of land devoted to parking spaces as set forth by
the parking standards of §§ 154.120 though 154.125.



   PARKING LOT, COMMERCIAL. Any lot upon which members of the general
public operating a motor vehicle upon said lot and parking thereon may be
required to pay a charge or fee for said usage to the owner of the lot or his
or her agent.



   PARKING SPACE. A permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed,
having a minimum width of nine feet and an area of not less than 180 square
feet which will accommodate a car.



   PATIO HOME. An attached or detached single-family dwelling constructed
with no side yard on one side of the lot.



   PERMITTED USE. A use specifically permitted or a use analogous to those
specifically permitted in this chapter.



   PRE-SCHOOL. See DAY CARE SCHOOL.



   PROFESSIONAL USE. The rendering of a service of a professional nature
by:



      (1)   Architects, engineers, and surveyors, who are licensed
by the State Board of Technical Registration;



      (2)   Doctors, osteopaths, and dentists, who are licensed by
the state;



      (3)   Lawyers, who are admitted to practice before the courts
of the state; or



      (4)   Accountants, who are members of the Arizona Society of
Certified Public Accountants and/or the Arizona Association of Accountants,
Incorporated.



   PROHIBITED USE. A use not specifically permitted or a use analogous to
those not specifically permitted.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle eight feet or less in width and 40 feet
or less in length primarily designed as temporary living quarters for
recreational camping or travel use and not designed for permanent residential
or commercial purposes, with either its own motive power or mounted on or
drawn by another vehicle.



   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A home in which persons with development
disabilities live and which is licensed, operated, supported, or supervised
by the state. DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY shall mean autism, cerebral palsy,
epilepsy, or mental retardation.



   REST HOME. See HOSPITAL.



   RESTAURANT. An establishment whose primary business is the serving of
food to the public for compensation.



   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN. Any building or structure where food and drink
are served for consumption on the premises by order from and service to
vehicular passengers outside the structure.



   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH. Any building or structure where food and
drink are served for consumption within the building or off the premises by
order from vehicular passengers outside the structure, including, but not
limited to, services from an outdoor service window.



   RETAIL. A sale for any purpose other than for resale in the form of
tangible personal property.



   ROOMING HOUSE. See BOARDING HOUSE.



   SCHOOL or COLLEGE. Unless otherwise specified, private or public places
of general instruction, but shall not include day care schools, dancing
schools, riding academies, or trade or specialized vocational schools.



   SERVICE STATION, AUTOMOTIVE. A retail business engaged primarily in the
sale of motor fuels but also in supplying goods and services generally
required in the operation and maintenance of automotive vehicles. These may
include sale of petroleum products; sale and servicing of tires, batteries,
automotive accessories, and replacement items; washing and lubrication
services; automotive maintenance and repair; and the supplying of other
incidental customer services and products.



   SHOPPING CENTER. A group of facilities for commercial use, planned and
designed for the site on which it is built, functioning as a unit, with,
common off-street parking, landscaped areas, and pedestrian malls or plazas
provided on the property as an integral part of the unit.



   SIGNS.



      (1)   SIGN. Any device (visible beyond the boundaries of the
property upon which located) providing identification, advertising, or
directional information for a specified business, service, product, person,
organization, place, or building. Included in this definition as signs are
graphic devices such as logos, attention-attracting media such as banners or
logo sculpture, and obtrusive, colored fascia or architectural element.



      (2)   SIGN AREA. That area in square feet of the smallest
geometric figure or combination of regular geometric figures which figure or
figures entirely enclose both the copy and the facing of the sign.



      (3)   SIGN, ADVERTISING. A sign which includes any copy and/or
graphics related to any service, product, person, business, place, activity,
or organization in addition to simple identification, excluding directional
information.



      (4)   SIGN, BANNER. Temporary sign of fabric, plastic, paper,
or other light pliable material not enclosed in a rigid frame but mounted as
to allow movement of the sign by wind movements.



      (5)   SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. Any temporary sign erected on the
premises of an existing construction project and designating the architect,
contractor, designer, engineer, building, financier, or the name and the
nature of the project.



      (6)   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A sign that does not contain either
identification or advertising copy, but includes pertinent information,
including assistance in the flow of traffic.



      (7)   SIGN, FASCIA. A sign which is permanently affixed to the
horizontal piece covering the joint between the top of a wall and the
projecting eaves of the roof.



      (8)   SIGN, FREESTANDING. An identification sign which is
erected of or mounted upon its own self-supporting permanent structure,
detached from the supportive elements of a building.



      (9)   SIGN, HEIGHT. Distance from the top of curb, or crown of
road where no curb exists, to the top of the highest point of the sign or
sign structure.



      (10)   SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. A sign that includes, as copy,
only the name of the business, place, organization, building, or person it
identifies and not containing any advertising copy.



      (11)   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign with a surface lighted
internally or externally.



      (12)   SIGN, PORTABLE. Sign not permanently affixed to the
ground.



      (13)   SIGN, ROOF. Any sign erected upon the roof or structure
of any building which is partially or totally supported by the roof.



      (14)   SIGN, STRUCTURE. Any portion of a sign, including the
supports and framework of the sign.



      (15)   SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign, banner, pennant, valance of
advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard,
wallboard, or other like materials, with or without frames, and any type sign
not permanently attached to the ground, wall, or building, intended to be
displayed for a short period of time not to exceed 30 days.



      (16)   SIGNS, WALL. Any sign placed or painted directly upon
or attached to the exterior, front, rear, or side wall of any building or
structure.



   SLEEPING ROOM. A room, other than a guest room, in which no cooking
facilities are provided.



   STORY. The portion of a building included between the upper surface of
any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost STORY shall be that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the top most floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished
floor level directly above a basement, cellar, or unused underfloor space is
more than six feet above the grade as defined herein for more than 50% of the
total perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at any
point, such basement, cellar, or unused underfloor space shall be considered
as a STORY.



   STREET. A dedicated public or private passageway which affords a
principal means of access to abutting property.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a
building such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or
any complete rebuilding of the roof.



   STRUCTURE. Any piece of work constructed or erected, the use of which
requires a location on the ground or attached to something having a location
on the ground, but not including a tent, vehicle, trailer coach, or mobile
home.



   STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY. Any piece of work which is readily movable, and
used or intended to be used for a period not to exceed 90 consecutive days.
Such STRUCTURE shall be subject to all applicable property development
standards for the district in which it is located.



   SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE. A contained body of water, used for swimming or
bathing purposes, either above ground level or below ground level, with the
depth of the container being more than 18 inches or the area being more than
38 square feet.



   SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC. The same definition as private pool, but
operated as a commercial business. PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS shall conform to
county health requirements.



   TOWN. The Town of Guadalupe, Arizona.



   TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling with party walls and no side yards
between abutting dwellings.



   TRAILER COACH. See RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.



   UNIT DENSITY. The ratio between land area and the dwelling units within
the project.



   USE. The purpose for which land or building is occupied, or maintained,
arranged, designed, or intended.



   USE, ACCESSORY. A subordinate use customarily incident to and conducted
on the same lot with the principal use or building including bona fide
household employees’ quarters.



   USE PERMIT, CONDITIONAL. A permit granted to a property owner by the
Council to conduct a use allowed as a conditional use in a zoning district
subject to a use permit. A use permit may be granted at the discretion of the
Town Council after a public hearing.



   VARIANCE. A modification of the terms of the zoning ordinance granted
by the Board of Adjustment upon a finding that strict enforcement of the
ordinance would cause undue hardship owing to special circumstances
applicable to the individual property, including its size, shape, topography,
location, or surroundings, for which the VARIANCE is granted and not caused
by the applicant for said variance.



   WALL. Any structure or device required by this chapter for screening
purposes forming a physical barrier, which is so constructed that 50% or more
of the vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of light, air, and
vision through said surface in a horizontal plane. This shall include
concrete, concrete block, wood, or other materials that are solids and are so
assembled as to form a screen.



   WAREHOUSE. A building or building used for the storage of goods of any
type, and where no retail operation is conducted.



   WHOLESALE. The sale of tangible personal property for resale by a
licensed retailer for consumption by the ultimate purchaser.



   YARD. An open space at grade level between a building and the adjoining
lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the
ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein, and the width of a side
yard, the depth of a front yard, or depth of a rear yard, measured as the
minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall
be used.



   YARD, FRONT. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main
building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street
line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the
lot. The FRONT YARD on a residential corner lot is the yard adjacent to the
shorter street frontage. The FRONT YARD of a commercial corner lot is the
yard adjacent to the major street as determined by the Town Engineer. The
FRONT YARD of a double frontage lot shall be maintained adjacent to both
street frontages.



   YARD, REAR. An open space on the same lot with a main building between
the rear line of the principal building and the rear line of the lot
extending the full width of the lot.



   YARD, SIDE. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main
building situated between the building and the side line of the lot and
extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line
or a front line shall be deemed a side lot line. An interior SIDE YARD is
defined as the side yard adjacent to a common lot line.



   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Town Manager, or his or her agent,
responsible for the enforcement of the zoning ordinance of the town.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part IV)




ADMINISTRATION




§ 154.015  REPEAL, VALIDITY, AND APPLICATION.



   (A)   Repeal. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with
this chapter are hereby repealed.



   (B)   Validity. Should any section or provision of this chapter be
decided by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof other
than the part so decided to be unconstitutional or invalid.



   (C)   Application. The repeal of the ordinance or parts thereof by
this chapter shall not:



      (1)   Affect suits pending or rights existing immediately
prior to the effective day of this chapter;



      (2)   Impair, avoid, or affect any grant or conveyance made or
right acquired or cause of action now existing under any such repealed
ordinance or amendment thereto; or



      (3)   Affect or impair the validity of any bond or other
obligation issued or sold in constituting a valid obligation of the issuing
authority immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part II)



§ 154.016  POWERS, DUTIES, ENFORCEMENT, INTERPRETATION, AND CONFLICT.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Town Council to hold public
hearings when necessary and make recommendations to the Town Council on all
matters concerning or relating to the town’s comprehensive plan, the
creation of zoning districts, the boundaries thereof, the appropriate
regulations to be enforced therein, the amendment of this chapter, and the
relationship of development to the surrounding environment and the community.



   (B)   The Town Council shall have the power to approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove all applications for site plan review
consistent with this chapter. Upon hearing an application, it may impose such
reasonable conditions as it may deem necessary in order to fully carry out
the provisions and intent of this chapter. Prior to the development,
construction, remodel, change, or alteration of any proposed or existing
project within a zoning district subject to approval of the Council.



   (C)   The Town Council shall have the power and jurisdiction to hear
appeals taken to it by persons aggrieved or affected by a decision of an
administrative official charged with the enforcement of this chapter within
30 days by filing a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The
officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Said
appeal shall be filed on a form provided by the Zoning Administration.



   (D)   This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Administration of
the town or its authorized representative.



   (E)   In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter will be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens.



   (F)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to interfere
with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rule, regulation, or permit
previously adopted or issued and not in conflict with any provision of this
chapter or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law related to the
use of building or ordinance not in conflict with this chapter; nor is it
intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul an easement,
covenant, or other agreement between parties, except when this chapter
imposes a greater restriction, this chapter shall prevail.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part II)



§ 154.017  INJUNCTION.



   (A)   If any building or structure is constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or
land is used in violation of this chapter, the town or any owner or tenant of
real property in the same contiguous zoning district as the building or
structure in question, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceedings:



      (1)   To prevent the unlawful construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use;



      (2)   To prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or
land;



      (3)   To prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in
or about the premises; or



      (4)   To restrain, correct, or abate the violation.



   (B)   When any such action is instituted by an owner or tenant,
notice of such action shall be served upon the municipality at the time suit
is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the Town Manager/Clerk.



   (C)   In any such action or proceeding, the court with jurisdiction
thereof has the power and in its discretion may issue a restraining order, or
a preliminary injunction, as well as a permanent injunction, upon such terms
and under such conditions as will do justice and enforce the purpose of this
chapter.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part II)



§ 154.018  NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS.



   (A)   The lawful use of a building or land existing at the time of
the passage of this chapter, although such use does not conform to the
provisions hereof for said land, may be continued, but if such nonconforming
use is discontinued for a period of six months, it is then declared
abandoned, and any future use of said building or land shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   (1)   The lawful use of a building or land existing at the
time of the passage of this chapter may be continued, although such use does
not conform with the provisions of this chapter for such building or land,
and such use may be continued provided only reasonable repairs and
alterations are made.



      (2)   A nonconforming use of a building or land may not be
changed to another nonconforming use.



      (3)   Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or land has
been changed to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to
a nonconforming use.



   (C)   An existing building or land designed, arranged, or intended
for or devoted to a use not permitted under the regulations of this chapter
for the district in which such building or land is located shall not be
enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered unless such
building and such enlargement, extension, reconstruction, structural
alterations, and further use thereof conform in every respect with the
regulations specified by this chapter for such district in which said
building or land is located. Nothing herein shall prohibit any reasonable
repairs or alterations in a building or land used for such existing purposes.



   (D)   If at any time any building or land in existence or maintained
at the time of the adoption of this chapter, which does not conform to the
regulations for the district in which it is located, shall be destroyed by
fire or other cause to the extent of 50% of its remaining value as determined
by three competent appraisers, then and without further action by the Council
the said building and the land on which said building was located or
maintained shall from and after the date of such destruction be subject to
all the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such
land and building are located.



   (E)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorization
for or approval of the continuance of the use of a building or land in
violation of zoning regulations in effect at the time of the effective date
of this chapter.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part II)



§ 154.019  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   Conditional use permits which may be revokable, conditional,
or valid for a term period, may be granted only when expressly permitted in
the zoning district herein specified by this chapter and only after the Town
Council has filed, in writing, that the granting of such conditional use
permit will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, and
welfare and that the characteristics of the use proposed in such conditional
use permits are compatible with the types of uses permitted in the
surrounding area.



   (B)   The burden of proof satisfying these requirements shall rest
with the applicant.



   (C)   In the case where a use permit is conditional upon a time
schedule of development, if the property has not been developed within one
year or on a schedule agreed upon by the Town Council, the conditional use
application shall cease. Any request for an extension to these conditions
shall be considered as a new application.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part II)




PROCEDURES




§ 154.030  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   The regulations and boundaries set forth in this chapter may
be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed whenever deemed
necessary to best serve the public interest, health, comfort, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the town.



   (B)   Before any such amendments can be considered by the Town
Council, a public hearing shall be held at which parties of interest and
citizens are to be heard.



   (C)   (1)   Any recommendation of approval for an amendment, or
any adoption of an amendment, may be subject to such conditions as the
Council deems applicable in order to fully carry out the provisions of this
chapter.



      (2)   If the condition regards a schedule for development of
the specific use or uses for which zoning is requested and at the expiration
of that period the property has not been developed according to said
schedule, it shall revert to its former zoning classification without
legislative action. Any request for an extension of amendment to the
conditions granted shall be considered as a new application.



   (D)   Applications for amendments shall be made in the office of the
Town Manager/Clerk by the owner or owners of real property, or by the Town
Council on its own motion.



   (E)   (1)   If the owners of 20% or more, either of the area of
the lands included in the proposed ordinance or zoning map change, or those
immediately adjacent in the rear or any side thereof extending 150 feet
therefrom, or those directly opposite thereto extending 150 feet from the
street frontage of opposite lots file a protest in writing against a proposed
ordinance amendment, such amendment shall not become effective except by a
favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the Town Council.



      (2)   If any members of the Town Council are unable to vote on
such a questions because of conflict of interest, then the required number of
votes for passage of the question shall be three-fourths of the remaining
membership of the Town Council, provided that such requirement number of
votes shall in no event be less than the majority of the full membership of
the Town Council.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part III)



§ 154.031  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Application for a variance of zoning regulations shall be
filed upon a form provided and shall be accompanied by plans and description
sufficient to indicate the nature of the variance involved.



   (B)   A variance from the provisions of this chapter shall not be
authorized unless the Town Council shall find upon sufficient evidence:



      (1)   There are special circumstances or conditions applying
to the property, including its size, shape, topography, location, or
surroundings, the strict application of this chapter will deprive such
property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the same district;



      (2)   Such special circumstances were not created by the owner
or applicant; and



      (3)   The authorizing of the application will not be
materially detrimental to persons residing or working in the vicinity nor
constitute the granting of special privileges inconsistent with the
limitations of adjacent property, the neighborhood, or the public welfare in
general.



   (C)   The Council shall prescribe such conditions as the Council may
deem necessary in order to fully carry out the provisions and intent of this
chapter. Such conditions may include, among other things, a limitation of the
time for which such variance shall be valid. Violation of any such condition
shall be a violation of this chapter and such violation shall render the
variance null and void.



   (D)   From the time of filing the application until the time of such
hearing, the application and all maps, plans, and other accompanying data
shall be available for public inspection during office hours at the office of
the Town Manager.



   (E)   Upon receipt in proper form of any such application, the
Council shall proceed to hold a public hearing upon said application not more
than 30 days nor less than 15 days after such filing, at which time all
persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard.



   (F)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Council, after
hearing an application made by any taxpayer or municipal officer, may
petition for a writ of certiorari to review the Council’s decision pursuant
to A.R.S. §§ 9-462 et seq., as amended.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part III)



§ 154.032  EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.



   The regulations specified in this chapter shall be subject to the
following exceptions, modifications, and interpretations.



   (A)   Extension of time. Under special conditions, the Council may
grant extensions of time otherwise set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   Use of existing lots of record. In any district where
dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling may be located on any lot
or plot of official record as of the effective date of this chapter which
does not meet area and/or width requirements of this chapter, provided that
the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The sum of the side yard widths of any such lot or plot
shall not be less than 25% of the width of the lot, but in no case less than
10% of the width of the lot for any one side yard;



      (2)   The depth of the rear yard of any such lot need not
exceed 20% of the depth of the lot, but in no case shall be reduced below 20
feet; and



      (3)   No building permit shall be issued for construction on
any substandard lot, which lot was of record at the time of the adoption of
this chapter, if said lot is adjacent to and has continuous frontage with any
other lot which at the time of the adoption of this chapter was in the same
ownership or whose ownership has beneficial interest in said lot, unless said
lots are combined into one lot meeting the requirements of the zoning
district which is applicable.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part III)



§ 154.033  APPEALS TO ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.



   (A)   (1)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in the matter
appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certified to
the Council that, by reason of the fact stated in the certificate, the stay
would in his or her opinion cause imminent peril to life or property.



      (2)   In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, except by
a restraining order granted by the Council or by a court of record on
application and notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken.



      (3)   The Council shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the
appeal and give notice thereof to the parties in interest and the public.



   (B)   The concurring vote of a majority of the Council shall be
necessary to reverse any order or decision of an administrative official, or
to pass or to affect any variations from the terms and conditions of this
chapter.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part III)



§ 154.034  NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   Upon receiving a complete application for any specified
request, the Town Manager/Clerk shall place the request upon the agenda for a
regular meeting of the Council within the number of days specified in this
chapter from the date of application submission to hearing date, or if the
number of days are not specified, place the request upon the agenda on the
next available regular meeting of the Council.



   (B)   (1)   For all Council hearings, the time, place, and date
of the hearing shall be posted on the property affected, at least 15 days
prior to the hearing.



      (2)   It shall not be the responsibility of the town to
maintain the posting once erected. At least 15 days notice of time, place,
and date of such hearing shall be published in an official paper of the town
or a paper of general circulation in the town.



      (3)   The notice required to be published and posted shall
also be mailed to the last known address of all owners of property within 150
feet of the property proposed to be rezoned or for which a variance is to be
considered by said amendment, said owners to be determined by a current list
of ownership.



      (4)   This list of owners shall be obtained not more than 30
days prior to the date of hearing before the Council and said notices shall
be mailed no less than 15 days prior to the date of the first public hearing.



      (5)   In the event that the requests for amendments to the
general requirements and uses are made, no application or posting shall be
required but all of the requirements of this provision shall be adhered to.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part III)



§ 154.035  SITE PLAN CRITERIA, APPLICATION, CONTENT, AND REVIEW.



   (A)   Criteria. In considering any application for site plan
approval, the Council shall be guided by the following criteria.



      (1)   The Council shall examine the application to ensure that
all provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances, master plans,
general plans, and standards of the town shall be complied with where
applicable.



      (2)   The proposed development shall not have any detrimental
effect upon the general health, welfare, safety, and convenience of persons
residing or working in the neighborhood.



      (3)   The architectural character of the proposed structure
shall be in harmony with, and compatible to, those structures in the
neighboring environment, and the architectural character adopted for any
given area, avoiding excessive variety or monotonous repetition and shall
take cognizance of the unique climatological and other environmental factors
of this region and promote an indigenous architectural feeling.



   (B)   Application.



      (1)   The Town Council shall prescribe the form and content of
applications and necessary accompanying data. The application shall be filed
with the Zoning Administration.



      (2)   Applications shall be made by the owner of the property
or his or her authorized agent. If the applicant is not the property owner, a
letter from the property owner authorizing the agent to act in his or her
behalf shall accompany said application.



   (C)   Contents.



      (1)   A site plan drawn to scale, indicating precisely what is
planned for the property, including the following information, as determined
necessary by the officer charged with administering this chapter may be
required:



         (a)   Lot dimensions;



         (b)   All building and structures existing and proposed;



         (c)   Yards and spaces between buildings;



         (d)   Walls, fences, and landscaping;



         (e)   Vehicular, pedestrian, and service access;



         (f)   Off-street parking facilities, including the
number of spaces and dimensions of parking areas;



         (g)   Signs and lighting, including location;



         (h)   Outdoor storage and activities;



         (i)   Drainage and grading plans;



         (j)   Refuse disposal facilities;



         (k)   Street dedication and improvements;



         (l)   Size, shape, and all adjacent rights-of-way; and/or



         (m)   Other data as may assist in determining the effect
of development on surrounding property.



      (2)   Design and development standards.



         (a)   All site improvements or those improvements
required in public rights-of-way adjacent to the subject property shall
conform to all pertinent sections in the town code, including, but not
limited to, standard specifications, street rights-of-way width, and the
subdivision ordinance of the town.



         (b)   Landscaping plans shall be in accordance with §§
154.100 through 154.105.



         (c)   Lighting for subject property shall be directed
towards the site and shall not cause undesirable glare to nearby residential
properties.



   (D)   Review.



      (1)   The Town Council may approve, with or without
conditions, a development or portion thereof, if it finds that:



         (a)   All provisions of the ordinances of the town have
been complied with; and



         (b)   All provisions of master plans, the comprehensive
plan, and development policies and standards of the town have been complied
with.



      (2)   An extension of approval may be granted if the recipient
files for the extension prior to the approval becoming void and the Committee
finds that the request justifies extension of the approval.



      (3)   The Town Council may find that special conditions on the
property require one or more of the following:



         (a)   Additional height limitations;



         (b)   Additional building setback;



         (c)   Limited vehicular access; or



         (d)   Off-site improvements in public rights-of-way
adjacent to the subject property.



   (E)   Enforcement.



      (1)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit within any
district subject to site plan review, the Zoning Administrator shall
ascertain that the Council has approved plans which are in conformance to
those presented with the building permit application and that the time
limitations imposed by this chapter or the Council have not elapsed.



      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall ensure that all matters
approved by the Council are undertaken and completed according to the
approval of the Council and is hereby authorized and required to cause to be
stopped any work attempted to be done without or contrary to the approval of
the Council and shall cause any violator to be prosecuted.



   (F)   Violations and penalties.



      (1)   Any violation of these provisions by any person shall be
prohibited and unlawful and such person shall be deemed to be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable upon conviction in accordance with the general penalty
provision of the town code, and further, in addition to other remedies, the
provisions of this chapter may be enforced by means of injunctive relief.



      (2)   Prior to any building being occupied, there must be full
compliance with all requirements of the Council.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part III)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.036  APPLICATIONS AND FEES.



   (A)   Applications.



      (1)   Applications for amendments, site plans, use permits,
appeals for interpretations, or variances shall be filed with the Zoning
Administration.



      (2)   Each application shall contain the following information
supplied by the applicant:



         (a)   Vicinity ownership map. A map drawn to scale, at
least eight and one-half inches by  11 inches showing all parcels in the
vicinity adjacent to and surrounding the property, within a radius of 150
feet from the exterior boundaries of the property;



         (b)   Ownership list. Typed or printed list containing
complete names and mailing addresses of owners and of parcels within a radius
of 150 feet of the boundaries of the property;



         (c)   Plot plan. A map drawn to scale, at least eight
and one-half inches by 11 inches showing the dimensions of the property and
the name and width of all internal and abutting streets, roads, or alleys,
and any existing buildings, fences, easements, and the like, with distances
to property lines;



         (d)   Legal description. An accurate description of the
property, either a lot or tract of a recorded subdivision, or a metes and
bounds description prepared by a registered engineer or licensed land
surveyor; and



         (e)   Letter of explanation. A letter explaining the
nature and intent of the proposed development and reasons justifying the
request. References to effects produced by the request proposed upon
surrounding neighborhoods and the town at large should be included.



      (3)   Additional materials such as development plans,
elevations, maps, and other materials may be required in accordance with
other stipulations of this chapter.



   (B)   Fees.



      (1)   Upon the filing of an application, the applicant shall
pay a filing fee in accordance with the following schedule.



 


Type of Application

 

Fee





Appeals of administrative decisions
 

$25



Site plan review application
 

$50



Amendments to the Zoning Map for:
 




Continued items, continued at the request of the applicant after the property
has been posted and the public hearing notices are mailed
 

$25



Multi-family residential, commercial, and industrial districts
 

$400



Planned area development
 

$400



Single-family residential
 

$100



Site plan review application
 

$50 + $25/acre for each acre over one



Conditional Use Permits
 




Mobile homes
 

$50



All other
 

$50



Variances
 




Single-family residential
 

$50



All other
 

$50





 



      (2)   No part of the application fees shall be returnable
after an application is advertised.



      (3)   An application initiated by the Town Council shall not
be subject to the requirements of a filing fee.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part III)



§ 154.037  BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



   Neither building permits nor certificates of occupancy may be issued
until the use of the building and land conform to the provisions of this
chapter.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part III)




ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS




§ 154.050  PURPOSE.



   In order to classify, regulate, restrict, and separate the use of land,
buildings, and structures; and to regulate and limit the type, height, and
bulk of buildings and structures in the various districts, and to regulate
the area of yards and other open areas abutting and between buildings and
structures and to regulate the density of population, the town is hereby
divided into districts.



(Zoning Code, Art. II Part I)



§ 154.051  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.



   The districts established by this chapter shall include the following.



 



R-1-9
 
Single-Family Residential


R-1-6
 
Single-Family Residential


R-2
 
One- and Two-Family Residential


R-3
 
Multi-Family Residential


R-4
 
Multi-Family Residential


C-1
 
Neighborhood Commercial


C-2
 
General Commercial


I-1
 
Light Industrial Park


I-2
 
General Industrial Park


PAD
 
Planned Area Development




 



(Zoning Code, Art. II Part II)



§ 154.052  EFFECT OF ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided:



      (1)   No building shall be erected and no existing building
shall be moved, altered, added to, or enlarged nor shall any land or building
be used, designed, or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner
other than is included among the uses hereinafter listed as permitted in the
district in which such building or land is located, provided that any
building may be moved off any lot;



      (2)   No building shall be erected to exceed in height the
limit hereinafter designated for the district in which such building is
located, whether such height be designated in number of stories, number of
feet, or otherwise;



      (3)   No building shall be erected, nor shall any open space
surrounding any building or otherwise required by this chapter be encroached
upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard, lot area,
open space, building location, and off-street parking regulations hereinafter
designated for the district in which such building or open space is located;
and



      (4)   No yard or other open space on one lot shall be
considered as providing a yard for open space for a building on any other lot.



   (B)   No lot shall be further divided to contain more dwellings than
are permitted by the regulations of the district the lot is located in.



   (C)   No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage,
parking, or other requirements of this chapter for a lot or a building may be
sold or leased away from such lot or building.



   (D)   No parcel of land which has less than the minimum width and
area requirements for the zone in which it is located may be cut off from a
larger parcel of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
building or development as a lot.



(Zoning Code, Art. II Part II)



§ 154.053  LOCATION AND BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The location and boundaries of the use districts are
established as they are shown on the map entitled “The Zoning Map of the
Town of Guadalupe” and which is hereby declared to be a part of this
chapter.



   (B)   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the
aforementioned districts shown on said map, the following rules shall apply.



      (1)   Such district boundary lines are intended to follow
street, alley, lot, or property lines as the same exist at time of passage of
this chapter, except where such district boundary lines are fixed by
dimensions shown on said map, in which case such dimensions shall govern.



      (2)   Where the application of the above rule does not clarify
the zone boundary location, then the Council shall determine the location.



(Zoning Code, Art. II Part II)



§ 154.054  ZONING MAP.







 




COMPOSITION OF DISTRICTS




§ 154.065  SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS: R-1-9 AND R-1-6.



   The composition of the districts listed above shall be as follows.



   (A)   Intent. The single-family residential districts are intended
to provide for low density, detached housing in the R-1-9 district and medium
density, detached housing in the R-1-6 District.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   One-family dwelling;



      (2)   Agricultural, flower and vegetable gardening, nurseries,
and greenhouses for the purpose of propagating and cultivating only, provided
no business shall be carried on upon the premises and provided that no
obnoxious fertilizers be stored and no obnoxious soil renovations shall be
carried on upon the premise; and



      (3)   Home occupation.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and
subordinate to one of the permitted principal uses, unless otherwise excluded;



      (2)   Temporary offices and/or construction sheds and
appurtenant signs and storage incidental to a construction project, which
buildings, signs, and storage shall be removed upon completion or abandonment
of the construction work;



      (3)   Private garage or carport;



      (4)   Private swimming pools when enclosed with a
non-climbable fence at least five feet in height;



      (5)   Fences, not to exceed four feet in height in front or
street side yards or seven feet in height in the side or rear yards; and



      (6)   Sign, on-site as provided in §§ 154.140 through
154.148.



   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted as
conditional uses, subject to obtaining a conditional use permit.



      (1)   Public utility facilities to serve the immediate area,
but not including any office facilities or maintenance yards for public
utility use;



      (2)   Publicly owned buildings and facilities, including
libraries, police and fire stations, and other community and recreational
buildings, including public schools;



      (3)   Churches, accessory church facilities, and parochial
schools;



      (4)   Private recreational areas and facilities; and



      (5)   One mobile home per lot.



   (E)   Area, height, and setback regulations.



      (1)   The following requirements shall be observed for
residential uses in the R-1-9 and R-1-6 zoning districts.



 

 
 
 
Zone Standards

Minimum Yard Setbacks

 



Zoning District

 

Min. Lot Area

 

Min. Lot Width

 

Min. Lot Depth

 

Front

 

Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear

 

Max. Bldg. Height




R-1-9

 

9,000 square feet

 

80’

 

100’

 

30’

 

10’

 

20’

 

10’

 

30’; accessory building




R-1-6

 

6,000 square

 

60’

 

90’

 

25’

 

7’*

 

15’

 

10’

 

15’



*for ease of access, 1 side shall be at least 10 feet in width. Churches and
schools 35 feet on each side.



 



      (2)   The minimum provisions listed above of width and area
shall not apply to any lot of less than said width and area existing and of
record in the office of the County Recorder before the effective date of this
section, provided the owner thereof owns no adjoining land.



      (3)   For planned area developments, the density per gross
acre shall not exceed 4.85 dwelling unit per acre for R-1-6.



   (F)   Off-street parking. There shall be two parking spaces per
dwelling unit and as provided in §§ 154.120 through 154.125.



(Zoning Code, Art. II Part II)



§ 154.066  TWO-FAMILY R-2 DISTRICT AND MULTI-FAMILY R-3 AND R-4 DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Intent. The two-family and multi-family districts are intended
to provide for a variety of lifestyles and residential densities. The R-2
District is intended to provide for medium density, one-family and two-family
dwellings. The R-3 District is intended for medium density, multi-family
dwellings. The R-4 District is intended for higher density, multi-family.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Any use permitted in the R-1-6 and R-1-9 Districts;



      (2)   Two-family dwellings (duplex);



      (3)   Boarding houses; and



      (4)   In the R-3 and R-4 Districts, multiple dwellings,
including cooperative apartment houses, condominium dwellings, and row
dwellings consisting of not more than six units in a continuous row.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Accessory uses permitted in and as limited in the R-1-9
and R-1-6 Districts; and



      (2)   Signs, on-site, as provided in §§ 154.140 through
154.148.



   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted as
conditional uses, subject to obtaining a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Medical clinics; and



      (2)   Conditional uses permitted in and as limited in the
R-1-9 and R-1-6 Districts.



   (E)   Area, height, setback regulations.



      (1)   The following requirements shall be observed for
permitted uses in the R-2, R-3, and R-4 Zoning Districts:



 



 


 


 


Zone Standards 

Minimum Yard Setbacks

 





Zoning District

 

Min. Lot Area 

 

Min. Lot Area Per D.U.

 

Min. Lot Width

 

Frt.

 

Side

 

Street Side

 

Street Rear

 

Max Bldg. Hgt.




R-2

 

5,000 sq. ft.

 


 

75’

 

25’

 

7’*

 

20’

 

20’

 

30’




R-3

 

5,000 sq. ft.

 

2,500 sq. ft.

 

100’

 

20’

 

7’*

 

15’

 

15’

 

30’




R-4

 

5,000 sq. ft.

 

1,250 sq. ft.

 

100’

 

20’

 

7’*

 

15’

 

15’

 

30’



*for ease of access, 1 side shall be at least 10 feet in width. Churches and
schools 35 feet on each side.


The minimum provisions listed above shall not apply to any lot of smaller
size already of record in the office of the County Recorder of Maricopa
County, Arizona, before the effective date of this chapter.



 



      (2)   The following requirements shall be observed for
residential uses in the R-1-9 and R-1-6 zoning districts.



 


Zoning District

 

Minimum Yard Setbacks

 

Max-Height





 

Front

 

Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear

 





R-1-9

 

30’

 

10’

 

20’

 

10’

 

30’




R-1-6

 

25’

 

7’

 

15’

 

10’

 

30’



The minimum provisions listed above shall not apply to any lot of smaller
size already of record in the office of the County Recorder of Maricopa
County, Arizona, before the effective date of this chapter.



 



   (F)   Off-street parking. For two-family and multi-family dwellings,
there shall be at least one space for each efficiency apartment, one and
one-half spaces for each one and two bedroom dwelling unit, and two spaces
for each dwelling unit containing more than two bedrooms as provided in §§
154.120 through 154.125.



(Zoning Code, Art. II Part II)  (Ord. 98-07, passed 12-22-1998; Ord.
2005-01, passed 4-28-2005)



§ 154.067  COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS; C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL, C-2 GENERAL
COMMERCIAL, AND C-M MIXED-USE COMMERCIAL.



   (A)   Intent.



      (1)   The C-1 District is intended to preserve and protect
neighborhood commercial areas located in close proximity of residential areas
and to provide retailing of convenience goods and services to meet the
frequent needs of the neighborhood.



      (2)   The C-2 District is intended to provide space for
general retail and office uses, and efficient development of major retail
shopping areas to serve the needs of the community and regional area.



      (3)   The C-M District is intended to provide for general and
outdoor retailing uses and light manufacturing and storage associated with
commercial uses.



   (B)   General regulations.



      (1)   In the C-1 and C-2 Districts, all uses shall be within
enclosed buildings except for drive-thru windows and other outdoor uses where
specifically permitted by this chapter.



      (2)   In the C-1 and C-2 Districts, outdoor display and
storage are prohibited except where specifically permitted by this chapter.



      (3)   In the C-1, C-2, and C-M Districts, overhead doors and
loading and service bays shall be screened from public street view by opaque
fences or walls, six feet in height.



      (4)   In the C-1, C-2, and C-M Districts, the yards required
adjacent to public streets shall be entirely landscaped except for necessary
driveways and walkways; parking and maneuvering areas shall be located beyond
those required landscaped yards.



      (5)   In the C-M District, outdoor storage shall be screened
from public street view and adjacent properties by opaque fences or walls,
six feet in height.



      (6)   All uses in the C-1, C-2, and C-M Districts shall comply
with the regulations of §§ 154.100 through 154.105, 154.120 through
154.125, and 154.140 through 154.148 pertaining to landscaping, parking, and
signing requirements of the town’s zoning ordinance.



      (7)   Any use which is objectionable by reason of emission of
odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibration, or noise, or may impose hazard to health
or property, shall be prohibited.



   (C)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Any use permitted in the R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts.



      (2)   The following neighborhood retail businesses and service
establishments shall be permitted in enclosed buildings in the C-1, C-2, and
C-M Districts:



         (a)   Bakery;



         (b)   Barber and/or beauty shop;



         (c)   Bicycle sales and repair;



         (d)   Bookstore, except adult bookstore (see § 154.003);



         (e)   Café and/or cafeteria under 5,000 square feet in
area and excluding live entertainment;



         (f)   Day care center;



         (g)   Delicatessen;



         (h)   Drugstore;



         (i)   Florist;



         (j)   Fruit and fruit juice store;



         (k)   Grocery store;



         (l)   Hardware store;



         (m)   Health food store;



         (n)   Medical and dental offices;



         (o)   Self-service laundry;



         (p)   Radio and television sales and repair;



         (r)   Stationery store;



         (s)   Shoe sales and repair; and



         (t)   Sporting goods store.



      (3)   The following general retail business and service
establishments shall be permitted in enclosed buildings in the C-2 and C-M
Districts:



         (a)   Art shop and artist supplies, addressograph shop,
athletic club, awning sales and repair, air conditioning and ventilating
equipment, sales and repair;



         (b)   Blueprinting or photostating, bowling alley, banks;



         (c)   Carbonated water sales, costume rentals;



         (d)   Department store, diaper service, drapery and
curtain store, dressmaking, dry goods store, dance halls;



         (e)   Electrical and heating appliances and fixtures,
sales and repairs, employment agency, embroidery store;



         (f)   Fountain equipment supply, frozen food lockers,
fix-it shop, film exchange, furniture sales and repairs, flooring or floor
repair, funeral homes;



         (g)   Gift shop, greenhouse, gunsmith, gymnasium, garage;



         (h)   Hobby shop, hemstitching shop, house equipment
display, hospital supplies, hotels;



         (i)   Jewelry store;



         (j)   Kindergarten, key and lock service;



         (k)   Laundry, linen shop;



         (l)   Millinery, medical clinics, manufacture of goods
to be sold at retail on the premises, providing that such manufacture is
plainly incidental to and operated in connection with a use permitted in this
district;



         (m)   Novelty store, night club;



         (n)   Office supply store, offices;



         (o)   Painter or paint store, plumbing shop, paper
hanger or wallpaper store, pet store, pawn shop, pool hall, penny arcade,
public utility facilities and office, private schools;



         (p)   Roller skating rink;



         (q)   Second-hand store, sewing machine shop, seed and
feed store, sign painting shop;



         (r)   Towel and linen supply, trade school, typewriter
and adding machine repair, tire shop, theater (except adult theater, see §
154.003), tailor shops;



         (s)   Upholstery shop;



         (t)   Variety store, video supply store, video game
facility, veterinary offices, excluding animal hospitals, clinics, and
kennels; and



         (u)   Wholesale business, window washing service.



      (4)   The following outdoor general retail business and
service establishments shall be permitted in the C-2 and C-M Districts:



         (a)   Automobile service stations, including minor
repairs and lubricating, automobile car wash service;



         (b)   Building materials retailing;



         (c)   Drive-in and drive-thru restaurants;



         (d)   Fruit and vegetable outdoor sales;



         (e)   Insulation sales;



         (f)   Monument sales;



         (g)   Plant nursery, parking lots; and



         (h)   Recreation areas and facilities.



      (5)   The following commercial manufacturing and storage
establishments shall be permitted in the C-M District:



         (a)   Bus terminals;



         (b)   Cleaning and dyeing plant, carpet and rug cleaning;



         (c)   Dispatch yard;



         (d)   Express office;



         (e)   Printing, publishing, or lithographing, pest
extermination;



         (f)   Wholesale activities and warehousing;



         (g)   Assembly of products from previously prepared
materials; and



         (h)   Commercial trade schools and business colleges.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and
subordinate to one of the principal uses, unless otherwise excluded;



      (2)   Signs, on-site as provided in §§ 154.140 through
154.148; and



      (3)   Off-street parking and loading areas.



   (E)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Conditional uses permitted in and as limited in the R-2,
R-3, and R-4 Districts, subject to obtaining a conditional use permit in
accordance with § 154.019, except that mobile homes as a permanent structure
for commercial use shall not be permitted.



      (2)   The following uses shall be permitted in enclosed
buildings as conditional uses, in C-1 Districts, subject to obtaining a
conditional use permit in accordance with § 154.019:



         (a)   Bank;



         (b)   General business offices;



         (c)   Medical clinic;



         (d)   Veterinarian offices, excluding animal hospitals,
clinics, or kennels;



         (e)   Publicly owned museums, libraries, community
centers, governmental offices;



         (f)   Institutions of a religious, educational, or
philanthropic nature;



         (g)   Private clubs, lodges, or veterans organizations;



         (h)   Permanent residence;



         (i)   One mobile home for temporary use, not to exceed
12 months, while a permanent structure is being completed; and



         (j)   Liquor store, bar, beer tavern, and any other
businesses engaged in selling liquor, beer, and wine



      (3)   The following uses in enclosed buildings shall be
permitted as conditional uses in the C-2 and C-M Districts in accord with §
154.019 except those uses set forth in division (E)(3)(f) below. The uses in
division (E)(3)(f) below shall be allowed without complying with the
conditional use permit requirements of § 154.019. The uses set forth in §
154.019 will be subject to all other restrictions and conditions set forth in
division (E)(3)(f) below:



         (a)   Hospitals and related uses, including animal
clinics and hospitals;



         (b)   Permanent residence;



         (c)   One mobile home for temporary use, not to exceed
12 months, while a permanent structure is being completed;



         (d)   Liquor store, bar, beer tavern, and any other
businesses engaged in selling liquor, beer, and wine;



         (e)   Major automotive repair, painting, upholstering,
and body and fender work; and



         (f)   Adult bookstore, adult live entertainment, and
adult theater (as originally defined by Ord. 55) and similar such uses,
subject to the following conditions or limitations.



            1.   None of the above listed uses may be located
within 1,000 feet of any use in the same category or of the uses listed above.



            2.   None of the above listed uses may be located
within 500 feet of a preschool, kindergarten, elementary or secondary school,
or any residential use districts, unless a petition requesting a waiver of
this requirement signed by 51% of those adults who have resided for no less
than 90 days within 500 feet of the boundary of the lot or parcel upon which
the use is proposed to be located is received and verified by the Zoning
Administration in which the Town Council may waive this requirement. The
Zoning Administration, Town Manager, or any board shall not have jurisdiction
to vary this provision.



            3.   Waiver by Town Council shall be based on the
following findings:



               a.   The proposed use will not be contrary
to the public interest, injurious to the adjacent or nearby properties, nor
contrary to policies contained in the town comprehensive plan;



               b.   The proposed use will not alter the
character of the immediate area such that it would contribute to a decline in
economic vitality, public safety, or residential property values; and



               c.   The location of the proposed use in the
area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation or
redevelopment.



            4.   If a waiver is granted by Town Council, then
a use permit shall be obtained prior to commencing the use.



            5.   The requirement for signatures of residents
who live within 500 feet of the boundary of the lot or parcel shall apply
whether or not the residents are located within the corporate limits of the
town.



            6.   The Zoning Administration shall prescribe the
form of petition. The petition shall contain such in formation as will enable
the Zoning Administration to determine whether requirements of this chapter
have been met. The nature of the proposed use shall be described prominently
at the top of each page of the petition.



            7.   These provisions shall not be construed as
permitting any use or act which is otherwise prohibited or made punishable by
law.



      (4)   The following outdoor uses shall be permitted as
conditional uses in the C-2 and C-M Districts in accordance with § 154.019:
automobile, truck, mobile home, trailers, and recreational vehicle rentals
and sales lots, new and used.



      (5)   The following uses in enclosed buildings shall be
permitted as conditional uses in the C-M Districts in accordance with §
154.019:



         (a)   Amusement parks;



         (b)   Boat building;



         (c)   Bottling works;



         (d)   Bookbinding;



         (e)   Carpenter and/or cabinet shop;



         (f)   Contractors equipment storage yard or rental of
equipment commonly used by contractors;



         (g)   Electrical sign shop;



         (h)   Firewood or lumber storage and sales;



         (i)   Foundry casting light-weight, nonferrous metal
not-causing noxious odors or fumes;



         (j)   Knitting mills;



         (k)   Machine shop;



         (l)   Meat products, packing, smoking, and curing
providing no objectionable fumes are emitted;



         (m)   Monument works;



         (n)   Radio and television transmitting towers and
facilities;



         (o)   Scientific or research laboratories;



         (p)   Television set assembling;



         (q)   Trucking dispatch, terminal, transfer company;



         (r)   Weaving mills;



         (s)   Welding shop; and



         (t)   The manufacturing, compounding, processing,
packaging, assembly, or treatment of any non-toxic, non-flammable, and
non-hazardous materials or substances.



      (6)   The following uses in enclosed buildings shall be
permitted as a conditional use only, in the C-2 Districts in accordance with
this section:



         (a)   Medical marijuana dispensary owned and operated as
a non-profit entity; or



         (b)   Medical marijuana cultivation or infusion facility
owned and operated as a non-profit entity.



   (F)   Area, height, setback regulations. The following requirements
shall be observed.



 


Zoning District

 

Minimum Yard Setbacks

 

Max-Height





 

Front

 

Side

 

Street Side

 

Rear

 





C-1

 

25’

 

12’

 

15’

 

15’

 

30’




C-2

 

20’

 

12’

 

15’

 

15’

 

30’




C-Mix

 

30’

 

20’

 

30’

 

30’

 

40’



The minimum provisions listed above shall not apply to any lot of smaller
size already of record in the office of the County Recorder of Maricopa
County, Arizona, before the effective date of this chapter.



 



   (G)   Off-street parking and loading. Spaces for off-street parking
and loading shall be provided according to the business use as specified in
§§ 154.120 through 154.125.



   (H)   Required site plan. All uses in these districts shall be
subject to the site plan review as designated in § 154.035.



   (I)   Performance standards.



      (1)   No use shall be established, maintained, or conducted in
any commercial district which may cause any of the following:



         (a)   Dissemination of smoke, gas, dust, odor, or any
other atmosphere pollutant outside the building in which the use is conducted
or with respect to a use or any part thereof that is not conducted within a
completely enclosed building, any dissemination whatsoever;



         (b)   Noise perceptible beyond the boundaries of the
immediate site;



         (c)   Discharge of any waste material into any
watercourse or ditch;



         (d)   Dissemination of glare or vibration beyond the
immediate site of the use; and



         (e)   Traffic hazards or by reason of fire, explosion,
radioactive, or similar cause to property on the same or any adjacent
district.



      (2)   All principal buildings and all accessory buildings or
structures, including loading and unloading facilities, shall be located at
least 100 feet from any “R” District boundary.



      (3)   The Town Council may, as a condition for securing
necessary permits for building and occupancy, require all operations,
including the storage of anything except merchandise displayed for sale, to
be conducted in a fully enclosed building or entirely behind walls or fences
and for planting screens which fully conceal them from visibility off the lot.



      (4)   No merchandise shall be displayed for sale or rent in
any required yard abutting a public street.



(Ord. 89-06, passed 8-10-1989; Ord. 2002-06, passed 4-25-2002; Ord. 2005-01,
passed 4-28-2005; Ord. 2017-02, passed 3-23-2017)



§ 154.068  PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT (PAD).



   (A)   Intent. The PAD District is intended and designed to: provide
a means for development on a unit basis, ensuring orderly and thorough
planning that will result in high quality urban design; encourage variety in
architectural design through techniques, including, but not limited to,
variations in building style, lot arrangements, and site planning; establish
procedures that would reduce inequities occurring when strict application of
zoning regulations pertaining primarily to small lots are applied to large
lots; encourage innovative site planning, including, but not limited to, the
preservation of natural character of the land and economy in construction and
maintenance of streets and utilities; permit flexibility in design such that
development would produce maximum choice in the type of environment, living
units, commercial installations, and facilities available to the public; and
produce an efficient, aesthetic, and desirable use of open space.



   (B)   Procedure.



      (1)   The owner or owners of any tract of land may submit to
the Town Manager/Clerk, be accompanied by five copies of a development plan,
which shall consist of a complete set of drawings and specifications for the
proposed use and development of the entire tract of land. It shall be
reviewed for conformity with the comprehensive plan, and with recognized
principles of architectural design, land use planning, and landscape
architecture. The Council may approve or disapprove the plan as submitted or
may require that the applicant amend the plan as it deems necessary to
effectuate the intent and purpose of this chapter.



      (2)   (a)   If the Council approves the preliminary plan
and request for rezoning, the applicant shall submit within one year, five
copies of the final development plan for not less than one of the proposed
development. The final development plan shall then be reviewed for compliance
with the PAD standards and substantial compliance with the preliminary plan.
The Council shall review the final development plan for its compliance with
the standards of this chapter and its substantial compliance with the
preliminary development plan.



         (b)   The final development plan and final plat shall be
approved by the Council and the final plat duly recorded before any building
permit is issued.



      (3)   (a)   The Council may make the approval of the
development plan contingent upon the completion of construction and
improvements within a reasonable period of time. Failure to complete all
improvements within said period of time shall be deemed sufficient cause for
the Council to rescind the rezoning unless, an extension is requested by the
developer or owner and approved by the Council.



         (b)   Any proposed change in the development plan after
approval by the Council shall be considered in the same manner as the
original proposal.



   (C)   Plan requirements.



      (1)   The preliminary development plan shall contain at a
minimum the following information:



         (a)   Relationship of the property to the surrounding
areas that will be affected by the proposed PAD;



         (b)   Proposed pattern of land uses including areas to
be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved for parks, parkways, playgrounds, school
sites, public buildings, and other similar public and semi-public uses; and



         (c)   Schematic site plan for each building site and
common open areas, showing the approximate location of all structures,
buildings, and improvements, except for single-family detached units which
shall be indicated by lot location.



      (2)   The final development plan shall contain, where
applicable, the following information:



         (a)   All information contained in the preliminary
development plan as refined and revised;



         (b)   A map of the entire PAD showing topographic data
sufficient to indicate the character of the terrain, other natural features
and existing development to be retained;



         (c)   Plans and elevations of all building types;



         (d)   Schematic grading plans including proposed
treatment of slopes and drainage plans;



         (e)   The number of dwelling units by dwelling type;



         (f)   Projection of school enrollment generated by PAD;



         (g)   Street and lot patterns and building siting
envelopes showing setbacks;



         (h)   Projection of traffic volumes within PAD and
volumes generated by the PAD that will be added to streets in the vicinity;



         (i)   Evidence of consultation with affected public
agencies, including, but not limited to, school districts, flood control
districts, the state’s Division of Highways, and coordination with plans of
other appropriate agencies;



         (j)   Any applicable standards of design and
construction procedures for plan submission that may be related to the
subdivision ordinance of the town;



         (k)   Proposed ownership, method of financing
improvements, and maintenance of open space; if the proposed development
includes common land which will not be dedicated by the town, the proposed
by-laws of a homeowner’s association fully defining the functions,
responsibilities, and operating procedures of the association shall be
included; proposed by-laws shall include, but not be limited to, provisions:



            1.   Requiring membership in the association by
all owners of dwelling units within the development;



            3.   Granting to each owner of a dwelling unit
within the development the right to the use and enjoyment of the common
property in the association;



            4.   Placing the responsibility for operation and
maintenance of the common property in the association;



            5.   Giving every owner of a dwelling unit voting
rights in the association; and



            6.   If the development will combine rental and
for sale dwelling units, stating the relationship between the renters and the
homeowner’s association and the rights renters shall have to the use of the
common land.



         (1)   Performance bond or bonds which shall insure to
the town that the dedicated public streets, utilities, and other common
development facilities shall be completed by the developer within the time
specified in the final development plan;



         (m)   Covenant to run with the land, in favor of the
town and all persons having a proprietary interest in any portion of the
development premises, that the owner of the land or successors in interest
will maintain all interior streets, parking areas, sidewalks, common land,
parks and plantings which have not been dedicated to the town in compliance
with the town ordinances; and



         (n)   Additional information required by the town.



   (D)   Standards. The land usage, minimum lot area, yard, height, and
accessory uses shall be determined by the requirements set forth below, which
shall prevail over conflicting requirements of this chapter or the Chapter
152.



      (1)   Unless otherwise waived by the Council, and as limited
in this chapter, the minimum lot, height, and yard requirements of the zoning
district in which the development is located shall apply. Waivers shall not
be granted on required yards located on development boundaries.



      (2)   The Council may require that open space or screening be
located along all or a portion of the development boundaries.



      (3)   All public streets, water mains, and sanitary sewer and
storm sewer facilities shall comply with appropriate ordinances and
specifications of the town.



      (4)   Any land gained within the development because of the
reduction in lot sizes below minimum zoning ordinance requirements shall be
placed in common land and landscaped as provided in the final development
plan. COMMON LAND, as used in this section, refers to land retained in
private ownership for the use of the residents of the development or to land
dedicated to the general public.



      (5)   Developments or portions thereof which are being
developed for sale or resale shall contain common land in area totaling not
less than 25% of the net development area.



      (6)   Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be
provided in accordance with §§ 154.120 through 154.125.



      (7)   Signs, on-site shall be subject to the provisions of
§§ 154.140 through 154.148.



(Zoning Code, Art. II Part II)




MEDICAL MARIJUANA




§ 154.080  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this section is to implement A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter
28.1, entitled “Arizona Medical Marijuana Act”.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 3-23-2017)



§ 154.081  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A medical marijuana dispensary is allowed in C-2 Districts as
a conditional use. A medical marijuana cultivation/infusion facility is
allowed in the C-2 Zoning Districts as a conditional use.



   (B)   The locations are limited to the following.



      (1)   A medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana
cultivation/infusion facility shall not be operated or maintained on a parcel
within 1,320 feet, measured by a straight line in all directions, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the
property line of a parcel where the medical marijuana dispensary or medical
marijuana cultivation/infusion facility is located to the property line of
another parcel containing the following:



         (a)   Another medical marijuana dispensary or medical
marijuana cultivation/infusion facility;



         (b)   A child care facility;



         (c)   A charter school, private school, or public school
which provides elementary, secondary, or college education;



         (d)   A church, synagogue, temple, or similar religious
worship building;



         (e)   A public park, library, community building, or any
land owned by the town or in which the town owns an interest, excluding
public streets;



         (f)   Sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, beer,
wine or spirits;



         (g)   Adult entertainment, hotel, motel, or convenience
store; or



         (h)   Domestic violence shelter, domestic violence
counseling, or drug or alcohol counseling.



      (2)   A medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana
cultivation/infusion facility shall not be operated or maintained on a parcel
within 500 feet from a residential zoning district or the property line of a
parcel solely devoted to a residential use in any zoning district, measured
by a straight line in all directions, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest point of the property line of a
parcel containing such use.



      (3)   Medical marijuana cultivation/infusion for a caregiver
or patient’s residence in a residential district is not permitted, unless
the location is greater than 25 miles from a licensed medical marijuana
dispensary as allowed by the state.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 3-23-2017)



§ 154.082  OPERATION REQUIREMENTS.



   Any medical marijuana dispensary or cultivation/infusion facility,
except within a residential home, shall comply with the following 
requirements as well as those contained within A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1.



   (A)   The business shall be located in a permanent building, with an
engineered foundation that meets the town building code, and not located in a
mobile home, trailer, cargo container, motor vehicle, or similar personal
property.



   (B)   Only one secured exterior doorway shall be allowed for the
purpose of ingress or egress. The maximum size tenant space shall be limited
to the square footage dedicated for such use with one exit. Any existing
doorways beyond this allowance shall be permanently closed by removing the
door and frame and filling in the opening with permanent construction to
match the exterior wall.



   (C)   The business and tenant space must comply with the town’s
applicable building code and fire code requirements.



   (D)   Drive-through facilities are prohibited.



   (E)   The medical marijuana dispensary is limited to the hours of
operation not earlier than 8:00 a.m. and not later than 6:00 p.m.



   (F)   Medical marijuana remnants or bi-products shall be disposed of
according to an approved plan and not placed within the facility’s exterior
refuse containers.



   (G)   There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, or odors
into the environment from the premises.



   (H)   A security plan is required, which shall include, but is not
limited to, the following:



      (1)   The single doorway for the facility shall provide a
security vision panel, employee service entrances and exits, or a 180 degree
rotatable viewer. If doorway is transparent, the door shall be designed with
a material that is either impact-resistant or restricts entry by means of a
wrought iron gate;



      (2)   Closed circuit television cameras, operating 24 hours a
day, shall be provided at the building’s exterior entrance and inside the
building at a designated service area;



      (3)   All lighting for the site shall be brought into
conformance with the current town lighting standards. The building entrance
of the business shall be illuminated from dusk till dawn, activated by
photocell relay to the lighting controller;



      (4)   No one under the age of 18 shall enter the
establishment; and



      (5)   The plan shall provide for the proper removal and
disposal of marijuana residue and by-products.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 3-23-2017)



§ 154.083  USE ACCEPTANCE.



   (A)   A zoning administrative application shall be processed,
certifying that all town regulations for the medical marijuana dispensary or
cultivation/infusion facility are in compliance with the provisions set forth
in this subchapter.



   (B)   The use shall not commence without the Zoning Administrator or
designee issuance of an acceptance letter. The application shall include, but
is not limited to, the following items:



      (1)   A project submittal form with applicable fee. In
addition to all other applicable fees, the applicant shall pay an application
fee of $5,000;



      (2)   The property owner’s letter of authorization for the
use;



      (3)   The name and location of the dispensary’s off-site
medical marijuana cultivation facility, if applicable;



      (4)   A map showing the location in compliance with the
separation requirements listed in § 154.081;



      (5)   A copy of operating procedures adopted in compliance
with A.R.S. § 36-2804(b)(l)(c);



      (6)   A site plan;



      (7)   A floor plan of the building or tenant space;



      (8)   If applicable, building permits, which require a
separate submittal, in compliance with the town’s building code and fire
code;



      (9)   A security plan, in compliance with this subchapter; and



      (10)   Proof that the applicant is a registered non-profit
entity as defined by the A.R.S. §§ 36-2801(J) and 36-2806.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 3-23-2017)



§ 154.084  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA. All parts of the genus cannabis whether growing or
not, and the seed of such plants that may be administered to treat or
alleviate a qualifying patient’s debilitating medical condition or symptoms
associated with the patient’s debilitating medical condition.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION OR INFUSION.



      (1)   Cultivation is the process by which a person grows a
marijuana plant. A facility shall mean a building, structure, or premises
used for the cultivation or storage of medical marijuana that is physically
separate and off-site from a medical marijuana dispensary.



      (2)   Infusion is the process by which medical marijuana
(cannabis) is incorporated into consumable edible goods by cooking or
blending.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A non-profit entity defined in A.R.S. §
36-2801(11) that sells, distributes, transmits, gives, dispenses, or
otherwise provides medical marijuana to qualifying patients.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA QUALIFYING PATIENT. A person who has been diagnosed
by a physician as having a debilitating medical condition as defined in
A.R.S. § 36-2801(13).



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 3-23-2017)



§ 154.085  USE REGULATIONS AND EFFECT OF SUBCHAPTER.



   (A)   Nothing herein shall be construed to allow or permit a person
to engage in, nor does it prevent the imposition of any civil, criminal, or
other penalty for engaging in the following conduct prohibited by A.R.S. §
36-2802:



      (1)   Undertaking any task under the influence of marijuana
that would constitute negligence or professional malpractice;



      (2)   Possessing or engaging in the medical use of marijuana:



         (a)   On a school bus;



         (b)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or
secondary school; or



         (c)   In any correctional facility.



      (3)   Smoking marijuana:



         (a)   On any form of public transportation; or



         (b)   In any public place.



      (4)   Operating, navigating, or being in actual physical
control of any motor vehicle, aircraft, or motorboat while under the
influence of marijuana except the registered qualifying patient shall not be
considered to be under the influence of marijuana solely because of the
presence of metabolites or components of marijuana that appear in
insufficient concentration to cause impairment; or



      (5)   Using marijuana except as authorized by law.



   (B)   Final passage of this subchapter by the Town Council shall not
be construed to rescind or revoke the authority of a marijuana dispensary or
a marijuana infusion facility to continue its lawful operation, providing it
has been issued all of the following:



      (1)   Town of business license and privilege tax license,
zoning clearance letter, final occupancy permit;



      (2)   State Department of Health Marijuana Dispensary
Registration Certificate, and/or State Department of Health Certificate for a
Marijuana Infusion Facility, and State Department of Health approval to
operate a marijuana dispensary and/or approval to operate a marijuana
infusion facility, and/or amended State Department of Health Dispensary
Registration Certificate;



      (3)   If at the time of passage of this section the holder of
an State Department of Health Medical Marijuana Registration Certificate, or
an amended State Medical Marijuana Registration Certificate, State Department
of Health Certificate for a Medical Marijuana Infusion Facility has an
application pending before the State Department of Health requesting a permit
to operate a medical marijuana dispensary and/or a medical marijuana infusion
facility and the holder has obtained from the town a zoning clearance letter,
and/or a temporary or final occupancy permit, and in the opinion of the
Zoning Administrator the applicant has expended significant sums of money in
reliance on the zoning clearance letter or other preliminary documents, the
Zoning Administrator may consider the application as being “grand
fathered” and upon receipt of final documents from the State Department of
Health approving the operation issue any final permits required by the town
to operate the dispensary or the infusion facility; and



      (4)   Should the holder of any such certificate disagree with
the decision of the Zoning Administrator concerning “grand fathered”
status, the holder may file a notice of appeal to the Town Council. Said
notice of appeal shall be filed with the Town Manager/Clerk not later than
ten business days after receipt of the decision. The Council shall hear the
appeal at a special or regular Council meeting not less than ten nor more
than 30 days after receipt of the notice of appeal unless a different time
period is mutually agreed upon.



(Ord. 2017-02, passed 3-23-2017)




LANDSCAPING, WALLS, SCREENING DEVICES, AND SWIMMING POOLS




§ 154.100  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is intended to provide standards for landscaping,
walls, and screening devices, the creation of an attractive appearance, and
by screening of uses which may be unattractive to the public eye.



(Zoning Code, Art. III Part I)



§ 154.101  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter shall apply to all new uses of land and additions to
all existing buildings and uses in all zoning districts except the one-family
districts.



(Zoning Code, Art. III Part I)



§ 154.102  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any proposed building or use other than a single-family
residence shall be clearly shown on a site plan indicating the location of
existing and proposed buildings, parking areas, street improvements, location
of landscaped areas, types of landscaping materials, watering system, walls,
and screening devices. A copy of the site plan shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator at the time of application for a building permit. The
Zoning Administrator shall review and approve the site plan prior to the
issuance of a building permit. If the building or site requires rezoning,
variance or use permit approval, or site plan review, the site plan shall be
reviewed and approved by the Council.



   (B)   Landscaping, watering devices, walls, pools, and screening
structures shall be installed in accordance with the approved site plan.



(Zoning Code, Art. III Part I)



§ 154.103  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LANDSCAPING. Include trees, shrubs, ground cover, vines, walkways,
ponds, fountains, sculpture, or other organic and inorganic materials used
for creating an attractive appearance.



   SCREENING DEVICES. Any structure installed to conceal areas used for
refuse mechanical equipment, parking (service and loading bays or lanes),
multi-family habitation, and commercial or industrial activities from
adjacent residential districts and from street views.



   WALLS or FENCES. Any structure intended for the use of confinement,
prevention of intrusion, boundary identification, or screening or an activity.



(Zoning Code, Art. III Part II)



§ 154.104  DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Each parcel shall be required to provide minimum landscaped
areas equal to 10% of the total site area.



   (B)   Landscaping shall be sufficient to meet the purpose of this
subchapter and shall be in accordance with standards as approved by the Town
Council.



   (C)   Provision shall be made for water service to all landscaped
areas requiring water.



   (D)   Lack of maintenance of the landscaped areas by the owner or
the lessor of the property shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



   (E)   All outdoor storage areas for materials, trash equipment,
vehicles, or other similar items which are located within 100 feet of a
street or a residential district shall be provided with a screening wall,
view obscuring fence, or dense hedge sufficient in height to screen such
areas from view.



   (F)   Parking areas shall be screened from street view by the use of
walls, berms, or a combination of the two to a minimum height of three feet
above the highest finished grade of the parking area. Such screening may be
supplemented by up to 25% intermittent landscaping.



   (G)    Masonry walls at least six feet in height shall be installed
along the interior boundaries of the site where the site is adjacent to or
across the alley from a residential district. Where deemed desirable,
substitution of a screening fence, landscaping screen, or a reduced height of
a fence may be permitted by the Town Council.



   (H)   All fences in the rear yard having an alley must allow for a
three-foot by eight-foot inset with a gate, for storage of garbage cans.



   (I)   All outdoor lighting shall be directed down and screened away
from adjacent properties and streets.



   (J)   Where the unusual nature, size, or location of a specified
property justifies the modification of these requirements, the Council may by
variance approve a site plan with lesser requirements than those specified in
this section.



   (K)   With Council approval, in C-2, I-1, and I-2 districts, the
fenced-in area for the storage of materials and equipment may include a
three-strand barb wire or barbed tape for maximum security.



(Zoning Code, Art. III Part II)



§ 154.105  POOLS AND SWIMMING POOLS.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      POOLS. Include swimming pools, wading pools, fish ponds, or
shallow decorative pools in hazardous locations accessible to children.



   (B)   Design and development standards.



      (1)   All swimming pools or pools hazardous to and accessible
to children shall be enclosed by a non-climbable fence not less than five
feet nor more than six feet in height so as to prevent uninvited access.



      (2)   All gates shall be self-closing and self-latching.
Exception: gates not intended to provide frequent access to the enclosed area
need not be self-closing, and may be secured by a padlock or similar device
in lieu of a latch.



      (3)   The latches shall be at least five feet above the
underlying ground or otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small
children.



(Zoning Code, Art. III Part I)




OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING




§ 154.120  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is designed to provide standards that ensure adequate
parking areas for the various uses permitted in this subchapter.



(Zoning Code, Art. IV Part I)



§ 154.121  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FLOOR AREA. The cumulative floor areas of the several floors of a
building and/or the open land area needed for service to the public as
customers, patrons, clients, or patients, including areas occupied by
fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of merchandise. It shall not
mean floors or parts of floors used principally for non-public purposes, such
as storage, automobile parking, incidental repair, processing or packaging of
merchandise, show windows, or for office incidental to the management or
maintenance of stores or buildings, or to rest rooms or powder rooms.



   OFF-STREET BOAT OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SPACE. Space which is primarily
utilized for the parking of one boat or recreational vehicle and measuring
not less than ten feet by 24 feet.



   OFF-STREET PARKING AREA. The area reserved for transient storage of
motor vehicles, including parking spaces, maneuvering areas, aisles, and
driveways completely located on the property it serves.



   OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE. A paved and properly drained parking space
for one vehicle, in the form of a rectangle not less than nine feet by 20
feet, excluding driveways or aisles, and with access to a public thoroughfare.



(Zoning Code, Art. IV Part I)



§ 154.122  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)    No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has
presented satisfactory evidence to the Zoning Administrator that he or she
owns or has otherwise available for his or her use, sufficient property to
provide the parking required as specified in this section.



   (B)   The parking requirements of this subchapter are to be met for
the addition or enlargement of an existing building or use.



   (C)   For any new buildings, building expansions, or conversions,
plans must be submitted to show how the required parking spaces shall be
arranged in the area supplied for that purpose and to indicate sufficient
space for turning maneuvers, as well as adequate ingress and egress to the
parking area before a permit is granted. All such parking plans shall be
submitted, fully dimensioned, to the Zoning Administrator.



   (D)   Whenever a building permit has been granted and the plans so
approved for off-street parking, any permanent use of such off-street parking
areas for uses other than said purpose shall constitute a violation of this
section. Should the owner or occupants of any building, to whom a permit has
been granted containing off-street parking requirements change the use to
which the building is put so as to increase the requirement for off-street
parking, it shall constitute a violation of this section, until the parking
requirements have been complied with.



   (E)   In the case of mixed uses permitted on a site, the total
requirements for off-street parking space shall be the sum of the
requirements of the various uses computed separately.



   (F)   For residential districts, recreational vehicles, boats,
trailers, house trailers, camp trailers, or campers not attached to a vehicle
shall not be parked in the required front or street side yards. In addition,
the parking of more than one commercial vehicle of not more than two-ton
capacity, or the parking of any commercial vehicle of more than two-ton
capacity, on any lot or street in any residential district shall be
considered a commercial use and is prohibited.



(Zoning Code, Art. IV Part I)  Penalty, see § 154.999



§ 154.123  PARKING DESIGN AND STANDARDS.



   (A)   For Multi-Family Residential, Commercial, Industrial, and
Planned Area Development Districts, the following shall apply.



      (1)   All off-street parking and loading areas shall be
surfaced with a permanent pavement striped to requirements herein.



      (2)   Except where a wall is required, a minimum six-inch high
curb or bumper guard shall be constructed so that no part of the vehicle
shall extend over or beyond any property line.



      (3)   Parking spaces and driveways shall be arranged to
require ingress and egress from the lot to a street by forward motion of the
vehicle.



   (B)   All required off-street parking and loading spaces shall be
connected with a public street by a paved driveway which affords safe and
convenient ingress and egress.



   (C)   All required parking spaces shall be located on the lot, or a
contiguous lot, upon which the use is located.



(Zoning Code, Art. IV Part II)



§ 154.124  PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Requirements for residential uses.



      (1)   There shall be at least two off-street parking spaces
for each single-family residence or mobile home.



      (2)   For multiple-family dwellings, there shall be at least
one space for each efficiency apartment, one and one-half spaces for each
one- and two-bedroom unit, and two spaces for each dwelling unit containing
more than two bedrooms.



   (B)   For places of public assembly.



      (1)   There shall be at least one parking space for every 400
square feet of floor area.



      (2)   Parking for restaurants, bars, and other dining
establishments, there shall be one parking space for every 50 square feet of
floor area.



      (3)   Parking for general office buildings, retail and other
commercial uses, there shall be one parking space for every 300 square feet
of floor area at each floor level.



      (4)   For industrial uses, there shall be two parking spaces
for every three employees for the shift with the greatest number of employees.



      (5)   For warehousing, there shall be one parking space for
every 1,000 square feet of the first 10,000 square feet and an additional one
parking space for every 5,000 square feet remaining of building area.



      (6)   For clinics and doctor’s offices, there shall be one
parking space for every 150 square feet of office area and one parking space
for every physician.



      (7)   For institutions of religious, charitable or
philanthropic nature, nursing homes, and convalescent homes, there shall be
one parking space for every three beds, one parking space for every three
employees, and one parking space for every physician.



      (8)   For schools, there shall be one parking space for every
three students in senior high schools and educational institutions of higher
grade level, and one parking space for every two employees and instructors.
For elementary schools and junior high schools, there shall be one parking
space for every two employees and instructors.



      (9)   For churches, there shall be one parking space for every
ten seats. Where pews are used, 20 inches of pew space shall constitute one
seat. Accessory church buildings shall be provided with parking as provided
above for office, classroom, or other uses.



      (10)   For any uses not similar to those specifically listed,
the Town Council shall determine the amount of parking spaces required.



(Zoning Code, Art. IV Part II)



§ 154.125  LOADING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   At least one loading space, ten feet in width and 35 feet in
length, shall be required for each commercial and industrial use.



   (B)   Such loading spaces shall be located in the rear yards.



(Zoning Code, Art. IV Part II)




SIGN REGULATIONS




§ 154.140  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is intended to regulate signs in order to promote the
general welfare of the community, to protect property values, to preserve the
beauty and character of the town, and to promote the public safety, welfare,
convenience, and enjoyment of travel within the town.



(Zoning Code, Art. V Part I)



§ 154.141  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   A sign permit shall be required before the erection,
re-erection, construction, maintenance, or location of all signs regulated by
this subchapter.



   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall issue a sign permit only if the
proposed sign, construction, alteration, re-erection, maintenance, and
location of the sign complies with provisions of this regulation.



   (C)   Where there is a conflict between the provisions of this
subchapter and provisions of other regulations of the town, the more
restrictive regulations shall apply.



(Zoning Code, Art. V Part I)



§ 154.142  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The source of illumination shall be screened so as not to be
visible from any adjacent property or streets.



   (B)   Signs shall be located at least five feet from any property
lines.



   (C)   All freestanding signs shall be installed with landscaped
areas at the base having a minimum area of two square feet for each square
foot of sign area and consistent with the landscaping requirements of this
subchapter.



   (D)   Non-public signs shall not encroach on public property, public
easements, or public right-of-way, unless specifically authorized by the Town
Council by a conditional use permit.



   (E)   Non-conforming signs as defined by this subchapter may be
continued in use with reasonable repair and maintenance. Any such sign which
is damaged by natural or human-made causes or vandalized must be restored
within 90 days from date of damage or shall be removed at the owner’s
expense.



(Zoning Code, Art. V Part I)  (Ord. 2002-05, passed 4-25-2002)



§ 154.143  SIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Single -family dwellings shall be permitted one
non-illuminated sign, not exceeding three square feet in area, for names and
addresses of its occupants.



   (B)   Home occupations shall be permitted one non-illuminated wall
or fascia mounted sign not to exceed 12 square feet in area.



   (C)   Public facility identification signs shall be permitted in any
zoning district. Such signs are limited to one per property, may be
illuminated and shall not exceed 24 square feet in area. Maximum height of
these signs shall not exceed eight feet. This section pertains to signs
identifying churches, schools, parks, public and private recreational
facilities, hospitals, public institutions, and other public facilities.



   (D)   For multi-family uses, not more than two signs per lot, not
exceeding 24 square feet in total sign area, nor eight feet in height for
freestanding signs, containing names and addresses of the land or building
shall be permitted.



   (E)   For C-1, C-2, I-1, I-2, and PAD zones, business identification
signs for individual businesses not within a center shall not exceed a
cumulative total of 100 square feet per property. Such signs may be wall or
fascia mounted or freestanding. Freestanding signs shall not exceed a height
of 12 feet. There shall be not more than one freestanding sign per street
frontage of property.



   (F)   For C-1, C-2, I-1, I-2, and PAD zones consisting of three or
more businesses associated by common agreement or common ownership with
common parking facilities shall be permitted as follows:



      (1)   One freestanding center identification sign shall be
permitted per street frontage not exceeding a maximum sign area of 50 square
feet and a height of 12 feet maximum.



      (2)   Business identification signs for individual businesses
within a center shall not exceed 24 square feet per business. Such signs
shall be wall or fascia mounted.



   (G)   Temporary signs shall be permitted in the C-1, C-2, I-1, I-2,
and PAD zones for a maximum of 30 consecutive days.



(Zoning Code, Art. V Part II)



§ 154.144  SIGN CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE, AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Construction specifications. All signs shall comply with the
provisions of the Uniform Building and Sign Codes.



   (B)   Sign maintenance and enforcement.



      (1)   Each sign shall be maintained in a safe, presentable,
and good condition, including the replacement of defective parts, painting,
repainting, cleaning, and other maintenance required.



      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall require compliance or
removal of any sign determined by the Town Council to be in violation of this
section.



      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall remove or cause to be
removed any abandoned, dangerous, defective, illegal, prohibited, or
non-conforming sign subject to removal which has not been removed within the
time specified. Notice shall be mailed to the property owner as shown on the
latest tax assessment roll or given to the occupant on the property or their
representative upon which the sign is located. Any person having an interest
in the sign may appeal the determination within ten days after the date of
mailing the notice. The appeal shall be heard by the Council at its next
scheduled meeting.



(Zoning Code, Art. V Part III)



§ 154.145  SIGN PERMITS AND FEES.



   (A)   Fees for signs.



      (1)   A sign permit shall be secured prior to the installation
of any signs according to the following (except billboard signs which are
controlled by §§ 154.147 and 154.148): there shall be a minimum charge of
$100 for up to two signs and $200 for three or more signs. This fee is in
addition to the fee for a building permit.



      (2)   These sign permit fees shall be doubled in the event
that any sign is installed prior to the issuance of a sign permit.



   (B)   Signs not requiring sign permits.



      (1)   No sign permit shall be required for non-illuminated
signs under three square feet used for residential purposes.



      (2)   No sign permit shall be required for temporary signs and
real estate signs which are not greater than six square feet in area.



      (3)   No sign permit shall be required for temporary political
signs.



(Zoning Code, Art. V Part IV)  (Ord. 99-01, passed 2-11-1999)



§ 154.146  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BILLBOARD SIGN. A structure on which is portrayed information which
directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, or
product not necessarily related to the other uses existing on the premises
upon which the structure is located. A sign shall be classified as a
BILLBOARD unless its advertising area is entirely devoted to identifying the
business operating on the premises or to a product that is manufactured on
the premises. The fact that a product is merely sold on the premises is not
sufficient cause for the sign classification to be deleted from the billboard
sign category.



   SIGN, AREA OF. The area in square feet of the smallest regular
geometric figures, or combination of regular geometric figures, which figure
or figures entirely enclose both the copy and facing, including
embellishments, ornamentations, or moldings of the sign and its face or faces.



(Ord. 99-02, passed 2-11-1999)



§ 154.147  BILLBOARD SIGNS.



   (A)   Billboard signs are not a permissible use as a matter of right
in any zoning district in the town.



   (B)   Billboard signs may be allowed as a conditional use in any
commercial or industrial district in the town providing that the Town Council
makes the determination that the billboard will not be detrimental to the
value of the surrounding property and will be in harmony with the existing
structures in the area.



   (C)   The granting or denial of a conditional use permit for a
billboard sign rests solely with the discretion of the Town Council. The
Council’s decision on any particular application shall set no precedence
whatsoever. Each case shall be examined on its own merits.



   (D)   If the Council elects to grant such a conditional use permit,
it shall be on such terms as the Council deems appropriate including, but not
limited to, such matters as height, size, number of facings, and duration.
However, in no case shall the permit be less restrictive than the
requirements of state law currently set forth in A.R.S. §§ 28-7902 et seq.



   (E)   No such conditional use permit shall be considered without
first holding a public hearing and giving proper notice.



(Ord. 99-02, passed 2-11-1999)



§ 154.148  FEES FOR BILLBOARD SIGNS.



   In addition to any application fees, variance fees, building permit
fees, and any other fees that may be required, there shall be a minimum fee
of $1,500 or $3 per square foot of sign area, whichever is greater.



(Ord. 99-02, passed 2-11-1999)




CITIZEN REVIEW PROCESS




§ 154.160  PROCESS.



   (A)   This subchapter shall apply to rezonings, specific plan
applications or amendments that require a hearing, and any ordinance that
adds, modifies, or removes any regulation that governs the use of an
owner’s property.



   (B)   This subchapter is adopted to comply with A.R.S. § 9-462.03.



(Ord. 2006-11, passed 12-14-2006)



§ 154.161  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Adjacent landowners and other potentially affected citizens
will be notified of any such application as set forth in A.R.S. § 9-462.04
and with additional notice as the Zoning Administrator deems necessary.



   (B)   Such notice will inform the adjacent landowners and
potentially affected citizens of the proposed rezoning, specific plan
application, or changes in regulation.



   (C)   Adjacent landowners and potentially affected citizens will be
given the opportunity to file written letters of concern with staff at least
15 days prior to any hearing.



   (D)   Staff shall provide such letters of concern to the applicant
and to the hearing body. The applicant or staff, if staff has generated the
rezoning, plan application, or change of regulations, shall address the
concern as part of its application and provide a copy of that response to the
concerned citizen who filed the letter of concern at least five days prior to
any hearing to allow the concerned citizen time to prepare a rebuttal to be
used at the hearing, if the concerned citizen chooses to do so.



   (E)   If the town staff receives more than ten letters in
opposition, the hearing body may not take action the day the hearing is
scheduled. Instead, the hearing body will hold the public hearing as
scheduled and take public comments. Thereafter, without closing the public
hearing, the hearing body will table the hearing to a date certain not more
than 15 days thereafter.



   (F)   At the continued hearing, the hearing body will listen to any
additional testimony from those who had not spoken previously. The board will
also review any additional written material submitted. Thereafter, it will
allow the applicant a reasonable time for rebuttal. The hearing body shall
then close the hearing and is free to render its decision.



   (G)   If letters of opposition or concern are received but number
less than ten, the hearing body may make its decision at the regular
scheduled hearing.



(Ord. 2006-11, passed 12-14-2006)



§ 154.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   It is hereby declared to be unlawful to construct,
erect, install, alter, change, maintain, or use any building, structure, or
fence, or to use any lot or premises contrary to or in violation of any
provision of this chapter.



      (2)   Any person, firm, or corporation whether as principal,
owner, agent, tenant, or otherwise who violates, disobeys, omits, or refuses
to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this chapter and any amendment thereto shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $300 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding three months or by both fine and imprisonment. Each day a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.



   (C)   Any violation of §§ 154.080 through 154.085 shall be
punishable as a Class 1 Misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,500
and a jail term not to exceed six months.



(Zoning Code, Art. I Part II)  (Ord. 2011-02, passed 3-24-2011; Ord.
2017-02, passed 3-23-2017)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   ZONING



      II.   TAXATION



TABLE I:  ZONING



 


Ord./Res.

 

Date Passed

 

Description





Ord. 1997-01
 
- -
 
Changes property from R-1-6 to R-2


Ord. 1997-03   
 
- -
 
Changes property from R-1-9 to R-2


Ord. 1998-01
 
- -
 
Changes property from R-1-9 to R-2


Ord. 1998-02
 
- -
 
Changes property from R-1-9 to R-2


Ord. 1998-06
 
- -
 
Changes property from public to R-3 and R-4


Ord. 2001-03
 
- -
 
Freeway annexation


Ord. 2002-04   
 
- -
 
Freeway annexation


Ord. 2004-01
 
- -
 
Rezoning 4.7 acres


Ord. 2006-05
 
- -
 
Zoning change for property from C-1 to R-1-6


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  TAXATION



 


Ord./Res.

 

Date Passed

 

Description





Ord. 1995-03
 
- -
 
Tax code


Ord. 1999-05
 
- -
 
Tax code amendment


Ord. 2002-10   
 
- -
 
Tax code


Ord. 2011-03   
 
- -
 
Tax code


Ord. 2011-04
 
- -
 
Tax code


Ord. 2011-05
 
- -
 
Tax code


Ord. 2011-06
 
- -
 
Amendments to tax code


Ord. 2011-07
 
- -
 
Tax code, correcting scrivener’s error


Ord. 90-02
 
6-14-1990
 
1990 amendments to the tax code


Ord. 94-03
 
1-12-1995
 
1995 amendments to the tax code


Ord. 96-03
 
11-21-1996
 
1996 amendments to the tax code


Ord. 98-05
 
5-14-1998
 
1998 amendments to the tax code


Res. 98-03
 
5-14-1998
 
Declaring 1998 amendments as public record


Ord. 2002-07
 
4-25-2002
 
2001 amendments to the tax code


Res. 2002-02
 
4-25-2002
 
Declaring 2001 amendments to the tax code as public record


Ord. 2002-11
 
7-11-2002
 
Adopting local audit procedures of the tax code


Ord. 2002-12
 
7-11-2002
 
2002 amendments to the tax code


Res. 2002-12
 
7-11-2002
 
Declaring local audit procedures as public record


Ord. 2003-04   
 
3-13-2003
 
2002 amendments to the tax code


Res. 2003-04
 
3-13-2003
 
Declaring 2002 amendments as public record


Ord. 2003-06
 
5-22-2003
 
Increasing tax rates relating to the privilege license tax


Ord. 2003-12
 
12-17-2003
 
Increasing tax rates relating to the privilege license tax


Ord. 2006-04
 
6-8-2006
 
2006 amendments to the tax code


Res. 2006-07
 
6-8-2006
 
Declaring 2006 amendments as public record


Ord. 2006-12   
 
12-14-2006
 
2007 amendments to the tax code


Ord. 2007-02
 
6-28-2007
 
Increasing tax rates relating to the privilege license tax


Ord. 2008-03   
 
3-27-2008
 
2008 amendments to the tax code


Res. 2008-04
 
3-27-2008
 
Declaring 2008 amendments as public record


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Arizona Revised Statutes





References to 1989 Code





References to Zoning Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO ARIZONA REVISED STATUTES



 


A.R.S. Section

 

Code Section





5-301 et seq.
 
72.08


8-201 et seq.
 
130.06


9-232.03
 
30.020


9-233
 
30.063


9-462.03
 
154.160


9-462.04
 
154.161


9-462 et seq.
 
154.031


9-499.07
 
34.06


9-499.07(D)
 
34.06


9-500.04(H)
 
93.03


9-500.21
 
93.03


9-500.27
 
93.05


10-1013
 
90.37


11-1009
 
90.25


13-3214
 
34.06


13-3601
 
34.06


13-3899
 
90.23, 90.28


13-3903
 
90.23, 90.28


16-201
 
30.045


16-211
 
30.045


Title 28
 
71.99, Ch. 74, Schd. I


Title 28, Chapter 5
 
10.99


28-101
 
72.08


28-701D
 
71.13


28-881
 
72.07


28-1381
 
34.06


28-1381 et seq.
 
34.06


28-1381(K)
 
34.06


28-1382
 
34.06


28-1382(D)
 
34.06


28-1382(E)
 
34.06


28-7902 et seq.
 
154.147


Title 32, Chapter 9, Article 2
 
34.03


Title 36, Chapter 28.1
 
154.080, 154.082


36-601.01
 
32.41


36-1601
 
91.01


36-2801(J)
 
154.083


36-2801(11)
 
154.084


36-2801(13)
 
154.084


36-2802
 
154.085


36-2804(b)(l)(c)
 
154.083


36-2806
 
154.083


38-260
 
30.007


Title 41, Chapter 37
 
150.21


41-4001(25)
 
150.21


41-4001(30)
 
150.21


Title 45, Chapter 10, Article 1402
 
152.11


48-3609
 
152.11


48-3610
 
152.11


49-471
 
93.03


49-541(1)
 
93.02


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1989 CODE



 


1989 Code Sections

 

Code Section





1-1
 
10.01


1-2
 
10.02


1-3
 
10.03


1-4
 
10.04


1-5
 
10.05


1-6
 
10.06


1-7
 
10.07


1-9
 
10.08


1-8
 
10.99


2-1-1
 
30.001


2-1-2
 
30.002


2-1-3
 
30.003


2-1-4
 
30.004


2-1-5
 
30.005


2-1-6
 
30.006


2-1-7
 
30.007


2-1-8
 
30.008


2-2-1
 
30.020


2-2-2
 
30.021


2-2-3
 
30.022


2-2-4
 
30.023


2-2-5
 
30.024


2-2-6
 
30.025


2-3-1
 
30.040


2-3-2
 
30.041


2-3-3
 
30.042


2-3-4
 
30.043


2-3-5
 
30.044


2-4-1
 
30.060


2-4-2
 
30.061


2-4-3
 
30.062


2-4-4
 
30.063


2-4-5
 
30.064


2-4-6
 
30.065


2-4-7
 
30.066


2-4-8
 
30.067


2-4-9
 
30.068


2-5-1
 
30.080


2-5-2
 
30.081


2-5-5
 
30.082


2-5-6
 
30.083


2-5-7
 
30.084


2-5-8
 
30.085


2-5-9
 
30.086


3-1-1
 
31.01


3-1-2
 
31.02


3-1-3
 
31.03


3-1-4
 
31.04


3-1-5
 
31.05


3-2-1
 
31.20


3-2-2
 
31.21


3-2-3
 
31.22


3-2-4
 
31.23


3-2-5
 
31.24


3-2-6
 
31.25


3-3-1
 
32.01


3-3-2
 
32.02


3-3-3
 
32.03


3-3-4
 
32.04


3-3-5
 
32.05


3-4-1
 
32.20


3-4-3
 
32.21


3-4-4
 
32.22


3-4-5
 
32.23


3-4-6
 
32.24


3-4-7
 
32.25


3-4-8
 
32.26


3-4-9
 
32.27


3-5
 
31.55


3-6-1
 
31.40


3-6-2
 
31.41


3-6-3
 
31.42


3-6-4
 
31.43


3-6-5
 
31.44


4-1-1
 
33.01


4-1-2
 
33.02


4-1-3
 
33.03


4-1-4
 
33.04


4-1-5
 
33.05


4-1-6
 
33.06


4-1-7
 
33.07


4-2-1
 
33.20


4-2-2
 
33.21


4-2-3
 
33.22


4-2-4
 
33.23


4-2-5
 
33.24


4-2-6
 
33.25


4-2-7
 
33.26


4-2-8
 
33.27


4-2-9
 
33.28


4-2-10
 
33.29


4-2-11
 
33.30


4-3
 
33.31


6-1-1
 
90.01


6-1-2
 
90.02


6-1-3
 
90.03


6-1-4
 
90.04


6-1-5
 
90.05


6-1-6
 
90.06


6-2-1
 
90.20


6-2-2
 
90.21


6-2-3
 
90.22


6-2-4
 
90.23


6-2-5
 
90.24


6-2-6
 
90.25, 90.99


6-2-7
 
90.26


6-2-8
 
90.27


6-2-9
 
90.28


6-2-10
 
90.29


6-2-11
 
90.30


6-2-12
 
90.31


6-2-13
 
90.32


6-2-14
 
90.33


6-2-15
 
90.35


6-2-16
 
90.36


6-2-17
 
90.37


7-1-1
 
150.01


7-1-2
 
150.02


7-2
 
150.15


7-3
 
150.16


7-4
 
150.17


7-5
 
150.19


7-6
 
150.20


8-1-1
 
110.01


8-1-2
 
110.02


8-1-3
 
110.03


8-1-4
 
110.04


8-1-5
 
110.05


8-1-6
 
110.06


8-1-7
 
110.07


8-1-8
 
110.08


8-2-1
 
111.01


8-2-2
 
111.02


8-2-3
 
111.03


8-2-4
 
111.04


8-2-5
 
111.05


8-2-6
 
111.06


8-2-7
 
111.07


8-2-8
 
111.08


8-3-1
 
112.01


8-3-2
 
112.02


8-3-3
 
112.03


8-3-4
 
112.04


8-3-5
 
112.05


8-3-6
 
112.06


8-3-7
 
112.07


8-3-8
 
112.08


8-3-9
 
112.09


8-3-10
 
112.10


8-4
 
111.09


9-1
 
35.01


10-1-1
 
92.01


10-1-2
 
92.02


10-1-3
 
92.03


10-1-4
 
92.04


10-1-5
 
92.05


10-2-1
 
92.20


10-2-2
 
92.21


10-2-3
 
92.22


10-2-4
 
92.23, 92.99


10-3-1
 
92.35


10-3-2
 
92.36


10-3-3
 
92.37


10-4-1
 
92.50


10-4-2
 
92.51, 92.99


10-4-3
 
92.52, 92.99


10-4-4
 
92.53, 92.99


10-4-5
 
92.54


10-4-6
 
92.55


10-4-7
 
92.56


10-4-8
 
92.57


10-4-9
 
92.58


10-4-10
 
92.59


11-1-1
 
151.01


11-1-2
 
151.02


11-1-3
 
151.03


11-1-4
 
151.04


11-1-5
 
151.05


11-1-6
 
151.06


11-1-7
 
151.07


11-1-8
 
151.08


11-1-9
 
151.09


11-1-10
 
151.10


11-1-11
 
151.11, 151.99


11-1-12
 
151.12


11-1-13
 
151.13


11-1-15
 
151.14


11-2-1
 
151.25


11-2-2
 
151.26


11-2-3
 
151.27


11-2-4
 
151.28


11-3-1
 
151.40


11-3-2
 
151.41


11-3-3
 
151.42


11-3-4
 
151.43


12-1-2
 
130.02


12-1-3
 
130.03


12-1-4
 
130.04


12-1-5
 
130.05


12-1-6
 
130.06


12-1-7
 
130.07


12-1-8
 
130.08


12-1-10
 
130.09


12-1-11
 
130.10


12-1-12
 
130.11


12-1-13
 
130.12


12-1-15
 
130.13


12-2-1
 
97.01, 97.99


12-2-2
 
97.02


12-2-3
 
97.03


12-2-4
 
97.04


12-3
 
131.01


13-1-1
 
70.01


13-1-2
 
70.02


13-1-3
 
70.03


13-1-4
 
70.04


13-1-5
 
70.05


13-2-1
 
71.01


13-2-2
 
71.02


13-2-3
 
71.03


13-2-4
 
71.04


13-2-5
 
71.05


13-2-6
 
71.06


13-2-7
 
71.07


13-2-8
 
71.08


13-2-9
 
71.09


13-2-10
 
71.10


13-2-11
 
71.11


13-2-12
 
71.12


13-2-13
 
71.13


13-3-1
 
72.01


13-3-2
 
72.02


13-3-3
 
72.03


13-3-4
 
72.04


13-3-5
 
72.05


13-3-6
 
72.06


13-3-7
 
72.07


13-4-1
 
96.01


13-4-2
 
96.02


13-4-3
 
96.03


13-4-6
 
96.99


14-1
 
50.001


14-2-1
 
50.003


14-2-2
 
50.004


14-3-1
 
50.015


14-3-2
 
50.016


14-3-3
 
50.017


14-3-4
 
50.018


14-3-5
 
50.020


14-3-6
 
50.021


14-3-7
 
50.023


14-3-8
 
50.024


14-4-1
 
50.040


14-4-2
 
50.042


14-4-4
 
50.044


14-5-1
 
50.055


14-5-2
 
50.056


14-5-3
 
50.057


15-1-1
 
152.01


15-1-2
 
152.02


15-1-3
 
152.03


15-2
 
152.04


15-3
 
152.05


15-4
 
152.06


15-5
 
152.07


15-6
 
152.08


15-7
 
152.09


15-8
 
152.10, 152.99


15-9
 
152.11


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ZONING CODE



 


Zoning Code Reference

 

Code Section





Art. I Part I
 
154.001, 154.002


Art. I Part II
 
154.015 - 154.019, 154.999


Art. I Part III
 
154.030 - 154.037


Art. I Part IV
 
154.003


Art. II Part I
 
154.050


Art. II Part II
 
154.051 - 154.053, 154.065, 154.066, 154.068


Art. III Part I
 
154.100 - 154.102, 154.105


Art. III Part II
 
154.103, 154.104


Art. IV Part I
 
154.120 - 154.122


Art. IV Part II
 
154.123 - 154.125


Art. V Part I
 
154.140 - 154.142


Art. V Part II
 
154.143


Art. V Part III
 
154.144


Art. V Part IV
 
154.145


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 


Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Code Section





96-17
 
12-12-1996
 
153.01 - 153.04, 153.15 - 153.20, 153.35 - 153.46, 153.60 - 153.65


98-03
 
5-14-1998
 
TSO Table II


99-21
 
11-18-1999
 
71.14, 71.99


2002-02
 
4-25-2002
 
TSO Table II


2002-12
 
7-11-2002
 
TSO Table II


2003-04
 
3-13-2003
 
TSO Table II


2006-07
 
6-8-2006
 
TSO Table II


2008-04
 
3-27-2008
 
TSO Table II


2017-01
 
- -2017
 
30.060


 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 


Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Code Section





1995-03
 
- -
 
TSO Table II


1997-01
 
- -
 
TSO Table I


1997-03
 
- -
 
TSO Table I


97-04
 
- -
 
71.99


1998-01
 
- -
 
TSO Table I


1998-02
 
- -
 
TSO Table I


1998-06
 
- -
 
TSO Table I


1999-05
 
- -
 
TSO Table II


2001-03
 
- -
 
TSO Table I


2002-04
 
- -
 
TSO Table I


2002-10
 
- -
 
TSO Table II


2004-01
 
- -
 
TSO Table I


2006-05
 
- -
 
TSO Table I


2011-03
 
- -
 
TSO Table II


2011-04
 
- -
 
TSO Table II


2011-05
 
- -
 
TSO Table II


2011-06
 
- -
 
TSO Table II


2011-07
 
- -
 
TSO Table II


89-04
 
7-13-1989
 
90.20, 90.30, 90.33, 90.35


89-05
 
8-3-1989
 
113.002


89-06
 
8-10-1989
 
154.067


89-07
 
8-24-1989
 
50.001 - 50.004, 50.015 - 50.025, 50.040 - 50.044, 50.055 - 50.057, 50.070 -
50.078, 50.090 - 50.092, 50.999


90-02
 
6-14-1990
 
TSO Table II


90-03
 
6-28-1990
 
131.02


90-04
 
8-8-1990
 
10.99


90-06
 
9-13-1990
 
131.15, 131.16, 131.99


1991-01
 
2-14-1991
 
10.99


92-01
 
6-25-1992
 
30.060


92-02
 
7-23-1992
 
31.20


92-03
 
7-23-1992
 
31.21


92-07
 
12-10-1992
 
111.08


94-01
 
9-22-1994
 
31.26


94-03
 
1-12-1995
 
TSO Table II


95-01
 
3-9-1995
 
73.99


95-02
 
8-24-1995
 
150.18, 150.99


96-03
 
11-21-1996
 
TSO Table II


98-04
 
3-26-1998
 
130.14, 130.99


98-03
 
4-26-1998
 
110.09, 110.99


98-05
 
5-14-1998
 
TSO Table II


98-07
 
12-22-1998
 
154.066


99-01
 
2-11-1999
 
154.145


99-02
 
2-11-1999
 
154.146 - 154.148


99-03
 
2-11-1999
 
72.04


99-06
 
11-18-1999
 
71.14, 71.99


2000-01
 
1-13-2000
 
72.08


2000-02
 
6-8-2000
 
30.064


2001-01
 
1-25-2001
 
33.31, 150.01, 150.15 - 150.17


2001-02
 
2-22-2001
 
31.20


2001-07
 
9-27-2001
 
73.01 - 73.05, 73.99


2001-08
 
10-11-2001
 
33.20 - 33.24


2001-09
 
11-8-2001
 
150.21


2003-03
 
2-28-2002
 
34.01 - 34.05, 34.20 - 34.27


2002-05
 
4-25-2002
 
154.142


2002-06
 
4-25-2002
 
154.067


2002-07
 
4-25-2002
 
TSO Table II


2002-08
 
5-9-2002
 
32.40 - 32.48, 32.99


2002-11
 
7-11-2002
 
TSO Table II


2002-12
 
7-11-2002
 
TSO Table II


2003-02
 
2-13-2003
 
94.01, 94.99


2003-04
 
3-13-2003
 
TSO Table II


2003-06
 
5-22-2003
 
TSO Table II


2003-07
 
9-25-2003
 
113.001, 113.015 - 113.026, 113.040 - 113.048, 113.060 - 113.066, 113.080 -
113.086, 113.100 - 113.110, 113.125 - 113.139, 113.999


2003-08
 
9-25-2003
 
130.06, 130.99


2003-09
 
9-25-2003
 
97.01, 97.99


2003-10
 
10-23-2003
 
90.20, 90.24, 90.28


2003-11
 
11-20-2003
 
95.01 - 95.14, 95.99


2003-12
 
12-17-2003
 
TSO Table II


2005-01
 
4-28-2005
 
154.066, 154.067


2005-02
 
6-9-2005
 
111.10


2005-03
 
6-9-2005
 
71.99


2005-04
 
6-9-2005
 
34.03


2005-07
 
6-9-2005
 
72.06


2005-09
 
9-8-2005
 
10.09, 30.065


2005-11
 
10-27-2005
 
94.02, 94.99


2005-10
 
12-8-2005
 
111.08


2006-01
 
3-9-2006
 
150.01


2006-02
 
3-23-2006
 
73.99


2006-03
 
3-23-2006
 
50.022


2006-04
 
6-8-2006
 
TSO Table II


2006-11
 
12-14-2006
 
154.160, 154.161


2006-12
 
12-14-2006
 
TSO Table II


2007-02
 
6-28-2007
 
TSO Table II


2008-03
 
6-28-2007
 
111.09


2007-04
 
7-12-2007
 
95.05


2007-05
 
10-11-2007
 
30.066


2008-03
 
3-27-2008
 
TSO Table II


2008-08
 
4-3-2008
 
93.01 - 93.11, 93.99


2008-05
 
8-28-2008
 
30.001, 30.003, 30.020


2010-01
 
4-8-2010
 
130.06


2010-02
 
11-10-2010
 
130.04


2010-03
 
11-10-2010
 
34.06


2011-02
 
3-24-2011
 
154.999


2012-02
 
7-27-2012
 
150.01


2012-03
 
7-27-2012
 
32.20


2014-01
 
1-23-2014
 
34.02


2014-03
 
8-14-2014
 
32.40, 32.41, 32.45, 32.48, 32.99


2015-02
 
2-12-2015
 
130.01, 130.99


2015-03
 
5-14-2015
 
90.34


2016-02
 
9-8-2016
 
51.01 - 51.10, 51.99


2017-01
 
2-16-2017
 
152.11, 152.99


2017-02
 
3-23-2017
 
154.067, 154.080 - 154.085, 154.999


2017-03
 
7-13-2017
 
91.01 - 91.07, 91.99


 
 
 
 
 




 


