


CHAPTER 1: General Provisions

Article

1-1.    CODE DESIGNATION AND CITATION

1-2.    CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES

1-3.    DEFINITIONS

1-4.    REFERENCE TO CHAPTERS, ARTICLES OR SECTIONS; CONFLICTING PROVISIONS

1-5.    SECTION HEADINGS

1-6.    EFFECT OF REPEAL

1-7.    SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE

1-8.    PENALTY

1-9.    REPEAL OF EXISTING ORDINANCE

1-10.    EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE


ARTICLE 1-1 Code Designation and Citation

Section

1-1-1    How code designated and cited


1-1-1 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.

The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated The Code of the City of Goodyear, Arizona, and may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as the Goodyear City Code.

(Prior Code, Art. 1-1)


ARTICLE 1-2 Construction of Ordinances

Section

1-2-1    Construction of ordinances


1-2-1 CONSTRUCTION OF ORDINANCES.

The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall be observed in the construction of this code and the ordinances of the city unless such construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest intent of the Council or the context of the Charter, this code or the ordinances of the city.

(Prior Code, Art. 1-2)


ARTICLE 1-3 Definitions

Section

1-3-1    General rule regarding definitions

1-3-2    Definitions and interpretations

1-3-3    Definition of community development


1-3-1 GENERAL RULE REGARDING DEFINITIONS.

All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved use of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.

(Prior Code, § 1-3-1)


1-3-2 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

(A) Acts by agents. When an act is required to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirements shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.

(B) AND, OR. AND may be read or, and OR may be read and, if the sense requires it.

(C) BOND. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient.

(D) CHARTER. The Charter of the City of Goodyear.

(E) CITY. The City of Goodyear, Maricopa County, Arizona, except as otherwise provided. The words IN THE CITY or WITHIN THE CITY shall mean and include all territory over which the city has jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers as authorized by statute.

(F) CODE. The municipal code of the City of Goodyear, unless the context indicates otherwise.

(G) COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Goodyear.

(H) COUNTY. Maricopa County, Arizona, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

(I) DAY. The period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.

(J) DAYTIME, NIGHTTIME. DAYTIME is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. NIGHTTIME is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.

(K) DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE. Whenever any DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, OFFICE, OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE is referred to, it shall mean a department, board, commission, office, officer or employee of the city unless the context requires otherwise.

(L) Gender; singular and plural. Words of the masculine gender include the feminine; words in the singular include the plural and words in the plural include the singular.

(M) Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more city officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority.

(N) KEEPER, PROPRIETOR. Includes persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through an agent, servant or employee.

(O) MONTH. A calendar month.

(P) OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.

(Q) OWNER. Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of part of such building or land.

(R) PERSON. Includes a corporation, company, partnership, association or society as well as a natural person.

(S) PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property, except real property as defined in this section.

(T) PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.

(U) PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and personal property.

(V) PUBLIC PLACE. Any thoroughfare, park, open space or building not privately owned or controlled.

(W) REAL PROPERTY. Lands, tenements and hereditaments.

(X) SHALL, MAY. SHALL is mandatory and MAY is permissive.

(Y) SHALL HAVE BEEN. Includes past and future tenses.

(Z) SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

(AA) SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION BY MARK. Includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his or her own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.

(BB) STATE. The State of Arizona unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

(CC) STREET. Any alley, lane, court, boulevard, public way, public square, public place, sidewalk or thoroughfare.

(DD) TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land shall include any person holding a written or an oral lease of or who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, either alone or with others.

(EE) Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present.

(FF) Time; computation. The time within which an act is to be done as provided in this code or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday it shall be excluded; and when such time is expressed in hours, the whole of Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded.

(GG) Time; reasonable. In all cases where any section of this code shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.

(HH) WEEK. A week consists of seven consecutive days.

(II) WRITING. Any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless expressly provided otherwise.

(JJ) YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise provided.

(Prior Code, § 1-3-2)


1-3-3 DEFINITION OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.

For the purpose of the municipal code of the City of Goodyear, the term COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT shall mean "Development Services."

(Ord. 12-1258, passed 6-11-2012)


ARTICLE 1-4 Reference to Chapters, Articles or Sections; Conflicting Provisions

Section

1-4-1    Additional rules of construction

1-4-2    References to this code

1-4-3    Conflicting provisions-different chapters

1-4-4    Conflicting provisions-same chapter


1-4-1 ADDITIONAL RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.

In addition to the rules of construction specified in Articles 1-2 and 1-3, the rules set forth in this article shall be observed in the construction of this code.

(Prior Code, § 1-4-1)


1-4-2 REFERENCES TO THIS CODE.

All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this code unless otherwise specified.

(Prior Code, § 1-4-2)


1-4-3 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS – DIFFERENT CHAPTERS.

If the provisions of different chapters of this code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of such chapter.

(Prior Code, § 1-4-3)


1-4-4 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS – SAME CHAPTER.

If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same chapter, the provisions of the section which is last in numerical order shall prevail unless such construction is inconsistent with the meaning of such chapter.

(Prior Code, § 1-4-4)


ARTICLE 1-5 Section Headings

Section

1-5-1    Section headings


1-5-1 SECTION HEADINGS.

Headings of the several sections of this code are intended as a convenience to indicate the contents of the section and do not constitute part of the law.

(Prior Code, Art. 1-5)


ARTICLE 1-6 Effect of Repeal

Section

1-6-1    Effect of repeal


1-6-1 EFFECT OF REPEAL.

When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed.

(Prior Code, Art. 1-6)


ARTICLE 1-7 Severability of Parts of Code

Section

1-7-1    Severability of parts of code


1-7-1 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.

It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code shall be severable, and, if any provision of this code is held unconstitutional for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of the code.

(Prior Code, Art. 1-7)


ARTICLE 1-8 Penalty

Section

1-8-1    Penalty

1-8-2    Collections


1-8-1 PENALTY.

(A) Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this code, except as otherwise provided in this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $2,500 for an individual and not more than $20,000 for an enterprise or by imprisonment for a period of not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described. The term ENTERPRISE as used in this subsection shall mean any corporation, partnership, association, labor union or other entity or any group of persons associated in part although not a legal entity.

(Am. Ord. 92-450, passed 1-14-1992)

(B) Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any act required by Chapter 13 of this code constitutes a civil traffic violation. Civil traffic violations are subject to the provisions of A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 6, Arts. 20 and 21 and amendments thereto.

(C) Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in this code providing for enforcement of violations of this code as misdemeanors, violations of any provision of this code and violations of any proscription, requirement or duty set forth in any ordinance incorporated into this code or any other ordinance of the city are declared to be civil code violations which may be adjudicated and enforced by the city court pursuant to Chapter 18 of this code, as an additional enforcement alternative to other remedies provided in this section or remedies and procedures provided for specifically in this code or other ordinance. Use of this civil code enforcement alternative is not mandatory and shall be at the discretion of the city official undertaking enforcement action on an alleged violation of this code or other ordinance.

(Am. Ord. 93-481, passed 3-23-1993)

(Prior Code, Art. 1-8)


1-8-2 COLLECTIONS.

(A) All monies owed or due to the City, regardless of the origination of the debt or the identity of the debtor, which remain unpaid 30 days after the due date shall be assessed the following additional fees:

(1) A billing late fee of 1.5% per month, compounded daily after the due date, on to any balance owed;

(2) A fee of 20% of the unpaid balance on each debt will be added if the debt goes to collections;

(3) Any interest, fee, charge or expense, attorney fees, court costs and any other normal and customary costs of collection.

(B) The provisions identified in subsection (A) of this section shall be considered to be in addition to any provisions that may be provided in a written agreement between the parties.

(C) No debt may be assigned to a collection agency unless

(1) The debt is 30 days past due; and

(2) The debtor has been advised of the existence of the debt.

(a) The invoice or statement provided to the debtor shall be considered sufficient notice of the monies due. It is sufficient if the invoice or statement is provided in person, or mailed or emailed to the debtor’s address on record with the City.

(D) Insufficient check fee. Any checks returned to the City by the bank unpaid regardless of the reason may be required to pay an additional fee in amount set by resolution of Council.

(E) In addition to any other rights and remedies available to the City, the City is authorized to institute any appropriate civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of the past due debt, including but not limited to all fees, interests, and costs.

(Ord. 11-1237, passed 5-9-2011)


ARTICLE 1-9 Repeal of Existing Ordinance

Section

1-9-1    Effective date of repeal

1-9-2    Ordinances exempt from repeal


1-9-1 EFFECTIVE DATE OF REPEAL.

All ordinances of the city except those specially exempted in this article, now in force and effect are repealed effective at 12:00 noon on the April 26, 1989, but all rights, duties and obligations created by said ordinances shall continue and exist in all respects as if this code had not been adopted and enacted.

(Prior Code, § 1-9-1)


1-9-2 ORDINANCES EXEMPT FROM REPEAL.

The adoption and enactment of this code shall not be construed to repeal or in any way to modify or affect:

(A) Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding franchises, annexations, dedications or zoning;

(B) Any ordinance making an appropriation;

(C) Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any bond issue may have been authorized;

(D) The running of the statute of limitations in force at the time this code becomes effective;

(E) The continued existence and operation of any department, agency, commission or office heretofore legally established or held;

(F) Any bond of any public officer;

(G) Any taxes, fees, assessments or other charges incurred or imposed;

(H) Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming, approving or accepting any compact or contract with any other municipality, the State of Arizona or any county or subdivision thereof or with the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof.

(Prior Code, § 1-9-2)


ARTICLE 1-10 Effective Date of Code

Section

1-10-1    Effective date of code


1-10-1 EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE.

Each and every section of this code as herein contained and hereby enacted shall take effect and be in force on and after 12:00 noon on April 26, 1989, except that where a later effective date is provided it shall prevail.

(Prior Code, Art. 1-10)


CHAPTER 2: Mayor and Council

Article

2-1.    COUNCIL

2-2.    MAYOR

2-3.    ELECTION

2-4.    COUNCIL PROCEDURE

2-5.    ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS


ARTICLE 2-1 Council

Section

2-1-1    Elected officers

2-1-2    Corporate powers

2-1-3    Duties of office

2-1-4    Vacancies in Council

2-1-5    Compensation

2-1-6    Oath of office

2-1-7    Bond

2-1-8    Financial disclosure statement


2-1-1 ELECTED OFFICERS.

(A) The elected officers of the city shall be a Mayor and six Council members. The Mayor and Council members shall constitute the Council and shall continue in office until assumption of duties of office by their duly elected successors.

(B) The term of office of the Mayor shall be four years.

(C) Council members shall serve four year overlapping terms in the manner provided by state statute.

(Prior Code, § 2-1-1) (Am. Ord. 06-1035, passed 11-13-2006)


2-1-2 CORPORATE POWERS.

The corporate powers of the city shall be vested in the Council and shall be exercised only as directed or authorized by law. All powers of the Council shall be exercised by ordinance, resolution, order or motion.

(Prior Code, § 2-1-2)


2-1-3 DUTIES OF OFFICE.

The Mayor and members of the Council shall assume the duties of office at the first regular meeting of the Council in June following the date of the general election at which, or effective as of the date of which, the Mayor and Council members were elected.

(Prior Code, § 2-1-3) (Am. Ord. 06-1035, passed 11-13-2006)


2-1-4 VACANCIES IN COUNCIL.

Vacancies on the Council shall be filled as provided in the Charter.

(Prior Code, § 2-1-4)


2-1-5 COMPENSATION.

The compensation for the Mayor and City Council shall be fixed by ordinance adopted not less than 120 days prior to the next municipal election and shall be effective only for terms of office beginning after such election.

(A) Compensation of Mayor. The Mayor of the City of Goodyear will be compensated for his or her duties at the rate of $30,000 annually.

(B) Compensation of Vice Mayor. The Vice Mayor of the City of Goodyear will be compensated for his or her duties at the rate of $16,500 annually.

(C) Compensation of Councilmembers. Each member of the City Council not serving as Mayor or Vice Mayor shall be compensated for his or her duties at the rate of $12,000 annually.

The City Council shall regularly appoint a Citizens Committee to review the compensation and benefits available to the City Council. Reviews shall take place no less than biannually in the year with no election.

(Prior Code, § 2-1-5) (Am. Ord. 00-705, passed 10-9-2000; Am. Ord. 02-822, passed 9-9-2002; Am. Ord. 06-1036, passed 11-13-2006; Am. Ord. 18-1404, passed 10-22-2018)


2-1-6 OATH OF OFFICE.

Immediately prior to assumption of the duties of office, the Mayor and each Council member shall, in public, take and subscribe to the oath of office.

(Prior Code, § 2-1-6)


2-1-7 BOND.

Prior to taking office, the Mayor and every Council member shall execute and file an official bond, enforceable against the principal and his or her sureties, conditioned on the due and faithful performance of his or her official duties, payable to the state and to and for the use and benefit of the city or any person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act or default of such officer in his or her official capacity. A person so injured or aggrieved may bring suit on such bond under provisions identical to those contained in A.R.S. § 38-260. Bonds shall be in such sum as shall be provided by resolution, and the premium for such bonds shall be paid by the city.

(Prior Code, § 2-1-7)


2-1-8 FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT.

The Mayor and each Council member shall file a financial disclosure statement in a form and with such information as provided by resolution of the Council and pursuant to state law.

(Prior Code, § 2-1-8)


ARTICLE 2-2 Mayor

Section

2-2-1    Office of Mayor

2-2-2    Vice Mayor

2-2-3    Acting Mayor

2-2-4    Powers and duties of the Mayor

2-2-5    Absence of Mayor

2-2-6    Failure to sign documents


2-2-1 OFFICE OF MAYOR.

The Mayor shall be directly elected by the qualified electors of the city.

(Prior Code, § 2-2-1)


2-2-2 VICE MAYOR.

At the first regular meeting in June following an election, the Council shall designate one of its members as Vice Mayor, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The Vice Mayor shall perform the duties of the Mayor during his or her absence or disability.

(Prior Code, § 2-2-2) (Am. Ord. 06-1035, passed 11-13-2006)


2-2-3 ACTING MAYOR.

In the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Vice Mayor, the Councilmember with the most seniority and who is available shall be Acting Mayor unless an Acting Mayor has otherwise been designated by the City Council. The Councilmember with the most seniority shall serve as the Acting Mayor until the Vice Mayor or the Mayor return to the City or are no longer disabled, or until the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting at which time the City Council shall designate an Acting Mayor if needed. The Acting Mayor shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Mayor during such absence or disability.

(Prior Code, § 2-2-3) (Am. Ord. 18-1382, passed 4-2-2018)


2-2-4 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.

The powers and duties of the Mayor shall include the following:

(A) He or she shall be the chief executive officer of the city;

(B) He or she shall be the Chairperson of the Council and preside over its meetings and shall have a vote in all its proceedings. He or she may, upon yielding the chair, make and second motions;

(C) He or she shall enforce the provisions of this code;

(D) He or she shall execute and authenticate by his or her signature such instruments as the Council or any statutes, ordinances or this code shall require;

(E) He or she shall make such recommendations and suggestions to the Council as he or she may consider proper;

(F) He or she may, by proclamation, declare a local emergency to exist due to fire, conflagration, flood, earthquake, explosion, war, bombing or any other natural or man made calamity or disaster or in the event of the threat or occurrence of riot, rout or affray or other acts of civil disobedience which endanger life or property within the city. After declaration of such emergency, the Mayor shall govern by proclamation and impose all necessary regulations to preserve the peace and order of the city, including but not limited to:

(1) Imposition of a curfew in all or any portion of the city;

(2) Ordering the closing of any business;

(3) Closing to public access any public building, street or other public place;

(4) Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations within or without the political subdivision for assistance;

(G) He or she shall perform such other duties required by state statute and this code as well as those duties required as chief executive officer of the city.

(Prior Code, § 2-2-4)


2-2-5 ABSENCE OF MAYOR.

The Mayor shall not absent himself or herself from the city for a greater period than 15 days without the consent of the Council.

(Prior Code, § 2-2-5)


2-2-6 FAILURE TO SIGN DOCUMENTS.

If the Mayor is absent or refuses or fails to sign any ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant, demand or other document or instrument requiring his or her signature for five days consecutively, then the Vice Mayor or, in his or her absence, a duly appointed Acting Mayor is authorized to sign such ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant, demand or other document or instrument which, when so signed, shall have the same force and effect as if signed by the Mayor. The Mayor shall have no veto power.

(Prior Code, § 2-2-6)


ARTICLE 2-3 Election

Section

2-3-1    Primary election

2-3-2    Non partisan ballot

2-3-3    General election nomination

2-3-4    Election to office

2-3-5    Candidate financial disclosure


2-3-1 PRIMARY ELECTION.

Any candidate who shall receive at the primary election a majority of all the votes cast shall be declared to be elected to the office for which he or she is a candidate effective as of the date of the general election, and no further election shall be held as to said candidate; provided that if more candidates receive a majority than there are offices to be filled then those equal in number to the offices to be filled receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected.

For the purposes of this section, "votes cast" shall mean a legal vote actually cast in that candidate’s race for a legally eligible candidate and excludes ballots and other votes that were not actually cast in that race including "over votes" and "under votes."

(Prior Code, § 2-3-1) (Am. Ord. 17-1367, passed 9-11-2017)


2-3-2 NON PARTISAN BALLOT.

Nothing on the ballot in any election shall be indicative of the partisan support or political affiliation of a candidate.

(Prior Code, § 2-3-2)


2-3-3 GENERAL ELECTION NOMINATION.

If at any primary election held as above, provided there be any office or offices for which no candidate is elected, then as to such office or offices, the election shall be considered to be a primary election for nomination of candidates for such office or offices, and the second or general municipal election shall be held to vote for candidates to fill such office or offices. Candidates to be placed on the ballot at such second or general municipal election shall be those not elected at such first election, shall be equal in number to twice the number to be elected to any given office or less than that number if there be less than that number named on the primary election ballot, and persons who receive the highest number of votes for the respective offices at such first election shall be the only candidates at such second election, provided that if there be any person who, under the provisions of this article, would have been entitled to become a candidate for any office except for the fact that some other candidate received an equal number of votes therefor, then all such persons receiving an equal number of votes shall likewise become candidates for such office.

(Prior Code, § 2-3-3)


2-3-4 ELECTION TO OFFICE.

The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who receive the highest number of votes shall be declared elected.

(Prior Code, § 2-3-4)


2-3-5 CANDIDATE FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.

Each candidate for the office of Mayor or Council member shall file a financial disclosure statement when such candidate files a nomination paper. The statement shall contain such information as required by resolution of the Council pursuant to state law.

(Prior Code, § 2-3-5)


ARTICLE 2-4 Council Procedure

Section

2-4-1    Open meetings

2-4-2    Regular meetings

2-4-3    Recessed meeting

2-4-4    Special meetings

2-4-5    Executive sessions

2-4-6    Council work sessions

2-4-7    Public hearings

2-4-8    Quorum; attendance of Council members; attendance of officers

2-4-9    Agenda; order of business

2-4-10    Voting

2-4-11    Boards, committees and commissions

2-4-12    Suspension of rules


2-4-1 OPEN MEETINGS.

All meetings of the Council shall be called, noticed and conducted in accordance with the Open Meetings Law of the State of Arizona being A.R.S. §§ 38-431 through 38-431.09.

(Prior Code, § 2-4-1)


2-4-2 REGULAR MEETINGS.

Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the second and fourth Mondays of each month. The location and the starting time shall clearly be identified on the agenda of the meeting and posted on the City’s website. Notice of a change of any meeting place, date or time shall be given as required by law.

(Prior Code, § 2-4-2) (Am. Ord. 97-595, passed --; Am. Ord. 01-756, passed 5-2-2001; Am. Ord. 02-784, passed 1-28-2002; Am. Ord. 03-860, passed 8-11-2003; Am. Ord. 11-1251, passed 12-12-2011; Am. Ord. 16-1330, passed 7-11-2016; Am. Ord. 18-1392, passed 7-9-2018)


2-4-3 RECESSED MEETING.

A recessed meeting is the continuation of a regular or special meeting that is recessed prior to adjournment; the date, time and place of the resumption of the meeting shall be announced prior to such recess.

(Prior Code, § 2-4-3) (Am. Ord. 11-1251, passed 12-12-2011)


2-4-4 SPECIAL MEETINGS.

Special meetings may be called as provided in Charter, Article II, Section 17.

(Prior Code, § 2-4-4)


2-4-5 EXECUTIVE SESSIONS.

Executive sessions of the Council shall be subject to call and notice as provided in the open meetings law. An executive session may be held before, during or after a regular or special meeting of the Council or at such other time as the Council shall determine.

(Prior Code, § 2-4-5) (Am. Ord. 11-1251, passed 12-12-2011)


2-4-6 COUNCIL WORK SESSIONS.

The Council may convene work sessions at such times and at such places as it may find convenient subject to the open meetings law. The business to be considered shall be stated in the notice, and no formal action shall be taken on any matter considered at a work session.

(Prior Code, § 2-4-6)


2-4-7 PUBLIC HEARINGS.

The Council may call a public hearing to receive evidence on any matter properly before it. A public hearing shall be subject to the open meetings law and may be held before, during or after a meeting of the Council or at such other time as the Council may deem expedient. The agenda for a public hearing shall be in substantially the form specified in the City Council Meetings Rules of Procedure as adopted by resolution of the City Council.

(Prior Code, § 2-4-7) (Am. Ord. 18-1392, passed 7-9-2018)


2-4-8 QUORUM; ATTENDANCE OF COUNCIL MEMBERS; ATTENDANCE OF OFFICERS.

(A) A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of the Council, which includes the Mayor.

(B) All members of the Council, including the Mayor, are expected to be in attendance at all meetings of the Council unless excused for good cause. In the absence of a quorum, the meeting shall not be held, and the City Clerk shall announce the date of the next meeting, which may be on a date other than the next regularly scheduled meeting.

(C) The City Manager shall attend all meetings of the Council unless excused and shall have the right to be heard, shall present recommendations of the administration to the Council and shall provide information on city business to the Council as may be requested.

(D) The City Attorney shall attend all meetings of the Council unless excused and shall give opinions on questions of law on matters pertaining to city business. The City Attorney shall act as parliamentarian to the Council.

(E) The City Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Council unless excused, shall keep the official journal of the Council and perform such other duties as may be requested by the Council.

(F) The Council may require the attendance at any meeting of any other officer or employee of the city with respect to matters within that person’s competence regarding the affairs of the city.

(Prior Code, § 2-4-8) (Am. Ord. 11-1251, passed 12-12-2011)


2-4-9 AGENDA; ORDER OF BUSINESS.

The requirements for agendas and order of business for the meetings of the City Council shall be established in the City Council Meetings Rules of Procedure as adopted by resolution of the City Council.

(Prior Code, § 2-4-9) (Am. Ord. 92-451, passed 1-14-1992; Am. Ord. 11-1251, passed 12-12-2011; Am. Ord. 16-1330, passed 7-11-2016; Am. Ord. 18-1392, passed 7-9-2018)


2-4-10 VOTING.

The requirements for voting in the meetings of the City Council shall be established in the City Council Meetings Rules of Procedure as adopted by resolution of the City Council.

(Prior Code, § 2-4-10) (Am. Ord. 99-678, passed - -; Am. Ord. 11-1251, passed 12-12-2011; Am. Ord. 18-1392, passed 7-9-2018)


2-4-11 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS.

The Council may create such boards, committees and commissions, standing or special, as it deems necessary. They shall consist of as many members and perform such duties as the Council may require and shall exist at the pleasure of the Council.

(Prior Code, § 2-4-11)


2-4-12 SUSPENSION OF RULES.

Any of the provisions of this article may be temporarily suspended in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of three fourths of the members present; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to permit any action contrary to law.

(Prior Code, § 2-4-12)


ARTICLE 2-5 Ordinances and Resolutions

Section

2-5-1    Prior approval

2-5-2    Introduction

2-5-3    Reading of proposed ordinances

2-5-4    Passage

2-5-5    Effective date; emergency measures

2-5-6    Ordinance distinguished

2-5-7    Signatures required

2-5-8    Publication

2-5-9    Posting


2-5-1 PRIOR APPROVAL.

All ordinances, resolutions or contract documents shall, before presentation to the Council, have been reviewed and approved as to form by the City Attorney. When ordinances, resolutions or contract documents involve substantive matters of administration, the person charged with administration of those matters shall have an opportunity to present recommendations or objections, if any, prior to the passage of the ordinance or resolution or acceptance of the contract.

(Prior Code, § 2-5-1) (Am. Ord. 11-1251, passed 12-12-2011)


2-5-2 INTRODUCTION.

Ordinances, resolutions and other matters requiring action by the Council shall be introduced by City staff.

(Prior Code, § 2-5-2) (Am. Ord. 11-1251, passed 12-12-2011; Am. Ord. 18-1392, passed 7-9-2018)


2-5-3 READING OF PROPOSED ORDINANCES.

All ordinances shall have at least one reading. This reading shall be by title only, unless upon motion duly adopted by the Council a full reading is ordered.

(Prior Code, § 2-5-3)


2-5-4 PASSAGE.

Ordinances shall be passed according to the provisions of Charter, Art. VII, § 6.

(Prior Code, § 2-5-4) (Am. Ord. 11-1251, passed 12-12-2011)


2-5-5 EFFECTIVE DATE; EMERGENCY MEASURES.

(A) Ordinances, other than emergency measures, shall become effective 30 days after passage.

(B) Resolutions and other matters approved by Council shall become effective immediately unless otherwise specifically proscribed by Council or state law.

(C) Emergency measures shall become effective upon passage by an affirmative vote of three-fourths of the Council, provided that its emergency nature is stated in the title and a statement as to why it is necessary that it should become immediately effective is set forth in a separate section.

(Prior Code, § 2-5-5) (Am. Ord. 11-1251, passed 12-12-2011)


2-5-6 ORDINANCE DISTINGUISHED.

Ordinances are legislative acts that prescribe uniform and permanent rules of conduct relating to the corporate affairs of the City. Ordinances may be general or special in their application. Ordinances having general application shall be codified. Resolutions are acts of Council involving ministerial, administrative, or executive matters of a special or temporary character and that state the sense of the Council in the form of proposed action.

(Prior Code, § 2-5-6) (Am. Ord. 11-1251, passed 12-12-2011)


2-5-7 SIGNATURES REQUIRED.

Every ordinance and resolution passed by the Council shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk within five days after adoption, but the failure to so sign and attest shall not affect the validity of such ordinance or resolution.

(Prior Code, § 2-5-7) (Am. Ord. 11-1251, passed 12-12-2011)


2-5-8 PUBLICATION.

Ordinances, resolutions, orders, regulations or proceedings of the Council shall be published as may be required by the Charter, state law or as otherwise expressly ordered by the Council.

(Prior Code, § 2-5-8) (Am. Ord. 11-1251, passed 12-12-2011)


2-5-9 POSTING.

Ordinances imposing a penalty, fine, forfeiture or other punishment shall, after enactment, be posted in accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes.

(Prior Code, § 2-5-9) (Am. Ord. 11-1251, passed 12-12-2011; Am. Ord. 18-1392, passed 7-9-2018)


CHAPTER 3: Administration

Article

3-1.    OFFICERS IN GENERAL

3-2.    AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT ACCOMMODATION AND GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES

3-3.    MERIT SYSTEM

3-4.    GENERAL PROCUREMENT PROVISIONS

3-5.    SOURCE SELECTION

3-6.    MATERIAL MANAGEMENT

3-7.    EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER

3-8.    ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

3-9.    PUBLIC AND PERFORMING ARTS PROGRAM

3-10.    SISTER CITIES COMMISSION

3-11.    YOUTH COMMISSION

3-12.    CITY OF GOODYEAR MEET AND DISCUSS/MEET AND CONFER

3-13.    PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMISSION

3-14.    CITY OF GOODYEAR HEALTH CARE BENEFITS TRUST; Health Care Benefits Trust Fund


ARTICLE 3-1 Officers in General

Section

3-1-1    City Manager

3-1-2    City Attorney

3-1-3    City Magistrate

3-1-4    City Clerk

3-1-5    Department heads

3-1-6    Additional officers

3-1-7    Bond

3-1-8    Vacancies; deputies; holding more than one office

3-1-9    Additional powers and duties


3-1-1 CITY MANAGER.

(A) The office of City Manager shall be filled as provided by the Charter, and the City Manager shall have such powers and duties as are assigned by the Charter, together with such other powers and duties not inconsistent with the Charter or other law as may be assigned by the Council. The City Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Council, but may be removed from office only as provided by the Charter.

(B) The City Manager shall have the authority to employ one or more assistants. An Assistant City Manager shall have such duties as may be delegated by the City Manager, and one such assistant shall be delegated to serve as Acting City Manager in the temporary absence of the City Manager. An Assistant City Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager.

(Prior Code, § 3-1-1)


3-1-2 CITY ATTORNEY.

The office of City Attorney shall be filled as provided by the Charter, and the City Attorney shall have such powers and duties as are assigned by the Charter, together with such other powers and duties not inconsistent with the Charter or other law as may be assigned by the Council. The City Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the Council and may be removed by a majority vote of the members of the Council then holding office.

(Prior Code, § 3-1-2)


3-1-3 CITY MAGISTRATE.

Until such time as the provisions of Charter, Art. XI, §§ 1 et seq. are implemented, the Council shall employ a City Magistrate who shall have the powers and duties assigned by Chapter 6 of this code and by statute generally. The City Magistrate shall be appointed by the Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the Council for a term of two years and may be reappointed.

(Prior Code, § 3-1-3)


3-1-4 CITY CLERK.

A City Clerk shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall have the powers and duties provided by the Charter, together with the duties imposed on the City Clerk by statute and such other duties and powers as may be assigned by the Council or the City Manager not inconsistent with the Charter or other law.

(Prior Code, § 3-1-4)


3-1-5 DEPARTMENT HEADS.

(A) Pursuant to the authority granted by the Charter, there are created the following departments, each of which shall be under the immediate direction of a department head as set forth herein:

(1) City Clerk.

(2) City Manager.

(3) Development Services.

(4) Economic Development.

(5) Communications.

(6) Engineering.

(7) Finance.

(8) Fire.

(9) Human Resources.

(10) Information and Technology Services.

(11) Legal Services.

(12) Parks and Recreation.

(13) Police.

(14) Public Works.

(B) The head of each department shall be appointed by and report to the City Manager. The City Manager shall advise the Council of each such appointment at the regular Council meeting next following such appointment. Department heads shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager.

(Prior Code, § 3-1-5) (Am. Ord. 06-1035, passed 11-13-2006; Am. Ord. 09-1158, passed 1-26-2009; Am. Ord. 10-1218, passed 6-14-2010; Am. Ord. 12-1258, passed 6-11-2012; Am. Ord. 14-1309, passed 10-6-2014; Am. Ord. 18-1393, passed 6-11-2018)


3-1-6 ADDITIONAL OFFICERS.

The Council may appoint and remove from time to time such other officers as it may deem necessary and that are not provided for in the Charter, this code or statute.

(Prior Code, § 3-1-6)


3-1-7 BOND.

The Council may, at its discretion, require that any officer of the city post a bond for faithful performance with such sureties as are acceptable to the Council. The bond shall be payable to the city, and the city shall pay all costs in connection therewith.

(Prior Code, § 3-1-7)


3-1-8 VACANCIES; DEPUTIES; HOLDING MORE THAN ONE OFFICE.

(A) A vacancy in any office not subject to Council appointment shall be filled by appointment of the City Manager.

(B) The powers and duties of any of the offices enumerated in § 3-1-5 may be performed by a deputy upon authorization of the City Manager.

(C) It shall be lawful for one person to hold more than one office, but such person shall be compensated only for one office to which he or she has been regularly appointed.

(Prior Code, § 3-1-8)


3-1-9 ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.

In addition to any powers and duties prescribed in this code, each officer shall have such further powers, perform such further duties and hold such other offices as the Council may provide.

(Prior Code, § 3-1-9)


ARTICLE 3-2 Americans with Disabilities Act Accommodation and Grievance Procedures

Section

3-2-1    Purpose

3-2-2    Definitions

3-2-3    Request for accommodation

3-2-4    Complaint procedure

3-2-5    Request for reconsideration


3-2-1 PURPOSE.

These Accommodation and Grievance Procedures are established to meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 ("ADA"). These procedures may be used by anyone who wishes to request an accommodation or file a complaint alleging discrimination on the basis of disability in relation to services, facilities, programs, or benefits by the city. The city’s Personnel Rules and Regulations and Operating Policies and Procedures govern employment related accommodation requests and complaints of disability discrimination.

(Ord. 08-1110, passed 4-14-2008)


3-2-2 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

DISABILITY.

(1) A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual;

(2) A record of such impairment; or

(3) Being regarded as having such an impairment. (See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 Sec. 3(2)(A)(B)(C))

(4) Major life activities include such things as caring for one’s self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working. (See 28 C.F.R. § 36.104)

QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL WITH A DISABILITY. An individual with a disability who, with or without reasonable modifications to rules, policies, or practices, the removal of architectural, communication, or transportation barriers, or the provision of auxiliary aids and services, meets the essential eligibility requirements for the receipt of services or the participation in programs or activities provided by a public entity. (See 42 U.S.C. § 12131(2))

(Ord. 08-1110, passed 4-14-2008)


3-2-3 REQUEST FOR ACCOMMODATION.

(A) Requests for accommodation may be made by any qualified individual with a disability or his or her designee. A person whose written request for accommodation is made by a designee shall be expected to participate in any investigation pursuant to this procedure where it is not unreasonable for participation to be required.

(B) Requests shall be made to the ADA Coordinator in writing. Alternative means of making requests, such as verbal or tape recorded requests, will be made available upon request.

(C) The ADA Coordinator shall review all accommodation requests, gather necessary information from the applicant, involved departments/divisions and other applicable parties, and render a decision, in writing, on the request within 15 days from the date of receipt. If necessary, the ADA Coordinator may request an extension of time to respond to a request for accommodation.

(D) When possible, requests for accommodation should be made within 10 days of the time the applicant first becomes aware of the need for an accommodation.

(E) The use of this procedure shall not limit an applicant’s ability to file a complaint against the city through an appropriate state or federal agency. The use of this procedure is not a prerequisite to filing a complaint through an appropriate state or federal agency.

(Ord. 08-1110, passed 4-14-2008)


3-2-4 COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.

(A) Any person dissatisfied with an accommodation or denial thereof, or claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory practice, program, or facility prohibited by the ADA may file a complaint with the ADA Coordinator.

(B) The complaint should be in writing and contain information about the alleged discrimination such as name, address, phone number of complainant, and location, date, and description of the alleged discrimination. Alternative means of filing complaints, such as personal interviews or a tape recording of the complaint, will be made available upon request. A complaint form is available by request from the city, but use of this particular form to file a complaint is not necessary or required.

(C) The complaint shall be submitted by the grievant and/or his or her designee as soon as possible, but no later than 60 calendar days after the alleged violation to:

City of Goodyear

Attn: ADA Coordinator

190 N. Litchfield Road

Goodyear, AZ 85338

(D) The ADA Coordinator shall promptly conduct an investigation into each complaint filed with the city and shall attempt to resolve the complaint by means of conference and conciliation.

(E) Within 30 calendar days of the receipt of the complaint, the ADA Coordinator or his or her designee will respond in writing, and where appropriate, in a format accessible to the complainant. The response shall explain the findings of the investigation and notify the complainant what actions will or will not be taken as a result. (See 28 C.F.R. § 35.104)

(Ord. 08-1110, passed 4-14-2008)


3-2-5 REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION.

(A) The complainant or his or her designee may appeal the decision of the ADA Coordinator to the City Manager or his or her designee within 15 calendar days after the receipt of the response.

(B) A complete copy of the file for the complaint shall be provided to the City Manager.

(C) The City Manager shall reconsider the matter after reviewing the record and may discuss the matter with the ADA Coordinator, staff and/or the complainant. The City Manager may affirm or reverse the decision of the ADA Coordinator, or reach a compromise between the positions of the parties.

(D) Within 30 calendar days after receipt of the appeal, the City Manager or his or her designee will respond in writing, and where appropriate, in a format accessible to the complainant, with a final resolution of the complaint. The decision of the City Manager is final.

(E) All written complaints received by the ADA Coordinator, appeals to the City Manager, and responses from these two offices will be retained by city for at least three years.

(Ord. 08-1110, passed 4-14-2008)


ARTICLE 3-3 Merit System

Section

3-3-1    Creation and scope

3-3-2    Conditions of employment; nondiscrimination

3-3-3    Policies, rules, regulations and procedures

3-3-4    Political contributions


3-3-1 CREATION AND SCOPE.

(A) There is created and adopted a merit system governing the employees of the city, except those enumerated in this section, for the purpose of regulating the conditions of employment and removal of employees of the city.

(B) The merit system adopted by this article shall not apply to elected officials; officers subject to appointment and removal by the Council; the assistant to such officer; consultants hired on a contract basis; contract employees; part time employees whose regular work week is 19 hours or less; nonpermanent employees; volunteer firefighters; volunteer workers who receive no regular compensation from the city and members of boards, committees and commissions established by the Council.

(Prior Code, § 3-3-1) (Am. Ord. 06-1035, passed 11-13-2006)


3-3-2 CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT; NONDISCRIMINATION.

The appointment, promotion and tenure of all employees identified in § 3-3-1 shall be conditioned solely on merit, fitness and the satisfactory performance of the duties and responsibilities assigned. No employee or applicant for employment shall be discriminated against on the basis of race, color, religion, gender, political affiliation or handicapped status.

(Prior Code, § 3-3-2)


3-3-3 POLICIES, RULES, REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES.

The Mayor and Council shall adopt, by ordinance, written policies, rules, regulations and procedures to give effect to this article.

(Prior Code, § 3-3-3) (Am. Ord. 91-329, passed 5-28-1991; Am. Ord. 94-512, passed 11-8-1994)


3-3-4 POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS.

No official, officer or employee of the city shall use any influence or pressure, either direct or indirect, upon any employee to obtain an assessment or contribution of money or time for any political candidate, party or campaign or for personal gain.

(Prior Code, § 3-3-4)


ARTICLE 3-4 General Procurement Provisions

Section

3-4-1    Applicability

3-4-2    Supplementary general principles of law applicable

3-4-3    Definitions

3-4-4    Definitions - electronic bidding

3-4-5    Authority of the Procurement Manager

3-4-6    Delegation of authority by the Procurement Manager

3-4-7    Authority to contract for certain professional services; continuity of services

3-4-8    Procurements involving a prescribed amount

3-4-9    Cooperative procurement

3-4-10    Compliance with federal requirements

3-4-11    On-line solicitations

3-4-12    Contract clauses

3-4-13    Change order

3-4-14    Contracts in the best interest of the city

3-4-15    Long term contracts

3-4-16    Rules for protesting solicitations and contract awards

3-4-17    Rules for suspension and debarment of contractors

3-4-18    Debarment and suspension of contractors

3-4-19    Appeal

3-4-20    Violation; penalty; enforcement authority


3-4-1 APPLICABILITY.

(A) Articles 3-4, 3-5, and 3-6 comprise the city’s procurement code, and the use of the term "Article" in the city’s procurement code will include Articles 3-4, 3-5, and 3-6.

(B) The purpose of this article is to provide for oversight, accountability and good stewardship in the use of city resources. This article shall govern the purchase of any goods or services for or on behalf of the city, including, but not limited to, the purchase of equipment, material, supplies, services and public improvements.

(C) This article applies to all expenditures by the city, and all expenditures shall be made with prior City Council approval. Prior Council approval exists when the expenditure has been provided for in the current budget as adopted and the funds are available without limitation or restriction, or Council may designate prior approval by way of resolution as provided for in § 3-4-8. This article also applies to the disposal of city materials.

(D) This article does not apply to either grants as defined in this article, or contracts between the city and other governments, except as provided in § 3-4-9.

(E) The provisions of this article are not applicable to contracts or arrangements for testimony relating to an existing or probable judicial proceeding in which the city is or may become a party; to contracts for special investigative services for law enforcement purposes; or to contracts for professional services as defined in § 3-4-3, except as may be provided in § 3-4-7.

(F) Agreements negotiated by legal counsel representing the city in settlement of litigation or threatened litigation are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, except as may be provided in § 3-4-7.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2501 with changes


3-4-2 SUPPLEMENTARY GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW APPLICABLE.

Unless displaced by the particular provisions of this article, the principles of law and equity, the common law of contracts as applied in the city and law relative to agency, fraud, misrepresentation, duress, coercion and mistake supplement the provisions of this article.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2504, with changes


3-4-3 DEFINITIONS.

This article includes these definitions, definitions for online bidding in § 3-4-4, and definitions for source selection under § 3-5-1. Unless the context otherwise requires:

AFFILIATE. Any person effectively controlling or controlled by another or associated with others under common ownership or control.

AGGREGATE DOLLAR AMOUNT. Purchase price, including taxes and delivery charges, for the term of the contract and accounting for all allowable extensions and options.

ALTERNATE PROJECT DELIVERY METHODS. Design build, construction management at-risk, and job order contracting construction services.

AMENDMENT. Any written alteration in the terms and conditions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract, or by unilateral action as permitted by the terms of the contract.

ARCHITECT SERVICES. Those professional architect services that are within the scope of architectural practice as provided in A.R.S. Title 32, Chapter 1.

AWARD. A determination by the city that it is entering into a contract with one or more offerors.

BID. An offer in response to solicitation.

BIDDER. Has the same definition as that of OFFEROR.

BRAND NAME OR EQUAL SPECIFICATION. A written description that uses one or more manufacturers’ product name or catalog item, to describe the standard of quality, performance, and other characteristics that meet state requirements and provides for submission of equivalent products or services.

BRAND NAME SPECIFICATION. A written description limited to a list of one or more items by manufacturers’ product name or catalog item to describe the standard of quality, performance, and other characteristics that meet state requirements.

BUSINESS. Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture or other private legal entity.

CHANGE ORDER. A written order which is signed by the Procurement Manager and which directs the contractor to make changes that Procurement Manager determines is in the best interests of the city.

CITY. The City of Goodyear.

COMPETITIVE RANGE. The range determined on the basis of the criteria stated in the solicitation and shall include all offers that have a reasonable chance of being selected for award.

CONSTRUCTION.

(1) The process of building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any public structure or building or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property.

(2) Does not include:

(a) The routine operation, routine repair or routine maintenance of existing facilities, structures, buildings or real property.

(b) The investigation, characterization, restoration or remediation due to an environmental issue of existing facilities, structures, buildings or real property.

CONSTRUCTION MANAGER AT RISK. A project delivery method in which:

(1) There is a separate contract for design services and a separate contract for construction services.

(2) The contract for construction services may be entered into at the same time as the contract for design services or at a later time.

(3) Design and construction of the project may be in sequential phases or concurrent phases.

(4) Finance services, maintenance services, operations services, preconstruction services and other related services may be included.

CONSTRUCTION SERVICES. Either of the following for construction manager at risk, design build and job order contracting project delivery methods:

(1) Construction, excluding services, through the construction manager at risk or job-order contracting project delivery methods.

(2) A combination of construction and, as elected by the city department, one or more related services, such as finance services, maintenance services, operations services, design services and preconstruction services, as those services are authorized in the definitions of construction manager at risk, design build or job-order contracting in this section.

CONTRACT. All types of city agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement of materials, services, construction or the disposal of materials.

CONTRACT MODIFICATION. Any written alteration in the terms and conditions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract.

CONTRACTOR. Any person who has a contract with a city department.

COOPERATIVE PURCHASING. Procurement conducted by, or on behalf of, more than one public procurement unit.

COST DATA. Information concerning the actual or estimated cost of labor, material, overhead, and other cost elements that have been incurred or will be incurred by the offeror or contractor in performing the contract.

COST PLUS A PERCENTAGE OF COST CONTRACT. The parties to a contract agree that the fee will be a predetermined percentage of the cost of work performed and the contract does not limit the cost and fee before authorization of performance.

COST REIMBURSEMENT CONTRACT. A contract under which a contractor is reimbursed for costs which are reasonable, allowable and allocable in accordance with the contract terms and the provisions of this article, and paid a fee, if provided for in the contract.

DATA. Documented information, regardless of form or characteristic.

DAY. A calendar day, unless otherwise specified in the solicitation or contract.

DEBARMENT. An action taken by the Procurement Manager that prohibits a person from participating in the city’s procurement process.

DEPARTMENT. A subdivision or unit within the city as set forth in its organizational chart.

DESIGN BID BUILD. A project delivery method in which:

(1) There is a sequential award of two separate contracts.

(2) The first contract is for design services.

(3) The second contract is for construction.

(4) Design and construction of the project are in sequential phases.

(5) Finance services, maintenance services and operations services are not included.

DESIGN BUILD. A project delivery method in which:

(1) There is a single contract for design services and construction services.

(2) Design and construction of the project may be in sequential phases or concurrent phases.

(3) Finance services, maintenance services, operations services, preconstruction services and other related services may be included.

DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.

(1) Means at a minimum the city department’s written description of the project or service to be procured, including:

(a) The required features, functions, characteristics, qualities and properties.

(b) The anticipated schedule, including start, duration and completion.

(c) The estimated budgets applicable to the specific procurement for design and construction and, if applicable, for operation and maintenance.

(2) May include:

(a) Drawings and other documents illustrating the scale and relationship of the features, functions and characteristics of the project, which shall all be prepared by an architect or engineer, as appropriate, who is registered pursuant to A.R.S. § 32-121.

(b) Additional design information or documents that the city department elects to include.

DESIGN SERVICES. Architect services, engineer services or landscape architect services.

DESIGNEE. A duly authorized representative of the Procurement Manager.

ELIGIBLE PROCUREMENT UNIT. A local public procurement unit, any other state, any agency of the United States, or a nonprofit educational or public health institution that is eligible under a cooperative agreement to use city contracts.

ENGINEER SERVICES. Those professional engineer services that are within the scope of engineering practice as provided in A.R.S. Title 32, Chapter 1.

FINANCE SERVICES. Financing for a construction services project.

GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION CONTRACT. Contracts awarded by the United States government general services administration.

GRANT. The furnishing of financial or other assistance, including state funds or federal grant funds, by any city department to any person for the purpose of supporting or stimulating educational, cultural, social or economic quality of life.

INTERESTED PARTY. An offeror or prospective offeror whose economic interest is affected substantially and directly by issuance of a solicitation, an award or loss of an award. Whether an offeror or prospective offeror has an economic interest depends upon the circumstances of each case.

JOB ORDER CONTRACTING. A project delivery method in which:

(1) The contract is a requirements contract for indefinite quantities of construction.

(2) The construction to be performed is specified in job orders issued during the contract.

(3) Finance services, maintenance services, operations services, preconstruction services, design services and other related services may be included.

LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT SERVICES. Those professional landscape architect services that are within the scope of landscape architectural practice as provided in A.R.S. Title 32, Chap. 1.

LOCAL PUBLIC PROCUREMENT UNIT. Any political subdivision, any agency, board, department or other instrumentality of such political subdivision and any nonprofit corporation created solely for the purpose of administering a cooperative purchase under this article.

MAINTENANCE SERVICES. Routine maintenance, repair and replacement of existing facilities, structures, buildings or real property.

MATERIALS.

(1) All property, including equipment, supplies, printing, and insurance.

(2) Does not include land, a permanent interest in land or real property, or leases of property.

NEGOTIATION. An exchange or series of exchanges between the city and an offeror or contractor in which both parties intend to revise, in writing, an offer or contract, unless revision is specifically prohibited by these rules or statutes.

NOT SUSCEPTIBLE FOR AWARD. An offer in response to a solicitation fails to meet one or more of the mandatory requirements of the solicitation, fails to comply with any required criteria specifically mentioned in the solicitation, or that the offer is not within the competitive range in comparison to other offers that meet the criteria set forth in the solicitation.

OFFER. A response to a solicitation.

OFFEROR. A person that responds to a solicitation.

OPERATIONS SERVICES. Routine operation of existing facilities, structures, buildings or real property.

OWNER. The City of Goodyear.

PERSON. Any corporation, business, individual, union, committee, club, other organization or group of individuals.

PRECONSTRUCTION SERVICES. Construction advice during the design phase.

PRICE DATA. Information concerning prices, including profit, for materials, services, or construction substantially similar to the materials, services, or construction to be procured under a contract or subcontract. In this definition, PRICES refers to offered selling prices, historical selling prices, or current selling prices of the items to be purchased.

PROCUREMENT.

(1) Buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring any materials, services, construction or construction services.

(2) Includes all functions that pertain to obtaining any material, services, construction or construction services, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration.

PROCUREMENT CARD. A credit or debit card issued to the city that enables and facilitates on line or electronic transactions made in accordance with this article.

PROCUREMENT FILE. The official records file of the Procurement Manager.

PROCUREMENT MANAGER. The individual designated by the City Manager for the city who is thereby duly authorized as directed to enter into, approve, execute, or administer contracts; make written determinations on contracts, bids, or purchases; and to serve as the property administrator. Written determinations required by this article shall be retained in the appropriate official records file of the Procurement Manager.

PROCUREMENT REQUEST. The document that initiates a procurement.

PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Those services, as determined by the Procurement Manager, that require specialized knowledge and training (often through long and intensive academic preparation) or in depth experience in a particular field or discipline, and may include licensing by a professional board. Professional services are professional, technical, or consultant services predominantly intellectual in nature. They may include analysis, evaluation, predicting, planning, or recommendation and usually result in the production of a report or completion of a task services.

PROPOSAL. An offer submitted in response to a solicitation.

PROSPECTIVE OFFEROR. A person that expresses an interest in a specific solicitation.

PUBLIC PROCUREMENT UNIT. The city, a state or an agency of the United States, or any local public procurement unit such as a city or county government.

RAW MATERIALS. Goods, excluding equipment and machinery, purchased for use in manufacturing a product.

RESPONSIBLE. When used in connection with a bid or offer shall mean that the bidder or offeror is fully capable to meet all of the requirements of the solicitation and subsequent contract.

RESPONSIVE. When used in connection with a bid or offer shall mean that the bid or offer fully conforms in all material respects to the solicitation and all of its requirements, including all form and substance.

SERVICES.

(1) The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor or subcontractor which does not involve the delivery of a specific end product other than required reports and performance.

(2) Does not include employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements.

SHALL. Something is mandatory.

SINGLE SOURCE. A procurement whereby a purchase is directed to one source because of standardization, warranty, or other factors even though other competitive sources may be available.

SOLE SOURCE. A procurement whereby only one vendor or supplier possesses the unique ability or capability to meet the particular requirements of the solicitation.

SOLICITATION. An invitation for bids, a request for technical offers, a request for proposals, a request for quotations, a request for qualifications, or any other invitation or request issued by the city to invite a person to submit an offer.

SOURCE SELECTION METHOD. A process that is approved by the Procurement Manager and used to select a person to enter into a contract for procurement.

SUBCONTRACTOR. A person who contracts to perform work or render service to a contractor or to another subcontractor as a part of a contract with a city department.

SUSPENSION. An action taken by the Procurement Manager that temporarily disqualifies a person from participating in a city procurement process.

TRADE SECRET. Information, including a formula, pattern, device, compilation, program, method, technique, or process, that is the subject of reasonable efforts to maintain its secrecy and that derives independent economic value, actual or potential, as a result of not being generally known and not being readily ascertainable by public means.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. §§ 41-2503 and 41-2631 with changes.


3-4-4 DEFINITIONS – ELECTRONIC BIDDING.

In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:

AUCTION. A public sale in which property or items are sold to the highest bidder. On line auctions are allowed as directed by the Procurement Manager.

INFORMATION SERVICES. Data processing, telecommunications and office systems technologies and services.

INTERNET. The international computer network of both federal and nonfederal interoperable packet switched data networks, including the graphical sub network called the world wide web.

ON LINE SOLICITATION. A procurement process in which the city receives vendors’ bids or offers for goods, services, construction or information services electronically over the internet in a real time, competitive solicitation event.

REVERSE AUCTION. A procurement method in which offerors are invited to bid on specified goods or services through on line bidding and real time electronic bidding. During an electronic bidding process, offerors’ prices or relative ranking are available to competing offerors and offerors may modify their offer prices until the closing date and time.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-1671 with changes


3-4-5 AUTHORITY OF THE PROCUREMENT MANAGER.

(A) The Procurement Manager shall serve as the central procurement authority and the Property Administrator for the city. The Procurement Manager shall be designated by the City Manager and will be duly authorized as directed to enter into, approve, execute, or administer contracts, and to make written determinations on contracts, bids, or purchases.

(B) The Procurement Manager may adopt rules, consistent with this article, governing the procurement and management of all materials, specifications, services and construction to be procured by this city and the disposal of materials. Any prior approval that Council may establish by resolution as permitted by § 3-4-8 is still subject to this article and the rules established thereunder.

(C) Except as otherwise provided in this article, the Procurement Manager, in accordance with rules adopted under this article shall:

(1) Procure or supervise the procurement of all materials, services and construction needed by the city.

(2) Establish guidelines for the management of all inventories of materials belonging to the city.

(3) Sell, trade or otherwise dispose of surplus materials belonging to the city.

(4) Establish and maintain programs for the inspection, testing and acceptance of materials, services and construction.

(5) Establish forms and procedures for use in all procurements.

(D) The Procurement Manager has the sole authority to debar or suspend a person from participating in city procurements.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2511 with changes


3-4-6 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY BY THE PROCUREMENT MANAGER.

The Procurement Manager may designate and delegate authority to qualified individuals of any city department.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2512 with changes


3-4-7 AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT FOR CERTAIN PROFESSIONAL SERVICES; CONTINUITY OF SERVICES.

(A) Contracts for professional services as defined in § 3-4-3 or for services listed in divisions (B) and (C) of this section are not required to comply with the provisions of this article except as may be set forth in this section. Any contract for services that does not meet the definition of professional services under § 3-4-3, but for which services relate to a prior contractual relationship that permits a continuity of services for the city may be exempt from this article, subject to the written approval of the Procurement Manager.

(B) All contracts for the services of legal counsel, expert witnesses related to an existing or probable judicial proceeding in which the city is or may be a party, or for special investigative services shall be approved by the City Attorney and the Procurement Manager.

(C) The Finance Director shall approve city contracts for financial and compliance auditing services except if specific statutory authority is otherwise provided. The Finance Director shall ensure that these audits are conducted in accordance with generally accepted governmental auditing standards. An audit contract shall not be accepted until it has been approved by the Finance Director and the Procurement Manager.

(D) Payment for any services, including those services described in divisions (A), (B), and (C) of this section, procured under this article shall not be made unless pursuant to a written contract for which a valid purchase order has been issued.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2513 with changes


3-4-8 PROCUREMENTS INVOLVING A PRESCRIBED AMOUNT.

(A) All city expenditures must be approved by Council prior to purchase. Prior approval includes items that are in the current budget as adopted by Council, and Council may designate an amount, by way of resolution, authorizing the City Manager to approve non budgeted expenditures. Council may also designate an amount, by way of resolution, of an amount above which a contract for a budgeted expenditure must be approved by Council before a purchase order, change order, or a notice to proceed may be issued. Prior approval of expenditures does not waive the application of the provisions of this article. The expenditure must still meet the requirements of this article, as applicable.

(B) Any procurement less than $50,000 will be procured in accordance with the rules established by the Procurement Manager.

(C) Procurement requirements shall not be artificially divided or fragmented so as to constitute a purchase under this section and to circumvent the source selection procedures required by §§ 3-5-9 or 3-5-10 or be artificially combined to circumvent this section.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2535 with changes


3-4-9 COOPERATIVE PROCUREMENT.

(A) Pursuant to this article the City Council hereby approves and authorizes the Procurement Manager to enter into cooperative purchasing agreements deemed by the Procurement Manager to be in the best interest of the city. The City Council reserves the right to revoke its approval for an individual agreement.

(B) The Procurement Manager on behalf of the city may participate in, sponsor, conduct, or administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the procurement of any materials, services, or construction with one or more public procurement units in accordance with an agreement entered into between the participants. The Procurement Manager will make a written recommendation that such an agreement is allowable and in the best interest of the city.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2632 with changes


3-4-10 COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL REQUIREMENTS.

If a procurement involves the expenditure of federal assistance or monies, the Procurement Manager shall comply with federal law and authorized regulations which are mandatory and which are not presently reflected in this article.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2637 with changes


3-4-11 ON LINE SOLICITATIONS.

(A) If the Procurement Manager determines that electronic, on line solicitation is advantageous, the Procurement Manager may use on line solicitations to obtain bids or offers electronically for the purchase of goods, services, construction and information services.

(B) An on line solicitation must designate an opening date and time.

(C) The closing date and time for an on line solicitation may be fixed or remain open depending on the structure of the item being solicited on-line. Information regarding the closing date and time must be included in the solicitation. At the opening date and time, the city must begin accepting on line bids or offers and must continue accepting bids or offers until the solicitation is officially closed. The on line system must provide for security equal to competitive sealed solicitations.

(D) All on line bids or offers must be posted electronically and updated on a real time basis.

(E) The Procurement Manager may:

(1) Require vendors to register before the opening date and time and, as part of that registration, require vendors to agree to any terms, conditions or other requirements of the solicitation.

(2) Pre qualify vendors and allow only those vendors who are pre qualified to submit bids or offers on line.

(F) Provisions regarding competitive sealed solicitations (§§ 3-5-9 and 3-5-10) apply to solicitations issued pursuant to this section, except for the means of advertising.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2572 with changes


3-4-12 CONTRACT CLAUSES.

(A) The Procurement Manager may permit or require the inclusion of clauses providing for appropriate remedies, adjustments in prices, time of performance or other contract provisions.

(B) The Procurement Manager may modify clauses for inclusion in any particular city contract, provided that any variations are supported by a written determination that states the circumstances justifying the variation and provided that notice of any material variation is stated in the solicitation.

(C) All contract clauses shall be approved by the City Attorney’s office and shall be consistent with the provisions of this article and the regulations issued pursuant to this article.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2585 with changes


3-4-13 CHANGE ORDER.

A change order exceeding an amount or percentage established by regulation may be executed only after the Procurement Manager determines in writing that the change order is advantageous to the city. No change order shall exceed that amount established by § 3-4-8 without prior Council approval.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2552 with changes


3-4-14 CONTRACTS IN THE BEST INTEREST OF THE CITY.

Any type of contract which will promote the best interests of the city may be used with the following limitations. A cost plus a percentage of cost contract is prohibited, and a cost reimbursement contract may be used only if a determination is made in writing that such contract is likely to be less costly to the city than any other type or that it is impracticable to obtain the materials, services or construction required except under such a contract.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2544 with changes


3-4-15 LONG TERM CONTRACTS.

(A) Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for materials or services may be entered into for a period of time up to five years and a contract for job order contracting construction services may also be entered into for a period of time up to five years, as deemed to be in the best interest of the city by the Procurement Manager, if the term of the contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and monies are available for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. A contract may be entered into for materials or services for a period of time exceeding five years if, under rules adopted pursuant to this article, the Procurement Manager determines in writing that such a contract would be advantageous to the city. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods are subject to the availability and appropriation of monies.

(B) Before the use of a long term contract, it shall be determined in writing that:

(1) Estimated requirements cover the period of the contract and are reasonable and continuing.

(2) Such a contract will serve the best interests of the city by encouraging effective competition or otherwise promoting economies in city procurement.

(C) If monies are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall be cancelled and the contractor may only be reimbursed for the reasonable value of any nonrecurring costs incurred but not amortized in the price of the materials or services delivered under the contract or which are otherwise not recoverable. The cost of cancellation may be paid from any appropriations available for such purposes.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2546 with changes


3-4-16 RULES FOR PROTESTING SOLICITATIONS AND CONTRACT AWARDS.

The Procurement Manager shall include in the rules authorized by § 3-4-5, procedures providing for the expeditious administrative review of all solicitation protests and contract award claims or controversies.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2611 with changes


3-4-17 RULES FOR SUSPENSION AND DEBARMENT OF CONTRACTORS.

The rules adopted by the Procurement Manager pursuant to §§ 3-4-5 and 3-4-18 shall include hearing procedures for the suspension and debarment of contractors.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2612 with changes


3-4-18 DEBARMENT AND SUSPENSION OF CONTRACTORS.

(A) All contracts for services involving minors shall require background checks for all employees, or that contractor shall be placed on a suspension list until such time as all employees successfully meet this requirement. If there are reasonable grounds for debarment the rules of the Procurement Manager may provide for the suspension of any person. A debarment shall not exceed three years.

(B) The causes for debarment or suspension include the following:

(1) Conviction of any person or any subsidiary or affiliate of any person for commission of a criminal offense arising out of obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract.

(2) Conviction of any person or any subsidiary or affiliate of any person under any statute of the federal, state, or local government for embezzlement, theft, fraudulent schemes and artifices, fraudulent schemes and practices, bid rigging, perjury, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which affects responsibility as a city contractor.

(3) Conviction or civil judgment finding a violation by any person or any subsidiary or affiliate of any person under state or federal antitrust statutes.

(4) Violations of city contract provisions of a character which are deemed to be so serious as to justify debarment action.

(5) Any other cause deemed to affect responsibility as a city contractor, including suspension or debarment of such person or any subsidiary or affiliate of such person by another governmental entity for any cause listed in rules of the Procurement Manager.

(C) A written determination to debar or suspend shall be issued pursuant to the rules of the Procurement Manager which shall:

(1) State the reasons for the action taken.

(2) Inform any debarred or suspended person involved of the right to administrative review as provided in this article.

(D) A copy of the decision under division (C) of this section shall be mailed or otherwise furnished to any debarred or suspended person and to any intervening party, and a copy retained in the records of the City Clerk.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2613 with changes


3-4-19 APPEAL.

Any final decision on a protest, suspension, or debarment by the Procurement Manager under this article may be appealed to the City Manager or his designee. A copy of the appeal must be provided to the Procurement Manager and the City Attorney.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2614 with changes


3-4-20 VIOLATION; PENALTY; ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.

A person who evaluates bids and proposals shall sign a statement before reviewing bids or proposals that the person has no interest in the procurement other than that disclosed and will have no contact with any representative of any vendor related to the particular procurement during the course of evaluation of bids or proposals. The person shall disclose on the statement any contact unrelated to the pending procurement that the person may need to have with a representative of a competing vendor and any contact with a representative of a competing vendor during evaluation of bids or proposals. A person who evaluates bids and proposals and who fails to disclose contact with a representative of a competing vendor or who fails to provide accurate information on the statement is subject to a civil penalty up to $5,000, in addition to any other penalty available pursuant to § 1-8-1 of this Code. The Procurement Manager is authorized to initiate enforcement actions pursuant to the provisions of this section.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2616 with changes


ARTICLE 3-5 Source Selection

Section

3-5-1    Definitions

3-5-2    Methods of source selection

3-5-3    Pre-qualification of contractors

3-5-4    Bid and contract security

3-5-5    Right to inspect plant

3-5-6    Right to audit records

3-5-7    Reporting of anti-competitive practices

3-5-8    Retention of procurement records

3-5-9    Competitive sealed bidding

3-5-10    Competitive sealed proposals

3-5-11    Cancellation of invitation for bids or requests for proposals

3-5-12    Responsibility of bidders and offerors

3-5-13    Sole source and single source procurement

3-5-14    Emergency procurements

3-5-15    Competition impracticable procurement

3-5-16    Request for information

3-5-17    Demonstration projects

3-5-18    Unsolicited proposals

3-5-19    General Services Administration (GSA) contracts

3-5-20    Procurement of construction and specified professional services

3-5-21    Cost principles rules

3-5-22    Approval of accounting system

3-5-23    Cost of pricing data


3-5-1 DEFINITIONS.

In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:

BIDDER PREQUALIFICATION. Determining in accordance with rules adopted pursuant to this article that a prospective bidder or offeror satisfies the criteria for being included on the bidder’s list.

DEMONSTRATION PROJECT. A project in which a vendor supplies a service or material to the city for which the city does not pay but for which the city may be obligated to provide routine support such as utility cost and operating personnel.

ESTABLISHED CATALOG PRICE. The price included in a catalog, price list, schedule or other form that:

(1) Is regularly maintained by a manufacturer, distributor or contractor.

(2) Is either published or otherwise available for inspection by customers.

(3) States prices at which sales are currently or were last made to a significant number of any category of buyers or buyers constituting the general buying public for the materials or services involved.

INVITATION FOR BIDS. All documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, which are used for soliciting bids in accordance with the procedures prescribed in § 3-5-9.

MULTI STEP SEALED BIDDING. A two phase process consisting of a technical first phase composed of one or more steps in which bidders submit un priced technical offers to be evaluated by the city and a second phase in which those bidders whose technical offers are determined to be acceptable during the first phase have their price bids considered.

PURCHASE DESCRIPTION. The words used in a solicitation to describe the materials, services or construction for purchase and includes specifications attached to, or made a part of, the solicitation.

REQUEST FOR INFORMATION. All documents issued to vendors for the sole purpose of seeking information about the availability in the commercial marketplace of materials or services.

REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS. All documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, which are used for soliciting proposals in accordance with procedures prescribed in § 3-5-10.

REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATIONS. All documents which are used for obtaining statements of qualifications from bidders prior to issuing a solicitation.

REQUEST FOR QUOTATIONS. All documents which are used for soliciting price quotes for small amount purchases with procedures prescribed § 3-4-8.

SPECIFICATION. Any description of the physical or functional characteristics, or of the nature of a material, service or construction item. Specification may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing or preparing a material, service or construction item for delivery. All specifications, including those prepared by architects, engineers, consultants and others for public contracts, shall seek to promote overall economy for the purposes intended and encourage competition in satisfying this city’s needs and shall not be unduly restrictive.

UNSOLICITED PROPOSAL. A written proposal that is submitted on the initiative of the offeror or for the purposes of obtaining a contract with the city and that is not in response to a formal or informal request from the city.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2531 with changes


3-5-2 METHODS OF SOURCE SELECTION.

All city contracts shall be awarded by competitive sealed solicitations, including on line solicitations, as provided in § 3-5-9 or as provided in §§ 3-5-10, 3-5-13, 3-5-14, 3-5-15, and 3-5-17 through 3-5-20.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2532 with changes


3-5-3 PRE QUALIFICATION OF CONTRACTORS.

Prospective contractors may be pre qualified for particular types of materials, services and construction. Prospective contractors have a continuing duty to provide the Procurement Manager with information on any material change affecting the basis of pre-qualification. Solicitation mailing lists of potential contractors shall include the pre qualified contractors.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2541 with changes


3-5-4 BID AND CONTRACT SECURITY.

The Procurement Manager may require, in accordance with rules adopted by the Procurement Manager, the submission of security to guarantee faithful bid and contract performance. In determining the amount and type of security required for each contract, the Procurement Manager shall consider the nature of the performance and the need for future protection to the city. The requirement for security must be included in the invitation for bids or request for proposals.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2542 with changes


3-5-5 RIGHT TO INSPECT PLANT.

The city may, at reasonable times, inspect the part of the plant or place of business of a contractor or any subcontractor which is related to the performance of any contract awarded, or to be awarded, by the city.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2547 with changes


3-5-6 RIGHT TO AUDIT RECORDS.

(A) The city may, at reasonable times and places, audit the books and records of any person who submits cost or pricing data as provided in § 3-5-23 to the extent that the books and records relate to the cost or pricing data. Any person who receives a contract, change order or contract modification for which cost or pricing data is required shall maintain the books and records that relate to the cost or pricing data for five years after the completion of the contract.

(B) The city is entitled to audit the books and records of a contractor or any subcontractor conducting business with the city to the extent that the books and records relate to the performance of the contract or subcontract. The books and records shall be maintained by the contractor for a period of five years after the completion of the prime contract.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2549 with changes


3-5-7 REPORTING OF ANTI-COMPETITIVE PRACTICES.

If for any reason collusion or other anti-competitive practices are suspected among any bidders or offeror, a written summary of the relevant facts shall be transmitted to the Procurement Manager and the City Attorney. Anonymous reports may be considered if supported by verifiable facts. This section does not require an investigation by a law enforcement agency. The Procurement Manager or City Attorney may conduct such investigation as may be warranted.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2549 with changes


3-5-8 RETENTION OF PROCUREMENT RECORDS.

All procurement records shall be retained and disposed of in accordance with records retention guidelines and schedules approved by the City Clerk’s Office.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2550 with changes


3-5-9 COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDDING.

(A) An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include a purchase description and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement.

(B) Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given a reasonable time before the date set forth in the invitation for the opening of bids, but not less than two weeks before bid opening. The notice should include publication one or more times in a newspaper of general circulation, including circulation within the city. The notice may also be posted at a city approved site on a public network or by electronic notification to registered vendors.

(C) Bids shall be opened publicly at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid together with the name of each bidder shall be read, recorded and published. The bid documents shall not be open for public inspection until after a contract is awarded. To the extent the bidder designates and the city concurs, trade secrets or other proprietary data contained in the bid documents shall remain confidential in accordance with rules adopted by the Procurement Manager.

(D) Bids shall be received without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this article. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, including criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for a particular purpose, as may be prescribed in rules adopted by the Procurement Manager. The invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used, including the weighting of identified criteria. Evaluation criteria shall not be used for construction and no criteria may be used in bid evaluation that is not set forth in the invitation for bids.

(E) The correction or withdrawal of erroneous bids before or after bid opening, based on bid mistakes, may be permitted in accordance with rules adopted by the Procurement Manager. After bid opening, no corrections in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the city or fair competition shall be permitted. Except as otherwise provided by rule, all decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination made by the Procurement Manager.

(F) The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid conforms in all material respects to the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. Except for procurement of construction, for purposes of determining the low bidder the Procurement

Manager may consider the amount of applicable city business privilege tax and exclude that amount from the evaluation unless otherwise precluded by applicable law. If all bids for a construction project exceed available monies as certified by the appropriate fiscal officer, and the low responsive and responsible bid does not exceed such monies by more than 5%, the Procurement Manager may in situations in which time or economic considerations preclude re solicitation of work of a reduced scope negotiate an adjustment of the bid price, including changes in the bid requirements, with the low responsive and responsible bidder, to bring the bid within the amount of available monies.

(G) The multi step sealed bidding method may be used if the Procurement Manager determines in writing that it is not practical to initially prepare a definitive purchase description which is suitable to permit an award based on competitive sealed bidding. An invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of technical offers to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those bidders whose offers are determined to be technically acceptable under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation, except that the multi step sealed bidding method may not be used for construction contracts.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2533 with changes


3-5-10 COMPETITIVE SEALED PROPOSALS.

(A) If the Procurement Manager determines in writing that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city, a contract for materials or services may be entered into by competitive sealed proposals. This section does not apply to procurement of construction, construction services or specified professional services pursuant to § 3-5-20. Construction services shall be procured pursuant to §§ 3-5-14 or 3-5-20.

(B) Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals.

(C) Adequate public notice of the request for proposals shall be given in the same manner as provided in § 3-5-9.

(D) Proposals shall be opened publicly at the time and place designated in the request for proposals. The name of each offeror and such other relevant information shall be publicly read and recorded in accordance with rules adopted by the Procurement Manager. All other information contained in the proposals shall be confidential until after contract award. Any trade secrets or other proprietary data designated by the offeror may or may not remain confidential in accordance with rules adopted by the Procurement Manager.

(E) The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors. Specific numerical weighting is not required.

(F) As provided in the request for proposals, and under rules adopted by the Procurement Manager, discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible to being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of the solicitation requirements and to permit revision of offers. Offerors shall be accorded fair treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion. Revisions may be permitted after submission and before award. If discussions are conducted, all offerors who have submitted proposals that are determined by the Procurement Manager to be in the competitive range shall be invited to submit a final proposal revision. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors.

(G) The award shall be made to the responsible and responsive offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city taking into consideration the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria may be used in the evaluation. The amount of any applicable transaction privilege or use tax of the city, except as allowed by § 3-5-9(F) and applied to proposals, is not a factor in determining the most advantageous proposal. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2534 with changes


3-5-11 CANCELLATION OF INVITATION FOR BIDS OR REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS.

An invitation for bids, a request for proposals or other solicitation may be cancelled or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation if it is in the best interests of the city as determined by the Procurement Manager and the evaluators. The reasons for the cancellation or rejection shall be made part of the contract file. The City Council may reject any bid that exceeds the prescribed amounts in § 3-4-8.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2539 with changes


3-5-12 RESPONSIBILITY OF BIDDERS AND OFFERORS.

(A) A written determination of non responsibility of a bidder or offeror shall be made in accordance with rules adopted by the Procurement Manager. The unreasonable failure of a bidder or offeror to promptly supply information in connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility shall be grounds for a determination of non responsibility with respect to the bidder or offerors. A finding of non responsibility shall not be construed as a violation of the rights of any person.

(B) Information furnished by a bidder or offeror pursuant to this section shall not be disclosed outside of the office of the Procurement Manager without prior written consent by the bidder or offeror except to law enforcement agencies or as otherwise required by applicable law.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2540 with changes


3-5-13 SOLE SOURCE AND SINGLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT.

A contract may be awarded for a material, service or construction item without competition if the Procurement Manager determines in writing that there is a sole or single source for the required material, service or construction item. The Procurement Manager may require the submission of cost or pricing data in connection with an award under this section. Sole or single source procurement shall be avoided, except when no reasonable alternative sources exist. A written determination of the basis for the sole or single source procurement shall be included in the procurement file.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2536 with changes


3-5-14 EMERGENCY PROCUREMENTS.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the Procurement Manager may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements if there exists a threat to public health, welfare, or safety or if a situation exists which makes compliance with §§ 3-5-9, 3-5-10, or 3-5-20 impracticable, unnecessary or contrary to the public interest as defined in rules adopted by the Procurement Manager, except that such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file, and a full report of the circumstances of the emergency and the goods and services obtained shall be reported to the Council at its next regular meeting.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2537 with changes


3-5-15 COMPETITION IMPRACTICABLE PROCUREMENT.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the Procurement Manager may make, or authorize others to make, procurements that do not have to meet the requirements in § 3-5-9, 3-5-10, or 3-5-20 if the Procurement Manager deems compliance with those provisions impracticable, unnecessary, or disadvantageous to the city’s interest. Such procurements shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the procurement and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2537 with changes


3-5-16 REQUEST FOR INFORMATION.

The Procurement Manager may issue a request for information to obtain data about services or materials available to meet a specific need. Adequate public notice as specified in § 3-5-9 shall be provided.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2555 with changes


3-5-17 DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS.

(A) A demonstration project may be undertaken if the Procurement Manager determines in writing that the project is innovative, unique, and in the best interests of the city. The city shall not be obligated to pay the contractor during the demonstration period, or to procure or lease the services or materials supplied by the contractor. However, on the written request and justification by a department director and written determination by the Procurement Manager, the city may pay the contractor all or part of the expendable costs incurred during the demonstration period. The term of the demonstration shall not exceed two years.

(B) A subsequent contract to procure or lease services or materials previously supplied during a demonstration project may be procured under this section, subject to the Procurement Manager’s approval, or it may be procured as otherwise provided in this article.

(C) Except as otherwise provided by law, a contractor for a demonstration project shall not be precluded from participating as a bidder or offeror in a procurement for the services or materials supplied during a demonstration project.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2556 with changes


3-5-18 UNSOLICITED PROPOSALS.

A contract may be awarded based on an unsolicited proposal only if the Procurement Manager determines in writing that §§ 3-5-13 or 3-5-15 applies. The determination shall also include the following findings:

(A) The proposal is innovative and unique.

(B) The proposal is not available without restriction from another source and does not closely resemble a similar product which is either available or pending in the industry.

(C) The city department receiving the proposal has sufficiently supported its recommendations with facts and circumstances that preclude competition.

(D) The Procurement Manager has approved in writing the award of a contract based on the unsolicited proposal.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2557 with changes


3-5-19 GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION (GSA) CONTRACTS.

Notwithstanding §§ 3-5-9 and 3-5-10, the Procurement Manager or the Procurement Manager’s designee may use the pricing and cost schedules of General Services Administration (GSA) contracts for materials and services. The Procurement Manager or the Procurement Manager’s designee may authorize a city department to make purchases under a GSA contract approved by the Procurement Manager or the Procurement Manager’s designee without complying with the requirements prescribed in §§ 3-5-9 or 3-5-10 if the Procurement Manager or the Procurement Manager’s designee determines that it meets the requirements established by the rules.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2558 with changes


3-5-20 PROCUREMENT OF CONSTRUCTION AND SPECIFIED PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.

Professional services contracts with technical registrants, as defined in A.R.S. Title 32, and construction services contracts will be governed by the provisions of A.R.S. Title 34.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)


3-5-21 COST PRINCIPLES RULES.

The Procurement Manager may adopt rules setting forth cost principles which shall be used to determine the allowability of incurred costs under contract provisions which provide for the reimbursement of costs.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2591 with changes


3-5-22 APPROVAL OF ACCOUNTING SYSTEM.

Except with respect to firm fixed price contracts, no contract type may be used unless it is determined in writing by the Procurement Manager, or the Procurement Manager’s designee that the proposed contractor’s accounting system is adequate to allocate costs.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2545 with changes


3-5-23 COST OR PRICING DATA.

The submission of current cost or pricing data may be required in connection with an award in situations in which analysis of the proposed price is essential to determine that the price is reasonable and fair. The Procurement Manager may establish by rules what constitutes a fair and reasonable price.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 41-2543 with changes


ARTICLE 3-6 Material Management

Section

3-6-1    Definitions

3-6-2    Property Administrator

3-6-3    Surplus property management rules

3-6-4    Disposition of real property


3-6-1 DEFINITIONS.

In Article 3-6, unless the context otherwise requires:

PROPERTY. Assets with a useful life of more than one year.

PROPERTY TRANSFER FORM. A form submitted by the department requesting transfer of fixed assets between departments or transfer of property to or from the Surplus Property Program.

SURPLUS PROPERTY. Property no longer needed by city departments for their operations, obsolete property, property in poor or non working condition, or property that is a by product (e.g. scrap metal, used tires and oil, etc.). It does not include real property, which is governed by § 3-6-4.

UNCLAIMED, LOST AND CONFISCATED PROPERTY. All property used as evidence in the courts and remaining unclaimed after final disposition, property seized by a peace officer as being used unlawfully, and all property coming into the hands of any city officer or employee as lost or unclaimed.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)


3-6-2 PROPERTY ADMINISTRATOR.

The Procurement Manager, as appointed by the City Manager, shall serve as the Property Administrator for the city and shall be primarily responsible for all property, real or personal, belonging to the city. The Procurement Manager may designate another employee of the city as Property Administrator, and such designee shall report to the Procurement Manager. The real estate coordinator, and other real estate staff, in the Engineering Department will report to the Director of Engineering, but will coordinate and advise the Property Administrator of all real estate transactions for the city.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)


3-6-3 SURPLUS PROPERTY MANAGEMENT RULES.

The Procurement Manager shall adopt rules governing:

(A) The transfer of surplus property and operation of the surplus property program.

(B) The sale or disposal of surplus, unclaimed and seized property by public auction, competitive formal and informal bid, electronic, or other appropriate method designated by regulation.

(C) The trade in of surplus property for purchase of new equipment.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)


3-6-4 DISPOSITION OF REAL PROPERTY.

Any disposition of real property or improvements thereto may be made by public auction or otherwise in accordance with an approved method as determined by City Council.

(Ord. 08-1137, passed 9-22-2008)


ARTICLE 3-7 Emergency Services and Disaster

Section

3-7-1    Purposes

3-7-2    Definitions

3-7-3    Emergency services organization

3-7-4    Powers and duties

3-7-5    Mutual aid

3-7-6    Immunity of city and representatives thereof


3-7-1 PURPOSES.

The purposes of this article are to:

(A) Reduce vulnerability of people and the community to damage, injury and loss of life and property resulting from natural, technical, political or man made catastrophes, riots or hostile military or paramilitary action;

(B) Prepare for prompt and efficient rescue, care and treatment of persons victimized or threatened by disaster;

(C) Provide a setting conducive to the rapid and orderly start of recovery of persons and property affected by disasters;

(D) Clarify and strengthen the roles of elected officials, staff and citizens in prevention of, preparation for and response to and recovery from disasters;

(E) Authorize and provide for cooperation in disaster mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery;

(F) Authorize and provide for coordination of activities relating to disaster mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery by agencies and officers of this city, agencies of the private sector and similar activities in which the federal government, the state and its political subdivisions may participate;

(G) Provide a disaster management system embodying all aspects of pre disaster preparedness and post disaster response.

(Prior Code, § 3-7-1)


3-7-2 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

DIRECTOR. The Director of Emergency Services.

DISASTER. The occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property or extreme peril to the safety of persons or property resulting from any natural or man made causes, including, but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, blight, drought, famine, infestation, air contamination, epidemic, explosion, riot or other acts of civil disobedience which endanger life or property or hostile military or paramilitary action.

EMERGENCY. A situation arising with or without warning, causing or threatening death, injury or disruption to normal life for number of people in excess of those which can be dealt with by the public services operating under normal conditions and which requires special mobilization and organization of those forces.

EMERGENCY FORCES. All governmental and private sector agencies, departments, trained manpower, volunteers and other resources required to perform emergency functions.

EMERGENCY SERVICES. The organization, administration, trained manpower, facilities, equipment, material, supplies, programs, emergency plans, ability to execute emergency plans and all other measures necessary and incidental thereto relating to disaster prevention preparedness response and recovery by all governmental and private sector agencies to protect or save health, life or property.

LOCAL EMERGENCY. The existence of disaster conditions of extreme peril to the safety of persons or property within the territorial limits of the county, city or town which are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of such political subdivisions as determined by its governing body and which requires the combined efforts of other political subdivisions.

REGULATIONS. The orders, rules and emergency procedures deemed essential for civil preparedness.

STATE OF EMERGENCY. The duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or extreme peril in the state which are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment or facilities of any single county, city or town and which requires the combined efforts of the state and the political subdivision.

STATE OF WAR EMERGENCY. The situation which exists immediately whenever this nation is attacked or upon receipt by this state of a warning from the federal government indicating that such an attack is imminent.

(Prior Code, § 3-7-2)


3-7-3 EMERGENCY SERVICES ORGANIZATION.

The City Manager is authorized and directed to create an emergency services organization. The Director of Emergency Services shall be appointed by the City Manager.

(Prior Code, § 3-7-3)


3-7-4 POWERS AND DUTIES.

(A) The Council:

(1) Shall have the power to make, amend and rescind regulations, not inconsistent with regulations promulgated by the Governor, necessary for civil preparedness, which regulations shall have the full effect of this article when a copy is filed in the office of the Clerk. Existing ordinances and regulations or ordinances and regulations issued under authority of A.R.S. Title 26, Ch. 2 in conflict therewith are suspended during the time and to the extent that they are in conflict;

(2) May appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and distribute equipment, materials and supplies for emergency services purposes;

(3) In the absence of specific authority in state emergency plans and procedures, the Council shall take emergency measures as deemed necessary to carry out the provisions of A.R.S. Title 26, Ch. 2;

(4) In a state of war emergency, the Council may waive procedures and formalities required by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, incurring obligations, employing permanent and temporary workers, utilizing volunteer workers, renting equipment, purchasing and distributing supplies, materials and facilities and appropriating and expending public funds when the Council determines and declares that strict compliance with such procedures and formalities may prevent, hinder or delay mitigation of the effects of the state of war emergency. The city shall be exempt during such emergency from budget limitations prescribed by State Constitution, Art. IX, § 20.

(B) The Mayor:

(1) In addition to the powers granted by other provisions of the law or city ordinance, the Mayor may, by proclamation, declare an emergency or a local emergency to exist. The proclamation may be rescinded by a majority of the Council after 24 hours;

(2) During an emergency or local emergency, the Mayor shall govern by proclamation and shall have the authority to impose all necessary regulations to preserve the peace and order of the city, including, but not limited to:

(a) Imposition of curfews in all or in a portion of the city;

(b) Ordering the closing of any business;

(c) Closing to public access any public building, street or other public place;

(d) Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations within or without the city for assistance.

(C) The City Manager:

(1) Is responsible for the appointment of a Director and the overall emergency preparedness of the city;

(2) During emergencies shall act as the principal advisor or aide to the Mayor on emergency operations. His or her major responsibility is to serve as Deputy to the Mayor, to assist the Mayor in developing and implementing policy and assuring that the emergency operations center functions properly.

(D) The Director:

(1) The Director is responsible in nonemergency periods to act on behalf of the City Manager to develop a readiness plan for the city’s emergency preparedness and for coordinated operations in disaster situations;

(2) During emergencies, the Director shall act as the principal advisor or aide to the City Manager on emergency operations. His or her major responsibility is to assure coordination among emergency forces and with higher and adjacent governments. He or she shall assist the City Manager in the execution of operations, plans and procedures required by the emergency;

(3) The Director shall prepare a comprehensive disaster basic plan which shall be adopted and maintained by resolution of the Council upon the recommendations of the Director. In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to city organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies be used to the fullest extent;

(4) The disaster plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law whenever emergencies, as defined in this article, have been proclaimed.

(Prior Code, § 3-7-4)


3-7-5 MUTUAL AID.

In periods of local emergency as declared pursuant to this article, the city is granted full power to provide mutual aid to any affected area in accordance with local ordinances, resolutions, emergency plans or agreements therefor. The city may request from state agencies mutual aid, including personnel, equipment and other available resources to assist the city during the local emergency in accordance with emergency plans or at the direction of the Governor.

(Prior Code, § 3-7-5)


3-7-6 IMMUNITY OF CITY AND REPRESENTATIVES THEREOF.

(A) The city shall not be liable for any claim based upon the exercise or performance or the failure to exercise or perform a discretionary function or duty on the part of the city or any employee of the city, except willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith of any such employee, in carrying out the provisions of A.R.S. Title 26, Ch. 2.

(B) The immunities from liability, exemptions from laws, ordinances and rules, all pensions, relief, disability worker’s compensation and other benefits which apply to the activity of officers, agents or employees of the city when performing their respective functions within the limits of the city shall apply to them to the same degree and extent while engaged in the performance of any of their functions and duties extraterritorially under the provisions of this article, excepting willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith.

(C) Volunteers duly enrolled or registered for services in a local emergency, a state of emergency or a state of war emergency in carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any regulations issued pursuant to A.R.S. Title 26, Ch. 2 or any local ordinance or performing any of their authorized functions or duties or training for the performance of their authorized functions or duties shall have the same degree of responsibility for their actions and enjoy immunities as officers and employees of the state and its political subdivisions performing similar work.

(Prior Code, § 3-7-6)


ARTICLE 3-8 Economic Development

Section

3-8-1    Authorization to reimburse development-related fees, city sales tax revenues and expend public funds in furtherance of economic development in the city

3-8-2    Criteria

3-8-3    Redevelopment projects


3-8-1 AUTHORIZATION TO REIMBURSE DEVELOPMENT RELATED FEES, CITY SALES TAX REVENUES AND EXPEND PUBLIC FUNDS IN FURTHERANCE OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN THE CITY.

If the City Council determines the criteria set forth in § 3-8-2 of this article are satisfied, the city may enter into development agreements or other contracts which provide for:

(A) Reimbursement of development fees, and/or reimbursement of any other fees required to be paid in connection with the construction, expansion or redevelopment of a commercial or industrial project; or

(B) Authorizing city resources to construct off site public infrastructure required for the development of a commercial or industrial project; or

(C) Reimbursement of all or a portion of the sales tax revenues levied, generated and received by the city as a result of the construction, expansion or redevelopment of the commercial or industrial project, unless the sales tax revenues are subject to a prior senior pledge; or

(D) Reimbursement of a percentage of the construction sales tax levied in certain circumstances for projects in accordance with the guidelines herein; or

(E) Collaborative opportunities between public and/or private sector entities.

(F) The authority set forth in this section shall terminate December 31, 2008.

(Ord. 97-574, passed 4-22-1997; Am. Ord. 98-596, passed 3-23-1998; Am. Ord. 00-692, passed 6-12-2000; Am. Ord. 03-846, passed 6-23-2003; Am. Ord. 05-958, passed 8-22-05)


3-8-2 CRITERIA.

Pursuant to this article, the city may enter into development agreements or other contracts that reimburse development related fees, expend city funds, reimburse city sales tax revenues, and/or reimburse a percentage of the construction sales tax levied in certain circumstances for projects only upon satisfaction of all of the following criteria:

(A) The project furthers the goals of the city as established within the following documents adopted by City Council and subject to updates as approved by the City Council or vote of the public:

(1) Focused Future II Strategic Plan for Economic Development as adopted by City Council in May 2002; or

(2) Goodyear Economic Corridor Study conducted by Arizona State University’s School of Planning and Landscape Architecture as adopted by City Council in May 2003; or

(3) The Goodyear Redevelopment Plan, as adopted by City Council in January 2005; or

(4) Goodyear General Plan, as amended from time to time, and other applicable ordinances of the city.

(B) The reimbursement of the fees, expenditure of the funds, rebate of city sales tax revenues, and/or reimbursement of a percentage of the construction sales tax levied are reasonably expected to assist in the creation or retention of jobs in the city or will otherwise improve or enhance the economic welfare of the city.

(C) The benefits the city will receive from the commercial or industrial project are reasonably expected to outweigh the economic costs to the city, as demonstrated through the city’s fiscal impact analysis model.

(D) The city has funds available for certain off site infrastructure improvements.

(E) The recipient, in order to receive benefits as outlined in the ordinance, and further defined in a development agreement, shall:

(1) Enter into a development agreement with the city as to the terms and conditions of the development and such other provisions as may be requested by the city, as authorized under A.R.S. § 9-500.05 and/or A.R.S. § 9-500.11. The development agreement must be consistent with this article and shall further identify the rights and obligations of the parties under this article. The information shall not include proprietary or certain financial information that, in the reasonable opinion of the recipient, could be used to recipient’s competitive disadvantage by market competitors; and

(2) Provide information, including capital investment and employment projections, to enable the city to prepare an economic assessment of the recipient project; and

(3) Provide an update of information, including capital investment and employment projections, 12 months after business operations have begun.

(Ord. 97-574, passed 4-22-1997; Am. Ord. 98-596, passed 3-23-1998; Am. Ord. 00-692, passed 6-12-2000; Am. Ord. 03-846, passed 6-23-2003; Am. Ord. 05-958, passed 8-22-05)


3-8-3 REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.

(A) For the purposes of this article, redevelopment projects include commercial and industrial buildings or property that may have adverse social, economic, and physical conditions, which constitute a danger to the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the community. These deficiencies are defined as having at least three of the following characteristics:

(1) Aging, deteriorating, and poorly maintained buildings and structures sometimes intermingled with historically significant structures.

(2) Factors that substantially hinder the economically viable use of lots or buildings.

(3) Incompatible adjacent or nearby uses that prevent economic development.

(4) High business vacancies, low lease rates, high turnover rates or abandoned buildings.

(5) Depreciated or stagnant property values or impaired investments.

(6) Underutilized or underdeveloped land or property.

(B) The recipient projects will preserve and/or enhance existing facilities and historical areas that create employment opportunities and provide economic benefits to the city by revitalizing the project area. The city may establish redevelopment zones or areas within the community.

(Ord. 97-574, passed 4-22-1997; Am. Ord. 98-596, passed 3-23-1998; Am. Ord. 00-692, passed 6-12-2000; Am. Ord. 03-846, passed 6-23-2003; Am. Ord. 05-958, passed 8-22-05)


ARTICLE 3-9 Public and Performing Arts Program

Section

3-9-1    Statement of Purpose: Public and Performing Arts Program

3-9-2    Definitions

3-9-3    Goodyear Arts and Culture Commission

3-9-4    Public Art Fund


3-9-1 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE: PUBLIC AND PERFORMING ARTS PROGRAM.

The intent of this article is to beautify public areas, enhance quality of life for Goodyear citizens, attract tourism, promote City services and departments, provide a mechanism to meaningfully involve citizens in the design of their environment, and encourage businesses to locate within the City, thus expanding Goodyear’s economic base through the promotion and encouragement of private and public programs, to further the development and public awareness of and interest in the visual and performing arts, to increase employment opportunities in the arts, and to encourage the integration of art into the architecture of municipal structures. This program shall hereinafter be referred to as the "Public and Performing Arts Program."

(Ord. 06-999, passed 4-24-2006; Am. Ord. 12-1256, passed 4-24-2012)


3-9-2 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

ANNUAL PUBLIC ART PROJECT PLAN. Recommendations from the Commission for public art projects and performing arts expenditures proposed for each immediate fiscal year and projections for public art and performing arts expenditures for the next five fiscal years, which report shall be submitted prior to April 1st of each year. The Mayor and City Council will review the plan in a policy session. City Council may amend and approve the final plan by increasing or decreasing the amount of money allocated for public and performing arts projects in a regular session.

CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN PROJECT. Any capital project paid for wholly or in part by the City for design services, engineering, and related costs for new construction or the substantial remodeling of any building, structure, park, utility, street, sidewalk, parking facility, bridge or utility undertaking within the limits of the City. Capital improvement plan projects also include capital projects for construction, remodeling, or expansion of water production and storage facilities, wastewater treatment and reclamation facilities, drainage facilities, and infrastructure for water or wastewater projects, within the limits of the City.

COMMISSION. The Goodyear Arts and Culture Commission.

PERFORMING ARTS. Art disciplines, including but not limited to dance, music, and theatre, which are presented in a public forum within the limits of the City.

PUBLIC AND PERFORMING ARTS PROGRAM. Performing Arts or Public Art projects as authorized by this chapter and as recommended by the Goodyear Arts and Culture Commission in the Annual Public Art Project Plan.

PUBLIC ART. Works of art placed in areas accessible to the public. Examples of public art include, but are not limited to, murals, fountains, sculptures, and paintings.

(Ord. 06-999, passed 4-24-2006; Am. Ord. 12-1256, passed 4-24-2012)


3-9-3 GOODYEAR ARTS AND CULTURE COMMISSION.

(A) To carry out the responsibilities and duties set forth herein, there is hereby created a "Goodyear Arts and Culture Commission" to consist of nine voting members plus one alternate and one standing ex officio member. The Commission shall strive to include one Goodyear business owner, one Goodyear resident who is a visual or performing artist, and one standing ex officio member from the West Valley Arts Council. All members, with the exception of the ex officio member from the West Valley Arts Council, shall be residents of the City of Goodyear at large.

(B) The members of the Arts and Culture Commission shall serve for a term of three years. If a vacancy occurs on the Commission, the City Council shall appoint the alternate member to complete the unexpired term. The unexpired term does not count against total appointment time. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed. 

(C) Chairpersons and Vice Chairpersons shall be elected by the members of the Commission for terms of one year. No member shall serve on the Commission for more than two consecutive three-year terms. All officers shall be elected from among the membership of the Commission.

(D) The Commission shall act as an advisory body to the City Manager and the City Council and make recommendations regarding, but not limited to:

(1) Policies, priorities, and plans for promoting, advancing, and maintaining Public Art Projects and Performing Arts events and programs in Goodyear;

(2) Allocation and budgeting of funds for Public Art and Performing Arts through the Annual Public Art Project Plan;

(3) Encouraging the promotion of Arizona artists in City art projects by setting annual goals to be identified in the Annual Public Art Project Plan and approved by City Council;

(4) Encouraging citizen input and involvement in the design and selection of artists for public art projects and performing arts events and programs;

(5) Coordinating with the private sector and other governmental agencies in promoting arts and cultural excellence as a tool for the encouragement of economic development, business relocation and tourism; and

(6) Organizing and promoting Public Art Projects and Performing Arts events and programs that celebrate the City and its unique cultural heritage.

(E) Five of the nine voting members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting Commission business and action may be had upon a majority vote of the quorum.

(F) The Commission may organize committees and adopt rules and procedures necessary to accomplish its purpose.

(G) The Commission may approve the artist and the art concept, subject to the Goodyear Procurement Rules and Regulations and any other applicable law.

(H) The Commission may engage in fundraising activities for the purpose of advancing public art projects and performing arts events and programs. All money collected by the Commission pursuant to this provision shall be placed in a separate revenue generating account used to carry out the intent of this article.

(Ord. 06-999, passed 4-24-2006; Am. Ord. 10-1206, passed 1-25-2010; Am. Ord. 11-1230, passed 1-10-11; Am. Ord. 12-1256, passed 4-24-2012)


3-9-4 PUBLIC ART FUND.

(A) The City shall establish a special fund designated as "Public Art Fund" into which funds appropriated in accordance with the City’s annual budget process and as contemplated by this article shall be allocated. Up to 1% of costs for eligible Capital Improvement Plan Projects may be allocated to the Public Art Fund.

(B) The monies appropriated for the Public Art Fund may be used to fund any public art project that is authorized in accordance with this article. The Public Art Fund is not available for performing arts events and programs recommended by the Commission.

(C) Expenditures from the Public Art Fund shall be recommended by the Commission through its Annual Public Art Project Plan and shall be subject to approval by the City Council. Expenditures must conform to the City’s procurement regulations, as may be amended from time to time.

(Ord. 06-999, passed 4-24-2006; Am. Ord. 12-1256, passed 4-24-2012)


ARTICLE 3-10 Sister Cities Commission

Section

3-10-1    Statement of purpose

3-10-2    Goodyear Sister Cities Commission


3-10-1 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.

The Sister Cities Commission will (A) advise the City Council in all matters related to the development of one or more sister city relationships for the City of Goodyear, which would present possibilities for economic benefit and recognition of cultural diversity, and (B) advise the City Council about the ongoing opportunities for developing economic benefits and cultural diversity through the creation of programs and/or events related to sister cities.

(Ord. 07-1088, passed 9-24-2007)


3-10-2 GOODYEAR SISTER CITIES COMMISSION.

(A) To carry out the responsibilities and duties set forth herein, there is hereby created a "Goodyear Sister Cities Commission" to consist of 15 members. The Commission should include members who are representative of a diverse community, and to the extent practicable, members of racial or ethnic minorities.

(B) The Commission will be composed of 15 persons, including three ex officio members: the Mayor, a Councilmember, and the Economic Development Director, or their designees. Their terms are permanent. One member of the Youth Commission will serve as a member of the Sister Cities Commission with a term of one year. The remaining members, 11 citizens, shall serve staggered three-year terms. For the first term, six members will serve for three years and five members for a term of two years. If a vacancy occurs on the Commission, the City Council shall appoint the alternate member to complete the unexpired term. The unexpired term does not count against total appointment time. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed.

(C) The initial Chairperson of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council for a term of one year. Subsequent Chairpersons shall be elected by the members of the Commission for terms of one year. No member shall serve on the Commission for more than two consecutive three-year terms. All officers shall be elected from among the membership of the Commission.

(D) The Commission shall act as an advisory body to the City Council and make recommendations as appropriate.

(E) Four of the seven members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting Commission business and action may be had upon a majority vote of the quorum.

(F) The Commission should make an annual report to the City Council at the end of the City’s fiscal year, and otherwise report to the City Council on an as-needed basis to carry out the programs and activities approved by Council.

(G) The Commission may organize committees and adopt rules and procedures necessary to accomplish its purpose.

(Ord. 07-1088, passed 9-24-2007)


ARTICLE 3-11 Youth Commission

Section

3-11-1    Statement of purpose

3-11-2    Goodyear Youth Commission


3-11-1 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.

The Youth Commission will provide a forum for students to develop leadership skills through involvement in City government and by expressing opinions on a variety of youth-related issues, such as youth programming, recreation opportunities, and special events.

(Ord. 07-1089, passed 9-24-2007)


3-11-2 GOODYEAR YOUTH COMMISSION.

(A) To carry out the responsibilities and duties set forth herein, there is hereby created a "Goodyear Youth Commission" to consist of 20 voting members who are high school students that also reside in Goodyear. The Commission should include, to the extent practicable, members of racial or ethnic minorities.

(B) The members of the Youth Commission shall serve for a term of one year, except that the members of the first Commission shall serve staggered terms: 10 members for one year and 10 members for a term of two years. If a vacancy occurs on the Commission, the City Council shall appoint the alternate member to complete the unexpired term. The unexpired term does not count against total appointment time. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed.

(C) The initial Chairperson of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council for a term of one year. Subsequent Chairpersons shall be elected by the members of the Commission for terms of one year. No member shall serve on the Commission for more than two consecutive one-year terms. All officers shall be elected from among the membership of the Commission.

(D) The City Council shall provide a charge to the Commission to assist in structuring and guide its mission and purpose. The Commission shall act as an advisory body to the City Council and make recommendations regarding but not limited to:

(1) Policies, priorities, and plans for involving youth in City government to promote leadership and civic responsibility, including development of youth programming and recreation;

(2) Developing a budget for any planned project and presentation of the project to the City Council for approval.

(E) Eleven of the 20 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting Commission business and action may be had upon a majority vote of the quorum.

(F) The Commission may organize committees and adopt rules and procedures necessary to accomplish its purpose.

(Ord. 07-1089, passed 9-24-2007)


ARTICLE 3-12: City of Goodyear Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer

Section

3-12-1    Purpose

3-12-2    Policy statement

3-12-3    Definitions

3-12-4    Rights of Employees and Public Safety Sworn Employee Organizations

3-12-5    Rights of Management

3-12-6    Employee Groups

3-12-7    Petition process

3-12-8    Election procedures

3-12-9    Decertification process/disqualification

3-12-10    Scope of Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer

Meet and Discuss

3-12-11    Meet and Discuss procedures

Meet and Confer

3-12-13    Purpose

3-12-14    Meet and Confer process

3-12-15    Resolution of claims of breach of a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)

3-12-16    Reopening a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)

3-12-17    Conflicts

3-12-18    Delegation

3-12-19    Prohibitions

3-12-20    Severability

3-12-21    Non-arbitration/mediation

3-12-22    Meet and Discuss initial period

3-12-23    Effective date


3-12-1 PURPOSE.

This article establishes a process to facilitate communication between the City Manager and the selected representatives of the City’s Public Safety Sworn Employees regarding certain subjects connected to their employment through a "Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer" process.

Sworn Employees within two designated Employee Groups may select representatives for the purpose of participating in the Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer process on their behalf, pursuant to this article. The certified representatives of these Groups may meet with the City Manager to discuss certain defined subjects, such as the wages, hours, benefits (excluding health care), and working conditions of employees in the Employee Group. This article also establishes the method for communicating recommendations that may result from the Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer process to the Goodyear City Council through the City Manager utilizing the Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer process.

Recognizing that working together is usually the most productive and effective method, Employee Organizations shall engage in the "Meet and Discuss" process for a minimum of 12 months following certification. Pursuant to the Meet and Discuss process, an Employee Organization may meet with the City Manager on behalf of an Employee Group regarding issues such as wages, hours, benefits (excluding health care) and other similar items that are mutually agreed upon by the Employee Organization and the City Manager. The Meet and Discuss process shall not result in a Memorandum of Understanding or similar memorialized written document. The Meet and Discuss process and the products of that process are described specifically in Section 3-12-11.

An Employee Organization may elect to engage in the Meet and Confer process described in Section 3-12-14, only after it has participated in the "Meet and Discuss" process for a minimum of 12 months following certification.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-2 POLICY STATEMENT.

(A) The City of Goodyear is committed to promoting open and honest communication between City Management and City employees regarding employment issues.

(B) The City Manager’s Office will maintain an "open door" policy regarding communication with employees and will use a variety of resources to actively and regularly communicate with employees. Employees are encouraged to communicate directly with the City Manager’s Office about issues of interest to them, including employment issues, throughout the year.

(C) The Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer process will respect both the rights of City Management and employees, as defined in this article.

(D) The City of Goodyear currently has in place a number of personnel rules, policies, regulations and practices to effectively respond to and resolve the employment issues that are raised by its employees. The process outlined in this article is intended to provide an additional tool that will supplement the City’s efforts to establish positive and mutually rewarding employment relationships with employees. It shall not be construed as intending to repeal, usurp or bypass any current or future City of Goodyear personnel rules, policies, regulations or practices dealing with employment issues. Individual employment terms and cases of employee discipline are outside the scope of this article.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-3 DEFINITIONS.

When used in this document the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings defined below. All other words shall have the meaning ascribed to them by Personnel Rule, City Charter, or other sections of the City Code as appropriate.

(A) BUDGET YEAR. Budget year means the period for which the Council appropriates City funds during its budget process.

(B) CERTIFICATION. Certification is the designation by the City Manager of a Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization as the designated representative of an Employee Group for the purpose of engaging in the Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer process.

(C) PUBLIC SAFETY SWORN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION. An organization representing employees within an Employee Group for the purpose of engaging in the Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer process.

(D) DECERTIFICATION. Decertification is the removal by the City Manager of a Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization as the designated representative of an Employee Group.

(E) ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE. Eligible employees include Sworn Police Employees in classifications up to and including the rank of Sergeant, and Sworn Fire Employees, in classifications up to and including the rank of Captain, who have completed their Trial Service period with the City. Contract, part-time, temporary, and seasonal employees are excluded. An individual employee’s eligibility to participate in the process described in this article will be determined by the City Manager.

(F) TRIAL SERVICE. Consistent with City Personnel Policies, a Trial Service Employee shall mean an employee who is in his or her first year of service after hire and any required Academy. Trial Service may be extended at the discretion of the City Manager. A Trial Service Employee serves as an "employee at will" whose employment may be terminated at any time without notice. Trial Service Employees do not have access to the City’s appeals process in the event of termination. Trial Service Employees are not eligible to participate in the Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer process and they may not vote in a certification election until they have completed their Trial Service period.

(G) SWORN EMPLOYEE. A Sworn Employee is a Police or Fire employee who is a member of the Arizona Public Safety Personnel System.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-4 RIGHTS OF EMPLOYEES AND PUBLIC SAFETY SWORN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS.

(A) Employees have the right to participate on behalf of, or engage in activities on behalf of, a Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization during non-working times, and have the right to refrain from such activities. Employees shall be free from any interference, restraint, or coercion with respect to the exercise of these rights.

(B) Violations of the rights described above may result in disciplinary action to an employee, up to and including discharge. Violations of these rights by officials, officers or agents of a Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization and/or organization seeking Certification under this article also may result in Decertification of the Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization and/or disqualification from the Certification process by the City Manager.

(C) There can be only one Certified Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization for each Employee Group for purposes of the Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer process. Nothing in this document will prohibit any employee from exercising any rights the employee may have to meet with the City Manager or other City official consistent with personnel rules and regulations or any City Manager policies or directives. The City Manager will maintain an "open door" policy regarding communications with employees and will use a variety of resources to actively and regularly communicate with employees. Employees are encouraged to communicate directly with the City Manager throughout the year.

(D) Meeting and Discussing/Meeting and Conferring will be conducted through the defined process with the City Manager. Violation of this process may result in Decertification by the City Manager.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-5 RIGHTS OF MANAGEMENT.

(A) The following are illustrative of the reserved rights of Management and are not to be construed as being all-inclusive.

City Management will maintain the right to determine the purpose of each of its departments, agencies, boards and commissions, and set standards of service to be offered to the public and shall exercise complete control and discretion over its organization and operations consistent with the City Charter, City Code and City Personnel Policies and Guidelines. For example,

(1) The City will direct its employees, take disciplinary action, relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work, budgetary constraints, disciplinary reasons, or for other legitimate reasons.

(2) The City will determine whether goods and services shall be produced or provided by City employees, purchased or contracted for, and determine the methods, means, and personnel by which the City’s operations are to be conducted.

(3) The City may alter, combine, or cease any department, operation or service, and may move or interchange equipment, functions and operations between its departments or facilities.

(4) The City Manager may, but is not obligated to, consult with the City’s employees, or their authorized representatives, about the direct consequences that decisions on any of the foregoing matters may have on wages, hours, and working conditions.

(5) The City will determine the overall goals, objectives and policies affecting City programs.

(6) The City will determine the size of the City’s workforce, its organization, reduction, functions, duties, amount of supervision, and table of organization.

(7) The City will direct, appoint, employ and assign officers, agents and employees of the City and determine the standards therefore.

(8) The City will determine the location of City facilities, including the establishment or relocation of buildings, divisions or subdivisions thereof, and the relocation or closing of offices, departments, divisions or subdivisions, buildings or other facilities.

(9) The City will decide the need for, and will select and acquire, all machinery, equipment, tools, components, supplies and materials.

(10) The City will determine the financial policies, including all accounting procedures and all matters pertaining to finance.

(11) The City will direct, supervise, control and evaluate the departments, units, programs, functions and services of the City.

(12) The City will classify or reclassify the various positions of the City, add or combine classifications, develop and determine levels of staffing and training, prescribe duties and standards of productivity therefore, and adopt personnel policies and guidelines, and administer the adopted merit system for eligible employees.

(13) The City will establish job requirements, job content, and the extent and nature of the work to be performed.

(14) The City will adopt reasonable rules and regulations concerning acceptable employee conduct, including rules and regulations concerning work, appearance and attendance standards, health and safety rules, policies pertaining to protective measures, devices or equipment, apparel, tobacco or training, and drug and alcohol testing policies and procedures.

(15) The City will take all necessary actions to maintain uninterrupted service to the community.

(16) The City will authorize, assign and apportion overtime, including authorization for any full, temporary, part-time or contract labor.

(17) The City and City Manager’s rights are not subjugated or diminished in any way by any expressed or implied duty or obligation to Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer. The authority of the City or City Manager shall not be modified or limited by inference or implication by this article.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-6 EMPLOYEE GROUPS.

The Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer process shall be limited to a total of two Employee Groups. They shall include:

(A) Eligible Sworn Police Officers in classifications up to and including the rank of Sergeant.

(B) Eligible Sworn Firefighters in classifications up to and including the rank of Captain.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-7 PETITION PROCESS.

(A) A Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization seeking recognition as the Certified Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization of an Employee Group for purposes of Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer shall submit a petition or signature cards to the City Clerk requesting such Certification. There shall be no solicitation of employees to sign such petitions or cards during the employee’s working time. Petitions shall be submitted no earlier than July 15th and no later than September 15th in any budget year. Each petition shall contain or be accompanied by:

(1) The name and address of the Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization, a copy of its charter, constitution and by-laws, and the names, titles, addresses and telephone numbers of all of its current duly elected officers.

(2) The name, title, address and telephone number of at least one duly elected officer of the Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization who has full authority to meet on behalf of the Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization, make commitments on its behalf, and represent the Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization during the Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer process with the City.

(3) A request for a secret ballot election to determine whether Eligible Employees in the Employee Group desire to be represented for purposes of Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer by the Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization.

(4) Signatures of at least 30% of the Eligible Employees in the Employee Group who support the petition for an election.

(5) The printed name, signature, date of signature, and employee classification and number of each person supporting the petition. Signatures may be submitted on a single petition or on separate signature cards. Petition or card signatures that are not post-marked or stamped received by the City Clerk’s Office within the designated petition period, or are dated more than 60 calendar days prior to submission, shall not be counted. If an employee signs more than one petition, the latest dated signature will be counted and earlier dated signatures will not be counted. If a person signs more than one petition on the same date, neither signature will be counted. Signatures of individuals who are not Eligible Employees will not be counted.

(B) The City Clerk will verify that the signatures submitted by the Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization are those of Eligible Employees currently in the Employee Group as of the date the petition is submitted. If the City Manager determines that at least 30% of the Eligible Employees in an Employee Group support the petition for an election, a secret ballot election will be held in accordance with this article.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-8 ELECTION PROCEDURES.

The following will be adhered to during the election process:

(A) Pursuant to a verified petition as described above, the City Manager will authorize the City Clerk to conduct an election. Election procedures and all other matters related to the conduct of the election will be determined by the City Manager.

(B) The Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization(s) will provide a publicity sheet to the City Clerk to mail directly to the list of Eligible Employees. The length and format of the sheet will be authorized by the City Manager.

(C) Early voting may be conducted up to two weeks prior to the election by the City Clerk’s Office during normal business hours.

(D) The City Manager will schedule the election at an appropriate time and place such that Eligible Employees have an opportunity to vote. The City Manager through the City Clerk shall post a notice prior to the election informing Eligible Employees of the date and time of the election. The polls will only be open during normal business hours.

(E) Ballots will show the names of each Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization submitting a verified petition for an election to represent the Employee Group for purposes of Meet and Discuss. Eligible Employees who participate in the election may mark their ballot to choose a candidate Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization or choose "none of the above." Ballots that indicate more than one choice will not be counted. Ballots on which the voter’s intent is not clear will not be counted. The City Manager shall retain sole discretion in making the final determination on disqualifying ballots in which more than one choice is indicated and/or whether the voter’s intent is not clear.

(F) Employees may cast their ballots at any time the polls are open, but not during their working time.

(G) No more than one Certification election may be held within any Employee Group during any 12-month period. Notwithstanding the above, representation elections may be held at any time upon mutual agreement of the City Manager and the Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization.

(H) A Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization shall be certified by the City Manager if either: (1) a majority of Eligible Employees in the Employee Group cast ballots selecting the Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization as their representative for Meet and Discuss, or (2) at least 80% of Eligible Employees in the Employee Group cast valid ballots in the election and a majority of the ballots cast select the Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-9 DECERTIFICATION PROCESS/DISQUALIFICATION.

(A) After a Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization has been the Certified Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization for at least 12 months, any Eligible Employee in the Employee Group may request an election to Decertify the Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization by submitting a petition supported by the signatures of not less than 30% of Eligible Employees in the Employee Group. If the City Manager, through the City Clerk, verifies the petition, an election shall be conducted using the procedures above to determine whether the Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization will remain the Certified Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization for the Employee Group for the purpose of Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer.

(B) In addition, Decertification can be declared at any time by the City Manager for violations of this article.

(C) A Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization seeking recognition as the representative of the Employee Group may be disqualified from the petition and/or election process at any time by the City Manager for violation of this article.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-10 SCOPE OF MEET AND DISCUSS/MEET AND CONFER.

For the purposes of this article the scope of subjects that may be included in the Meet and Discuss or Meet and Confer process is defined below:

(A) Permissible Subjects: The Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer process may encompass certain wages, hours, and working conditions which may include: salary or wage rates or other forms of direct monetary compensation and direct cost subjects; paid time off and procedures therefore; leaves of absence; total hours of work required of an employee on each workday or workweek, including overtime, compensatory time, rest and meal periods and call-in/call-back; health and safety training; personnel records reviews; distribution of information; administration of Meet and Discuss procedures; uniform procedures for employee grievances and discipline; and other items mutually agreed upon by a Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization and the City Manager and which were submitted with the initial written recommendations detailed in Section 3-12-11(A) or 3-12-14(B), as applicable.

(B) Impermissible Subjects: Subjects within the reserved Management Rights described in this article are impermissible and will not be included in the Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer process. Other impermissible subjects include: health benefits including but not limited to medical, dental, vision, life insurance, COBRA, Short Term Disability (STD), Long Term Disability (LTD), Industrial Injury Program, Workers Compensation, Health Claims Administration; compensation studies; individual cases of hiring, promoting, performance evaluation, or transfer; individual cases of disciplinary or non-disciplinary corrective action including discharging, demoting, suspending, reprimanding, corrective action plans, written counseling (or equivalent); determination of the size or composition of the workforce; determining the qualifications and fitness for employment and conditions for continued employment or dismissal.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)

MEET AND DISCUSS


3-12-11 MEET AND DISCUSS PROCEDURES.

The purpose of this section is to define and describe an orderly process by which Eligible Sworn Police and Eligible Sworn Fire Employees of the City of Goodyear and their designated representatives can Meet and Discuss with the City Manager certain matters relating to their wages, hours, benefits and working conditions.

(A) A Certified Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization may initiate the Meet and Discuss process for the following Budget Year by submitting written recommendations that are specific with respect to their subject matter, proposed effective dates, and estimated cost to the City Manager no earlier than November 1st and no later than November 30th preceding the Budget Year.

(B) The City Manager will meet at a reasonable time within the City of Goodyear with each Certified Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization that submits written recommendations in compliance with this procedure, to provide an opportunity to discuss the written recommendations. Following an initial meeting, the City Manager will prepare a written response to the Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization’s recommendations. Up to two additional meetings will be held if requested by either the City Manager or the Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization. Additional meetings may be scheduled if deemed necessary by the City Manager.

(C) Those items agreed to in the written proposals will be submitted as part of the City Manager’s proposed budget and will be considered during the Council’s budget hearings.

(D) The City Manager’s Office also will provide a report to the Goodyear City Council summarizing the issues discussed during the Meet and Discuss process.

(E) The City Council shall have sole discretion to accept, modify and/or reject any proposal, recommendation and/or report during the budget process.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)

MEET AND CONFER


3-12-13 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this section is to define and describe an orderly process by which Sworn Police and Sworn Fire Employees of the City of Goodyear and their designated representatives can Meet and Confer with the City Manager relating to their wages, hours, benefits and working conditions.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-14 MEET AND CONFER PROCESS.

The following is the authorized process for meeting and conferring:

(A) A Certified Employee Organization that has participated in the Meet and Discuss process for a minimum of 12 months following Certification may elect to use the following procedure in lieu of the Meet and Discuss process described in Section 3-12-11. An eligible Certified Employee Organization must provide written notice to the City Manager of its intention to submit proposals using the Meet and Confer process no later than October 1st prior to the Budget Year.

(B) An eligible Certified Employee Organization may submit proposals regarding those items within the scope of the Meet and Confer process that affect the Employee Group it represents to the City Manager. All proposals submitted to the City Manager by the Employee Organization must be in writing and shall specifically delineate the issues that will be discussed in the Meet and Confer process. Proposals shall be submitted no earlier than November 1st and no later than November 30th prior to a Budget Year.

(C) Upon receiving a proposal from a Certified Employee Organization and response from the City Manager, representatives of the Employee Organization and the City Manager or his designated representative(s) shall begin "meeting and conferring" at mutually agreed upon times (likely January through March) and places within the City, for the purpose of agreeing upon items to be included in a written Memorandum Of Understanding ("MOU"). This process is intended to work toward understanding of issues and identifying the interests that underlie each side’s issues and positions. Meetings shall continue until an agreement, for the purposes of Meet and Confer, is reached or impasse is declared by either party. Meeting ground rules shall be established, mutually agreed upon, and adhered to while meeting and conferring.

(D) Only those issues identified in the Certified Employee Organization’s initial proposals and those raised by the City Manager and/or in the City Manager’s response shall be discussed during the Meet and Confer process, unless otherwise mutually agreed.

(E) The City Manager and the representative of the Employee Organization shall reduce all areas of agreement, for the purposes of Meet and Confer, to writing. If agreement has not been reached on a subject by April 1st preceding the Budget Year, by mutual agreement of both parties, a neutral facilitator may be requested to assist the parties to reach an agreement. The neutral facilitator shall be from the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service or a non-employee of the City who is mutually agreed upon by the City Manager and the representative of the Certified Employee Organization. Any costs for the neutral facilitator shall be equally shared between the City and the Employee Organization.

(F) If agreement has not been reached on all items to be included in a MOU by April 15th, the City Manager will present a final offer for a MOU to the representative of the Employee Organization. The Employee Organization may prepare written comments concerning the final offer. If the Employee Organization prepares written comments, such comments must be submitted to the City Manager by April 30th. The final offer and written comments, if any, will be presented by May 1st to the Council for their consideration.

(G) The City Council shall have sole discretion to accept or reject any proposal, recommendation, reports or offers that result from the Meet and Confer Process. Final action by the Mayor and Council upon the issues raised during the Meet and Confer process will serve as the MOU for the following Budget Year.

(H) Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the Mayor and Council’s authority to modify, amend or terminate a MOU or any part of it at any time, and in their discretion.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011; Am. Ord. 12-1279, passed 12-10-2012)


3-12-15 RESOLUTION OF CLAIMS OF BREACH OF A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING (MOU).

(A) If there is a claim of breach of a MOU and the Certified Employee Organization’s existing MOU does not provide a process for resolution of the claim, the process described in this article shall apply. In all events, the decision of the City Council with respect to a claimed breach of a MOU shall be final.

(B) The following procedure applies to resolve claims by an Eligible Employee, a Certified Employee Organization, or the City that the MOU has been breached:

(1) Within 30 calendar days of the alleged breach of the MOU, the party alleging the breach shall give written notice to the party who has allegedly breached the MOU. The notice shall specify the specific provision(s) of the MOU allegedly breached, and provide the facts and evidence demonstrating or supporting the alleged breach.

(2) A written response to the alleged breach shall be submitted to the party alleging the breach within 10 calendar days.

(3) Within 14 calendar days of the written response, the parties shall meet and attempt to resolve the matter.

(4) To the extent that the parties reach a resolution to the dispute, such resolution shall be reduced to writing and signed by the parties.

(5) If the parties are unable to resolve the matter, all written materials shall be submitted to the City Council for resolution. The decision of the City Council is final.

(6) The time frames set forth herein may be extended by the mutual agreement of the parties.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-16 REOPENING A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING (MOU).

(A) During a MOU, if the City Manager determines that revenues are less than expected or expenditures are greater than expected, and, as a result, the City Manager is considering proposing changes to City expenditures in response to projected shortfalls, and those changes to City expenditures would directly affect provisions contained in an existing MOU, the City Manager may give notice to the Certified Employee Organization of his intention to reopen the MOU.

(B) The City Manager will provide as much notice of the reasons for reopening the MOU as is feasible given all of the circumstances then existing, in an effort to provide the Certified Employee Organization’s representatives an opportunity to discuss potential changes to the MOU before they are presented to the City Council. The City Manager and the Certified Employee Organizations will attempt to agree on changes to the MOU before proposals are presented to the City Council.

(C) This provision shall not limit the City Manager’s authority or right to manage the City budget or enact cost savings measures consistent with his grant of authority for budgetary matters not directly required by the then existing MOU.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-17 CONFLICTS.

In the event of a conflict between (1) the City’s personnel rules, policies and procedures, or the City Manager’s directives, and (2) a MOU that results from the Meet and Confer Process, the MOU shall apply to the conflicting issue.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-18 DELEGATION.

The City Manager may delegate any duties and responsibilities under the Meet and Confer process and may appoint personnel to assist in the performance of those duties and responsibilities.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-19 PROHIBITIONS.

Strikes, work stoppages, slow downs, and any other concerted efforts that interfere with City of Goodyear services are contrary to the public good and are strictly prohibited. Participation in such activities may be grounds for disciplinary actions up to and including discharge.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-20 SEVERABILITY.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this enabling document or any part of the Code adopted herein by reference is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-21 NON-ARBITRATION/MEDIATION.

Nothing in this article shall be construed to require or authorize the use of arbitration or mediation in the application of the Meet and Discuss/Meet and Confer Process.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-22 MEET AND DISCUSS INITIAL PERIOD.

Notwithstanding Sections 3-12-1, 3-12-11, and 3-12-14, following the enactment of the ordinance codified in this article, any Employee Group previously certified and in good standing under Goodyear Ordinance 2005-937 at the time of the enactment of the ordinance codified in this article shall be considered as a Certified Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization under this article for the limited purpose of engaging in a Meet and Discuss process as detailed in Section 3-12-11 for Goodyear Fiscal Year 2011-12. Completion of the Meet and Discuss process during Goodyear Fiscal Year 2011-12 shall satisfy the requirement to engage in Meet and Discuss for 12 months as otherwise detailed in Sections 3-12-1 and 3-12-11 prior to requesting to participate in the Meet and Confer Process in Section 3-12-14.

Any Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization recognized for the limited purpose of this Section 3-12-22 shall no longer be recognized under this Section 3-12-22 after June 30, 2012, and shall be required to obtain certification under Sections 3-12-7 and 3-12-8 to continue as a recognized Public Safety Sworn Employee Organization thereafter.

Unless specifically referenced and modified for the limited period of time detailed in this Section 3-12-22, all other sections and provisions of this article shall remain unchanged.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


3-12-23 EFFECTIVE DATE.

The ordinance codified in this article shall become effective at the time and in the manner prescribed by law.

(Ord. 11-1249, passed 10-24-2011)


ARTICLE 3-13: Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission

Section

3-13-1    Creation

3-13-2    Definitions

3-13-3    Commission purpose and duties

3-13-4    Commission membership and term

3-13-5    Meetings and quorum

3-13-6    Conflict of interest

3-13-7    By-laws

3-13-8    Officers and committees

3-13-9    Annual report


3-13-1 CREATION.

(A) There is hereby created a City of Goodyear Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission to carry out the functions and duties provided in this article and to serve as a liaison between the Parks and Recreation Department and the citizens of the City of Goodyear. The Goodyear Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission shall be referred to herein as the Commission. The Commission shall operate under the guidance of Parks and Recreation Department Director.

(Ord. 12-1267, passed 8-27-2012)


3-13-2 DEFINITIONS.

(A) For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

COMMISSION means the City of Goodyear Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission.

DIRECTOR means the City of Goodyear Parks and Recreation Department Director.

STUDENT MEMBER means a member of the City of Goodyear Youth Commission who has been appointed by the City of Goodyear Youth Commission to serve on the Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission as an ex officio non-voting member.

(Ord. 12-1267, passed 8-27-2012; Am. Ord. 12-1270, passed 12-3-2012)


3-13-3 COMMISSION PURPOSE AND DUTIES.

(A) The primary purpose and duties of the Commission shall be to act in an advisory and volunteer capacity to the City Council and Director and make recommendations regarding, but not limited to, the following:

(1) Strategic and program planning, programming, development of the Capital Improvement Plan and Program, annual operating budget, revenue generation, facility planning and operations, park master planning, natural and cultural resource protection and land acquisition;

(2) Development of a continuing plan for the City’s park system and its recreation program;

(3) Assist to promote and stimulate public interest in the City’s park system and its recreation program, and to that end participate in fund raising activities and solicit to the fullest extent possible the cooperation of school authorities and other interested public and private agencies;

(4) Be responsive to community needs for recreational, cultural and social programs;

(5) Affirm the diversity in the community;

(6) Promote safety in all facilities and programs; and

(7) Such other matters as directed by Mayor and Council.

(B) The Commission shall have no authority to take binding action on behalf of the City.

(Ord. 12-1267, passed 8-27-2012)


3-13-4 COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP AND TERM.

(A) The Commission shall consist of seven voting volunteer advisory members. In addition to the seven Commission members, there shall be three ex officio non-voting members, which will consist of one student member and the City Manager or designee and the Director. In addition, an alternate non-voting member may be appointed.

(B) The selection, retention and removal process for Commission members shall be as provided in the Boards, Commission and Committees Process approved by Council.

(C) The Student Member participant may rotate during the year, with no one student member serving more than a one-year term. Three Commission members will initially serve a two-year term, with a second term to be four years. Four Commission members will initially serve a four-year term, with a second term to be four years.

(D) The Director shall serve as the staff liaison to the Commission and see that such municipal services and facilities are made available so that the Commission can carry forth its purpose.

(E) No Commission member shall have been convicted of a felony or a crime of dishonesty and such a conviction will be immediate grounds for removal from the Commission.

(Ord. 12-1267, passed 8-27-2012; Am. Ord. 12-1270, passed 12-3-2012; Am. Ord. 14-1305, passed 8-18-14)


3-13-5 MEETINGS AND QUORUM.

The Commission shall establish a time, by vote, for regular meetings, which shall be held at least quarterly and monthly, if there is business to transact. A majority of the voting members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of a majority of the Commission members present at a meeting shall be required for passage of any matter before the Commission.

(Ord. 12-1267, passed 8-27-2012)


3-13-6 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.

Before participating in Commission deliberations or casting a vote on a matter in which a Commission member may reasonably be considered to have a conflict of interest, the member shall disclose the potential conflict of interest to the Commission members. Failure of a member to disclose a potential conflict of interest as required by this article constitutes malfeasance in office and grounds for removal from the Commission.

(Ord. 12-1267, passed 8-27-2012)


3-13-7 BY-LAWS.

The Commission shall establish written by-laws and rules for the conduct of its meetings, which shall be approved by Council.

(Ord. 12-1267, passed 8-27-2012)


3-13-8 OFFICERS AND COMMITTEES.

The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from its members, and may create and fill other offices as it considers advisable and necessary or as provided in the by-laws. The ex officio members of the Commission are not eligible to serve as Chairperson. The term of each office shall be as provided in the by-laws.

(Ord. 12-1267, passed 8-27-2012)


3-13-9 ANNUAL REPORT.

The Director and Chairperson shall present an annual report to Council regarding the Commission activities and operations for the previous year which is due no later than within 60 days of the start of the fiscal year.

(Ord. 12-1267, passed 8-27-2012)


ARTICLE 3-14 City of Goodyear Health Care Benefits Trust; Health Care Benefits Trust Fund

Section

3-14-1    Purpose

3-14-2    Definitions

3-14-3    Board; appointment; terms

3-14-4    Powers and duties

3-14-5    Risk Management Consultant or Insurance Administrator; verification

3-14-6    Termination; amendment

3-14-7    Applicability


3-14-1 PURPOSE.

The Health Care Benefits Trust is established and provides for a Health Care Benefits Trust Board to administer the Trust Fund for the purpose of providing for direct payment of the Health Care Benefits Plan for the benefit of participants, as follows:

(A) All monies received by the City for the purpose of funding the Health Care Benefits Plan shall be deposited into the Trust Fund, including all health care premiums, contributions, credits, rebates, refunds and funding for wellness related programs identified for appropriations.

(B) The Trust Fund shall be used for the purpose of administering, staffing, managing, and funding the Health Care Benefits Plan.

(C) The City shall adopt a Trust Agreement that sets forth the specific terms of the Health Care Benefits Trust. A stop-loss provision shall be incorporated into the Trust Agreement.

(D) An annual audit of the Trust Fund shall be conducted by an external auditor designated by the City Manager. A copy of the audit report shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk in accordance with the State of Arizona General Records Retention Schedule.

(Ord. 17-1349, passed 4-24-2017)


3-14-2 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this article, unless the context otherwise requires:

BOARD means the City of Goodyear Health Care Benefits Trust Board.

CITY means the City of Goodyear.

HEALTH CARE BENEFITS PLAN means the City of Goodyear Health Care Benefits Plan, a self-insured health care benefits program that provides for direct payment of health care benefits, losses or claims or any combination of insurance and direct payment, and including risk management consultation for the benefit of participants.

MEMBER means a person appointed and serving on the City of Goodyear Health Care Benefits Trust Board.

PARTICIPANT means a benefit-eligible City employee, elected official, eligible dependent, or other person determined to be eligible to participate in the Health Care Benefits Plan or other self-insured City program for the management and administration of a system for direct payment of benefits, losses or claims or any combination of insurance and direct payment, and including risk management consultation.

TRUST AGREEMENT means a separate document adopted by the City setting forth the specific terms for the administration of the City of Goodyear Health Care Benefits Trust, including any amendments or supplements to the agreement.

TRUST FUND means the City of Goodyear Health Care Benefits Trust Fund.

(Ord. 17-1349, passed 4-24-2017)


3-14-3 BOARD; APPOINTMENT; TERMS.

The Board shall be subject to the following:

(A) Establishment. The Board is established to administer the Trust Fund.

(B) Appointment. The City Council shall appoint individuals to serve as Trustees overseeing the management and administration of the Trust. The City Council shall consider and may appoint any individual so recommended, provided that the number and identity of the appointed Trustees shall conform to the requirements of this section. Each Trustee so appointed shall accept the appointment in writing and shall confirm in writing that the Trustee agrees to hold and administer the Funds, in trust, pursuant to the terms of this article.

(C) Number and Identity. There shall be five Trustees. No more than one Trustee may be an employee of Goodyear. The Finance Director shall be assigned as one of the five Trustees in an ex officio Trustee status with full Trustee privileges. In the event that the position of Finance Director is vacant, the City Manager shall appoint another employee to serve as the ex officio Trustee until such time as the position of Finance Director is filled. No former member of the Council or former employee shall be a Trustee. Preferably the Trustees shall have expertise in the field of finance, employee benefits, or health care.

(D) Bonding. All Trustees shall be bonded in an amount to be approved by the City Manager. This requirement may be satisfied by a blanket performance bond or other coverage provided by Goodyear.

(E) Officer. At the commencement of each Plan Year, the Trustees shall elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chair, and a Secretary from among themselves. The Chairperson shall preside over the work of the Trustees pursuant to this article. The Vice-Chair shall preside in the Chairperson’s absence. The Secretary shall maintain accurate records of all actions of the Trustees, including minutes from all Trustees’ meetings. A copy of the minutes shall be retained as record of the Trust’s activities.

(F) Terms. Each Trustee, with the exception of the Finance Director, shall serve a three-year term, unless terminated as described in this article. A Trustee may be reappointed to no more than one additional consecutive term. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the initial terms for the first five Trustees shall be as follows: one Trustee to serve an initial term of one year; two Trustees to serve an initial term of two years; and two Trustees to serve an initial term of three years. The Council shall determine which of the first five Trustees shall serve the one-year, two-year, and three-year terms.

(G) Termination. The term of any Trustee shall automatically terminate upon the earliest of the following: death; resignation; removal; failure to attend three consecutive meetings; or, for a Trustee who is an employee of Goodyear, the termination of such employment.

(H) Resignation of a Trustee. A Trustee may resign by giving a 60-day notice in writing to the Chairman. The Chairman may exercise discretion to waive or reduce the 60-day requirement, but shall not waive the written notice requirement. The notice shall state the effective date of resignation. The resignation shall take effect on its stated effective date unless a new Trustee is appointed and accepts appointment prior to the stated effective date, in which case the date of acceptance shall constitute the effective date of the resignation. Upon the effective date of the resignation, the resigning Trustee shall be discharged from any further duty or responsibility under the Trust, and the resigning Trustee shall deliver to the Chairman (or to the Secretary, if the Chairman is resigning) any and all property in his or her possession or control which belongs to the Plan or Trust.

(I) Removal of a Trustee. A Trustee may be removed by the majority vote of a quorum of the City Council at a regular or special meeting. Upon the effective date of the removal, the removed Trustee shall be discharged from any further duty or responsibility under the Trust, and the removed Trustee shall deliver to the Chairman (or the Secretary, if the Chairman is being removed) any and all property in his or her possession or control which belongs to the Plan or Trust.

(J) Meetings. The Trustees shall meet whenever required to provide for the orderly and timely administration of the business of the Plan and the Trust at such location as may be acceptable to the Trustees, but no less than four times per Plan year. In calling, providing notice of, and holding meetings, the Trustees shall conform to applicable laws.

(K) Quorum. A quorum shall consist of three Trustees.

(L) Voting. Each Trustee shall have one vote. All actions by and decisions of the Trustees shall be the affirmative vote of a majority of the number of the Trustees attending a duly called meeting of the Trustees at which there is a quorum present.

(Ord. 17-1349, passed 4-24-2017)


3-14-4 POWERS AND DUTIES.

(A) The Board shall:

(1) Administer the Trust Fund pursuant to this article and the Trust Agreement.

(2) Provide financial oversight of the Trust Fund by evaluating claim expenses and reserve amounts.

(3) Review quarterly the Trust Fund to ensure sufficient funds exist to pay outstanding and future benefits, to pay losses or claims or any combination of insurance and direct payment, and to pay for risk management consultation.

(4) Make recommendations to the City Manager on financial issues relating to the Health Care Benefit Plans covered under the Trust including appropriate premiums.

(5) Comply with all requirements of State and Federal laws relating to self-insurance programs for the management and administration of the Health Care Benefits Plan or other self-insured system for direct payment of benefits, losses or claims or any combination of insurance and direct payment, and including risk management consultation.

(6) Meet at least four times a year, or more frequently as the Chairperson of the Board deems necessary or upon the request of the City Manager.

(7) Comply with the State of Arizona’s Open Meeting Law (A.R.S. §§ 38-431 through 38-431.09).

(B) The Board may:

(1) Adopt rules or policies for the operation of the Board, which are not inconsistent with the City Code, the laws of the State of Arizona, the City Charter or any City ordinances or resolutions.

(2) Appoint committees.

(3) Request the City Manager to designate staff to perform assignments necessary for the administration of the Trust Fund.

(4) Consult with or advise any committee, task force or working group established by the City to address health care issues to make recommendations to the City Manager regarding such issues.

(5) Delegate its duties and responsibilities solely in a manner consistent with its fiduciary responsibilities.

(Ord. 17-1349, passed 4-24-2017)


3-14-5 RISK MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT OR INSURANCE ADMINISTRATOR; VERIFICATION.

(A) The City Manager shall designate a Risk Management Consultant or an Insurance Administrator licensed pursuant to Arizona State law.

(B) The City Manager shall verify that any Risk Management Consultant or Insurance Administrator is licensed pursuant to Arizona State law.

(Ord. 17-1349, passed 4-24-2017)


3-14-6 TERMINATION; AMENDMENT.

(A) The City may determine that it will no longer provide the Health Care Benefits Plan or any other self-insured program for the management and administration of a system for direct payment of benefits, losses or claims or any combination of insurance and direct payment, and including risk management consultation, at which time the Trust Fund will be dissolved after the payment of its outstanding liabilities. Any funds remaining will revert to the City’s General Fund.

(B) The City may amend the provisions of this article at any time.

(Ord. 17-1349, passed 4-24-2017)


3-14-7 APPLICABILITY.

This article shall not apply to any City of Goodyear Health Care Benefits Program, System, or Plan that is not self-insured.

(Ord. 17-1349, passed 4-24-2017)


CHAPTER 4: Police Department

Article

4-1.    POLICE DEPARTMENT

4-2.    POLICE RESERVES

4-3.    REPEALED

4-4.    PROPERTY DISPOSITION


ARTICLE 4-1 Police Department

Section

4-1-1    Created; composition

4-1-2    Appointment of officers

4-1-3    Compensation of officers

4-1-4    Departmental rules and regulations

4-1-5    Duties of Police Department

4-1-6    Answering calls outside the city


4-1-1 CREATED; COMPOSITION.

There is created a Police Department for the city which shall consist of a Chief of Police and as many police officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary by the City Manager for the safety and good order of the city.

(Prior Code, § 4-1-1)


4-1-2 APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS.

The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. The City Manager shall provide for the appointment of as many police officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the safety and good order of the city.

(Prior Code, § 4-1-2)


4-1-3 COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS.

The Chief of Police and the police officers of the city shall be compensated as determined by the Council. The Chief of Police shall not receive any perquisites, commissions or compensation for his or her services as Chief of Police, except as the Council may prescribe.

(Prior Code, § 4-1-3)


4-1-4 DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.

The Police Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with such departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be adopted by the Chief of Police.

(Prior Code, § 4-1-4)


4-1-5 DUTIES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.

It is the duty of the Police Department, under the direction of the Chief of Police, to:

(A) Enforce this code and the statutes of the State of Arizona within jurisdictional limits as conferred by law and to arrest and charge the violators thereof;

(B) Enforce the traffic regulations of the city as specified in Chapter 13 of this code and enforce the traffic laws of the state within the limits of the city;

(C) Perform such additional duties as may be required by the City Manager;

(D) Any peace officer or duly authorized agent of the city may stop and detain a person as is reasonably necessary to investigate an actual or suspected violation of any provision of this code and to serve a copy of the traffic complaint for any alleged civil or criminal violation of this code.

(Prior Code, § 4-1-5)


4-1-6 ANSWERING CALLS OUTSIDE THE CITY.

The members of the Police Department of the city are duly authorized to answer calls for aid and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the city pursuant to mutual aid agreements and state statutes.

(Prior Code, § 4-1-6)


ARTICLE 4-2 Police Reserves

Section

4-2-1    Establishment

4-2-2    Appointment and qualification of members

4-2-3    Limitations on membership

4-2-4    Command and control

4-2-5    Powers and duties

4-2-6    Rules and regulations

4-2-7    Insignia

4-2-8    Uniforms

4-2-9    Impersonations


4-2-1 ESTABLISHMENT.

There is established a Police Reserve for the city as an auxiliary to the regular Police Department and as a component thereof.

(Prior Code, § 4-2-1)


4-2-2 APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS.

The members of the Reserve shall consist of United States citizens who are residents of the state, 21 years of age and over and appointed by the Chief of Police. Any member of the Reserve may have his or her authority revoked at any time by the Chief of Police.

(Prior Code, § 4-2-2)


4-2-3 LIMITATIONS ON MEMBERSHIP.

The number of authorized Reserve positions shall be determined by the Chief of Police with approval of the City Manager.

(Prior Code, § 4-2-3) (Am. Ord. 90-312, passed 9-25-1990)


4-2-4 COMMAND AND CONTROL.

The Reserve shall be under the command and subject to the direction and control of the Chief of Police or such police officer as the Chief of Police shall designate.

(Prior Code, § 4-2-4)


4-2-5 POWERS AND DUTIES.

The members of the Reserve shall render auxiliary support, without compensation, to the Police Department under such rules and regulations as the Chief of Police and Council may prescribe. Members of the Reserve may be called to duty by the Chief of Police during the time of or in anticipation of any emergency situation or other occasion which, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, shall reasonably require the aid of personnel other than that of the regular Police Department to maintain peace and good order in the city. Members of the Reserve may also be called to duty at other times for training with the regular Police Department. Each member of the Reserve shall, before entering on his or her duties, be required to take an appropriate oath. Each member shall have the powers and authority of a peace officer during such time and only such time as he or she is on duty in response to a call by the Chief of Police, subject to such limitations as may be prescribed under rules and regulations adopted by the Chief of Police.

(Prior Code, § 4-2-5) (Am. Ord. 90-312, passed 9-25-1990)


4-2-6 RULES AND REGULATIONS.

The Chief of Police shall adopt rules and regulations expressly defining the powers and duties of the Reserve, but such powers and duties shall not be in excess of those accorded to the police nor inconsistent therewith.

(Prior Code, § 4-2-6) (Am. Ord. 90-312, passed 9-25-1990)


4-2-7 INSIGNIA.

The Chief of Police shall issue to each member of the Reserve a badge of authority to be used by the member only while on duty. The badge shall be of such design as the Chief of Police may determine but shall bear the word Reserve across the face thereof.

(Prior Code, § 4-2-7)


4-2-8 UNIFORMS.

The uniforms for members of the Reserves shall be similar to the uniform worn by the members of the regular Police Department of the city and shall be purchased and maintained by the members at their own expense and at no expense to the city or Police Department of the city and shall be worn by members only when on actual and authorized duty as police reserve officers.

(Prior Code, § 4-2-8)


4-2-9 IMPERSONATIONS.

No person shall impersonate a police reserve officer nor shall any person undertake the duties of a police reserve officer without first being appointed by the Chief.

(Prior Code, § 4-2-9)


ARTICLE 4-3 Permit to Discharge Certain Firearms

(Repealed by Ord. 12-1259. Prior legislation: Ord. 94-498)


ARTICLE 4-4: Property Disposition

Section

4-4-1    Definitions

4-4-2    Disposal of property

4-4-3    Notice; disposition of property

4-4-4    Petition; disposition of property if disputed

4-4-5    Firearms; petition for return


4-4-1 DEFINITIONS.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

CONTRABAND means any property, item, or substance which is unlawful to produce or possess under federal, state, or local law.

DISPOSE means the transfer of property by its return to the owner, sale, conversion or destruction or by any other means of disposal.

EVIDENCE means property that is held for possible presentation in a judicial or administrative proceeding to establish the truth or falsity of an alleged matter of fact.

FIREARM means any loaded or unloaded handgun, pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun or other weapon that will, or is designed to, or may readily be converted to expel a projectile by the action of expanding gases, except that it does not include a firearm in permanently inoperable condition.

FOUND PROPERTY means recovered, lost or abandoned property that is turned over to the City or any department thereof where the owner may or may not be known and that is not classified as evidence.

HAZARDOUS MATERIAL means any material that, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical and chemical characteristics, may pose a present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the workplace or environment, or the presence of which requires investigation, disposal, removal and/or remediation under any federal, state or local law, regulation, order or policy.

INTANGIBLE PROPERTY means the definition as provided in A.R.S. § 44-301.

OWNER means the person lawfully vested with, and the right to retain, ownership, dominion, care, control, management or title of property.

PROPERTY means any item, including currency, that is held for safekeeping or as evidence or found property or that has been abandoned, unclaimed or awarded by the court, excludes real and intangible property.

PROPERTY VALUE means the reasonable value of the property in its present condition.

SAFEKEEPING means storage of property by the City that is not classified as evidence and that belongs to a known individual.

STOLEN PROPERTY means that property to which the owner has been unlawfully deprived of possession, and which has been taken into police custody pursuant to a commission of any crime as defined by federal, state or local law.

(Ord. 10-1212, passed 4-26-10; Am. Ord. 13-1280, passed 1-14-2013)


4-4-2 DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY.

All property coming into the possession of the City shall be disposed of as follows and in accordance with the City code, rules and regulations, unless otherwise provided in this article:

(A) Abandoned and Unclaimed Vehicles. Abandoned and unclaimed vehicles shall be disposed of as provided in Arizona Revised Statutes Title 28, Chapter 11 (A.R.S. § 28-4831 et seq.).

(B) Contraband/Illegal/Hazardous Materials. Contraband, illegal or hazardous materials shall not be returned to any person, and instead shall be:

(1) Destroyed by or retained and utilized by the Police Department for law enforcement purposes; or

(2) Sold, loaned or transferred to any local, state or federal law enforcement agency for law enforcement purposes, to the extent allowed by law. Expenses for keeping and transferring such property are to be paid by the recipient.

(3) The handling and disposition of the contraband, illegal or hazardous materials shall be in accordance with federal, state and local law, order or policy.

(C) Evidence. Property seized for, or used as, evidence in any criminal proceeding shall be disposed of pursuant to Arizona Rules of Criminal Procedure, Rule 28.2, with the items that cannot be returned to a legal owner disposed of as provided in this article.

(D) Firearms. Firearms shall be:

(1) Sold, pursuant to court order, to any business that is authorized to receive and dispose of the firearm under federal and state law and that shall sell the firearm to the public according to federal and state law, unless the firearm is otherwise prohibited from being sold under federal or state law; or

(2) Traded to a federal firearms licensed business for ammunition, weapons, equipment or other materials to be exclusively used for law enforcement purposes.

(E) Forfeited Property. Property seized for forfeiture shall be disposed of as provided in Arizona Revised Statutes Title 13 (A.R.S. § 13-4301 et seq.).

(F) Found Property. Found property may be returned to the person who found the property if all of the following:

(1) The property is not contraband;

(2) It has remained unclaimed for 30 days after reasonable efforts have been made to locate and notify the owner; and

(3) The person who found the property is not a public employee of a federal, state or local government and the property was not found during the course of the duties of office or employment.

(G) Intangible Property. Intangible property shall be disposed of pursuant to the Unclaimed Property Act, Arizona Revised Statutes Title 44 (A.R.S. § 44-301 et seq.).

(H) Perishable Property. Perishable items not otherwise disposed of as provided herein, or reclaimed by the owner, may be destroyed within 24 hours of its acquisition by the City.

(I) Police Canine(s). Police canines may be:

(1) Transferred to a police canine handler or the equivalent, as approved by the Chief of Police and the Procurement Manager and by way of an agreement. Expenses for transferring the canine are to be paid by the recipient; or

(2) Sold, loaned or transferred to any local, state or federal law enforcement agency for law enforcement purposes, to the extent allowed by law. Expenses for transferring the canine are to be paid by the recipient; or

(3) Euthanized, if deemed appropriate.

(J) Safekeeping. Property which is held for safekeeping by the Police Department, or entrusted to the Police Department for safekeeping, shall be disposed of after the Department provides notice to the person entrusting the property or the property owner. The notice shall advise the owner to claim the property no later than 30 days following the date of the notice or else the property will be disposed of by the Department as provided in this article.

(Ord. 10-1212, passed 4-26-10; Am. Ord. 13-1280, passed 1-14-2013)


4-4-3 NOTICE; DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY.

(A) Owner Known. If the property is available for release, and the owner of the property is known, the Police Department shall make a reasonable attempt to provide notice to the owner. The notice shall advise the owner that they must claim the property (providing proof of ownership) and take away the property no later than 30 days following the date on the notice or the property will be disposed of by the Police Department as provided in this article.

(B) Service of Notice. Service of notice to known owner.

(1) Service of notice may be accomplished by any of the following methods:

(a) First class mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address provided by the owner to the Police Department. Service of notice by mail shall be considered complete upon mailing; or

(b) Posting the notice on the Police Department Property Disposition webpage, or its equivalent, not less than 30 days prior to disposition by the City. If the owner fails to claim (providing proof of ownership) and take away the property within 30 days of initial posting of the notice, the City may dispose of the property as it deems appropriate and in compliance with subsection (D) of this section.

(C) Unknown Owner. If the owner of the property is not known, the property may be disposed of as follows:

(1) If the property value of the item is $150 or less, it may be disposed of by the City as it deems appropriate and in compliance with subsection (D) of this section.

(2) If property value of the item exceeds $150, notice containing a description of the property shall be posted on the Police Department Property Disposition webpage, or its equivalent, not less than 30 days prior to disposition by the City. If the owner fails to claim (by providing proof of ownership) and take away the property within 30 days from the date of posting, the City may dispose of the property as it deems appropriate and in compliance with subsection (D) of this section.

(D) Disposition of Property. Unless otherwise provided in this article and in compliance with subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section, if applicable, property may be disposed by the City as provided below without further notice or court order. All property dispositions shall be consistent with the nature and type of item to be disposed.

(1) Returned to the owner, as provided by this article;

(2) Destroyed, if authorized by this article;

(3) Retained and utilized by the Police Department or other City department, to the extent allowed by law;

(4) Sold, loaned or transferred to any local, state, federal or other governmental entity, nonprofit or charitable organization, to the extent allowed by law. Expenses for keeping and transferring such property are to be paid by the recipient;

(5) Donated to a museum, educational institution or other similar entity for display or educational purposes, to the extent allowed by law. Expenses for keeping and transferring such property are to be paid by the recipient; or

(6) Treated as surplus and disposed of in accordance with this article and the City’s procurement code.

(Ord. 10-1212, passed 4-26-10; Am. Ord. 13-1280, passed 1-14-2013)


4-4-4 PETITION; DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY IF DISPUTED.

(A) If there is a dispute regarding the ownership or release of property, the City or claimant/respondent shall send a request to the City Municipal Court for a hearing to be conducted to determine ownership or appropriate release of the property as provided in this section.

(B) All parties known to be claiming an ownership interest in the property shall be given notice by the court of the hearing date by first class mail postage prepaid. Service shall be considered complete upon mailing to the address provided by the claimants or the last known address on file with the Police Department.

(C) Any person claiming an interest in the property shall be known as a respondent, and the City shall be known as the petitioner.

(D) All respondents are required to bring or file with the court an original and one copy of all documentary evidence, and all correspondence and other documents exchanged with any insurance carrier or other person regarding reimbursement for the property.

(E) Both the petitioner and respondent shall have the right to appear at the hearing and present evidence in support of their claim to the property or basis to decline release.

(F) The failure of a respondent to appear at the hearing shall constitute a waiver of any and all claim(s) to the property by such person against the City, and shall cause and authorize the court to enter a ruling consistent therewith.

(G) The hearing shall be informal. The rules of evidence shall not apply to the hearing and decisions shall be based upon the preponderance of the evidence. The Municipal Court may allow testimony to be given orally or through sworn written affidavits.

(H) The court’s decision shall be issued within 10 calendar days of the close of the record. The decision shall be in writing, and shall be mailed first class mail, postage prepaid, to each respondent or claimant appearing. The decision of the court shall be final upon issuance.

(I) Prior to receiving possession of the subject property, the prevailing claimant shall be required to provide a copy of the decision and appropriate identification to the Police Department Property Custodian, and may be required to pay all costs of publication, if any.

(J) Any property not claimed by the prevailing party within 30 days from the date the court issued its decision shall become the property of the City, without the necessity of further court proceedings.

(Ord. 10-1212, passed 4-26-10; Am. Ord. 13-1280, passed 1-14-2013)


4-4-5 FIREARMS; PETITION FOR RETURN.

(A) Firearms will be returned to the owner as provided by (e.g., A.R.S. § 13-3601) and this article, except as follows:

(1) When the firearm is illegal, as provided by federal or state law;

(2) When the return of the firearm is prohibited or forfeited by federal or state law or court order;

(3) When the owner has known criminal charges pending which involve a felony, domestic violence, or misconduct involving weapons in any jurisdiction;

(4) When the weapon must be retained for evidentiary purposes, regardless of the nature of the proceeding;

(5) When the owner is a prohibited possessor pursuant to law; or

(6) When release of the firearm to the owner is otherwise precluded by this article, state or federal law (e.g., 18 U.S.C. § 922); or

(7) When the Goodyear Property and Evidence Supervisor questions the appropriateness of the return. In such cases, the Goodyear Property and Evidence Supervisor shall in no less than five working days from the denial of the request for release file a petition with the court as provided in Section 4-4-4 above.

(B) When a weapon is seized by the Police Department pursuant to an investigation of a felony, domestic violence or misconduct involving weapons, the Police Department shall not release the weapon to a third party who claims to have had ownership of the weapon transferred to that third party by the owner since the seizure of the weapon.

(C) A person, other than the person from whom a weapon was seized, who claims ownership of the weapon must present documentary proof of ownership to the Police Department Property Custodian before the weapon will be released to that person.

(D) When the Police Department declines to return a weapon to any person for any reason identified in subsection (A) of this section, the City or claimant requesting the return of the property may file a petition with the City Municipal Court and request that a hearing be conducted to determine ownership or appropriate release of the property, setting forth the following:

(1) Claimant’s name and address;

(2) Description of the weapon, including manufacturer, model and serial number;

(3) Date the weapon was seized by the Police Department and the Department report number, if known;

(4) Date claimant became the owner of the weapon. Claimant must attach documentary evidence of their ownership;

(5) A brief statement explaining why the claimant believes the weapon should legally be returned to them;

(6) A statement that the claimant is not a prohibited possessor under state or federal law and has no pending criminal charges or domestic violence actions in any state where the claimant is a defendant; and

(7) The petition must be verified.

(E) All parties shall be given notice by the court of the hearing date by first class mail postage prepaid. Service to claimants shall be considered complete upon mailing to the address provided by the claimant in the petition or as provided to the Goodyear Police Department Property and Evidence Custodian.

(F) The hearing and related procedures shall be conducted by the City Municipal Court as provided in Section 4-4-4.

(G) Prior to receiving possession of the subject property, the prevailing claimant shall be required to provide a copy of the decision and appropriate identification to the Police Department Property and Evidence Custodian, and may be required to pay all costs of publication, if any.

(H) Any property not claimed by the prevailing party within 30 days from the date the court issued its decision shall become the property of the City, without the necessity of additional notice or further court proceedings.

(I) Firearms will be returned to the prevailing claimant only after first being dismantled by the Police Department in a manner which will not preclude reassembly. If ammunition is to be returned, the Police Department reserves the option of returning the ammunition on a day different from which the firearm is returned.

(Ord. 10-1212, passed 4-26-10; Am. Ord. 13-1280, passed 1-14-2013)


CHAPTER 5: Fire Department

Article

5-1.    FIRE DEPARTMENT

5-2.    INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE

5-3.    PENALTIES

5-4.    FIRE PREVENTION FEES


ARTICLE 5-1 Fire Department

Section

5-1-1    Created; composition

5-1-2    Departmental rules and regulations

5-1-3    Powers and duties of Chief

5-1-4    Appointment and duties of firefighters

5-1-5    Entry upon adjacent property

5-1-6    Equipment

5-1-7    Providing fire protection outside the city

5-1-8    Acknowledgment of right of way

5-1-9    Fire alarms


5-1-1 CREATED; COMPOSITION.

There is created a Fire Department for the city which shall consist of a Fire Chief and such staffing as may be deemed necessary from time to time by the Council.

(Prior Code, § 5-1-1) (Am. Ord. 90-313, passed 9-25-1990)


5-1-2 DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.

The Fire Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with such Departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be adopted by the Council.

(Prior Code, § 5-1-2)


5-1-3 POWERS AND DUTIES OF CHIEF.

The powers and duties of the Chief include the following:

(A) Direct the operations of the Fire Department subject to the rules and regulations thereof;

(B) Be present at all fires and other emergencies, if possible, and plan and direct emergency operations. During the progress of a fire, the authority of the Fire Chief shall be absolute in all matters directly concerning the extinguishment of the fire and disposition of property endangered by it;

(C) Conduct suitable drills or instruction in the operation and handling of equipment, first aid and rescue work, salvage, a study of buildings in the city, water supplies and all other matters generally considered essential to good firemanship and safety of life and property from fire;

(D) Assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of arson by investigating or causing to be investigated the cause, origin and circumstances of all fires;

(E) Inspect buildings and premises and serve written notice upon the owner or occupant to abate, within a specified time, any and all fire hazards that may be found. For the purpose of conducting such inspection, the Chief is empowered to enter any and all buildings and premises within the city at any reasonable hour. Any person served with such written notice shall comply and notify the Chief of his or her compliance within a reasonable time;

(F) Keep complete records of all fires, inspections, apparatus and equipment, personnel and other information about the work of the Department open to Council inspection and furnish to the Council such information upon request;

(G) Make a complete annual report, in writing, to the Council as may be specified by the Council. Such report shall include the information specified in subsection (G) of this section, together with comparative data for previous years and recommendations for improving the effectiveness of the Department;

(H) Enforce or cause to be enforced all ordinances, laws and regulations of the city and state, insofar as they pertain to fire and safety;

(I) Demote, dismiss or expel any officer or member of the Department for neglect or refusal to perform Departmental duties, subject to the right of any members so demoted, dismissed or expelled to appeal to the Council.

(Prior Code, § 5-1-3)


5-1-4 APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF FIREFIGHTERS.

Firefighters shall be appointed at such time and in such a manner as the Council may deem necessary. Such appointees shall have telephones in their homes and shall be available to respond to an alarm within the time limits prescribed by Departmental regulation. Firefighters shall be subject to supervision by the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee.

(Prior Code, § 5-1-4) (Am. Ord. 90-313, passed 9-25-1990)


5-1-5 ENTRY UPON ADJACENT PROPERTY.

It is lawful for any firefighter acting under the direction of the Chief or another officer in command to enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or other property that is on fire for the purpose of extinguishing such fire, and no person shall hinder, resist or obstruct any firefighter in the discharge of his or her duty as provided in this article.

(Prior Code, § 5-1-5)


5-1-6 EQUIPMENT.

The Department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other equipment as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and properly protect life and property. Recommendations concerning apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by the Chief, and after approval by the Council, such apparatus and equipment shall be purchased in such manner as may be designated by the Council. All equipment of the Department shall be safely and conveniently housed in such place or places as may be designated by the Council. No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose, nor shall any person willfully take away or conceal any article used in any way by the Department. No person shall enter any place where the fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the Department unless accompanied by or having special permission of an officer or authorized member of the Department. No fire apparatus and equipment shall be hired out or permitted to leave the fire station except in response to a call for aid at a fire within the corporate limits of the city, or in response to a call for aid at a fire in an area authorized for fire protection service or mutual aid under the provisions of § 5-1-7.

(Prior Code, § 5-1-6)


5-1-7 PROVIDING FIRE PROTECTION OUTSIDE THE CITY.

The Council may enter into agreements or contracts to furnish fire protection outside the city or enter into mutual aid agreements, and the Fire Department is authorized to render fire fighting service pursuant to the terms of such agreements or contracts.

(Prior Code, § 5-1-7)


5-1-8 ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF RIGHT OF WAY.

In accordance with the provisions of state law, all motor equipment of the Department shall have right of way over all other traffic when responding to an alarm. No unauthorized vehicle shall follow within 500 feet of any apparatus belonging to the Department nor park any vehicle or otherwise cause any obstruction to be placed within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or other place where fire apparatus is stored and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance or within 15 feet of any fire hydrant. No person shall drive any vehicle over a fire hose except upon specific orders from the Chief or other officer in charge where the hose is used.

(Prior Code, § 5-1-8)


5-1-9 FIRE ALARMS.

Suitable arrangements or equipment shall be provided for citizens to turn in an alarm and for notifying all members of the Department so that they may promptly respond. It is unlawful for any person knowingly to turn in or cause to be turned in a false alarm.

(Prior Code, § 5-1-9) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


ARTICLE 5-2 International Fire Code

Section

5-2-1    International Fire Code adopted


5-2-1 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED.

(A) Adoption of Code and Standards. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, including only the following appendices: Appendix B, Appendix C, Appendix D, Appendix E, Appendix F, Appendix G, Appendix H, and Appendix I as published by the International Code Council and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution No. 15-1698 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein except as amended below.

(1) Adoption of Amendment 1 to International Fire Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as "Amendment 1 to International Fire Code 2012 Edition" and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1698, is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein amending the International Fire Code as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

(B) Amendments. The International Fire Code 2012 Edition as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear is hereby amended as follows:

(1) CHAPTER 1 "ADMINISTRATION" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 101.1 Title is hereby amended as follows:

Insert the words "City of Goodyear" as the name of the jurisdiction.

Section 102.5 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

102.5 Application of residential code. Where structures are designed and constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the provisions of this code shall apply as follows:

1. Construction and design provisions: Provisions of this code pertaining to the structure shall apply including, but not limited to, premises identification, fire apparatus access, water supplies, fire suppression systems and fire alarm systems. Where interior or exterior systems or devices are installed, construction permits required by Section 105.7 and all subsections therein shall also apply.

2. Administrative, operational and maintenance provision: All such provisions of this code shall apply.

Section 102.7 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 80, the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the City of Goodyear Zoning Code, as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the 2010 ADA Standards of Accessible Design as adopted and amended by the governing authority; and all other applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations; and such codes and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the extent of each such reference or as otherwise applicable and as further regulated in Sections 102.7.1.

1. Any reference to the NFPA 70 National Electric Code shall mean NFPA 70 National Electric Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

2. Any reference to the International Fuel Gas Code shall mean the International Fuel Gas Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

3. Any reference to the International Plumbing Code shall mean the International Plumbing Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

4. Any reference to the International Building Code shall mean the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

5. Any reference to the International Residential Code shall mean the International Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

6. Any reference to the International Mechanical Code shall mean the International Mechanical Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

7. Any reference to the International Property Maintenance Code shall mean the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

8. Any reference to the ICC A117.09 shall mean ICC A117.09 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 102.7.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

102.7.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and standards referenced in this code or between the provision of this code and any state, local and/or federal laws, rules, and regulations, including by way of example, the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies as adopted and amended by the governing authority and technical codes as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the most restrictive requirements apply.

Exceptions:

1. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of equipment or appliances as approved by the City of Goodyear, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.

2. Where there is a provision contained in another technical code as adopted and amended by the governing authority that is not addressed in this code then the provision of the technical code shall apply.

Section 102.7.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 104.6 Official Records is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

104.6 Official Records. The fire code official shall keep official records as required by Sections 104.6.1 through 104.6.4 and all other records required to be retained by law. Such official records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of public records.

Section 105.1.1 Permits required is hereby amended as follows:

The following sentence is added to the end of this section: Permits are non-transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require a new permit.

Section 105.2 Application is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.2 Application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall submit a written application, all required supporting documentation and all applicable fees in accordance with the applicable requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority and as supplemented herein. If the applicable permit application requires the disclosure of occupancy classifications, the application shall indicate the proposed occupancy classifications for all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any not covered by the building or structure.

Section 105.2.1 Refusal to issue permit is hereby amended as follows:

The last sentence in this section shall read: Such refusal shall be in writing and shall contain the reasons for refusal.

Section 105.2.3 Time limitation of application is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.2.3 Time limitation of application. In the event a permit has not been issued or an application for a permit has not been denied, an application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, except that the fire code official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceed 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated before any extension is granted.

Section 105.2.4 Action on application is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.2.4 Action on application. The fire code official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto in accordance with the requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority as supplemented herein. If the application and/or supporting documentation does not conform to the requirements of applicable laws, the fire code official shall reject such application in writing stating the reasons therefor. If the fire code official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto and all applicable fees have been paid, the fire code official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.

Section 105.3.1 Expiration is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.3.1 Expiration. Every permit issued shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days after its issuance or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work is commenced. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a permittee holding an unexpired permit shall have the right to apply in writing to extend the expiration deadlines set forth herein. The fire code official is authorized to grant, in writing, one extension of time for a period of not more than 180 days provided that the permittee has demonstrated in writing that no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for the permitted work and that justifiable cause exists for the failure to commence the work within 180 days or for the suspension or abandonment of the work after it was commenced. The fee for the extension shall be the cost of reviewing the application at a rate of $100.00 per hour with a minimum charge of one hour. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, a new full permit fee shall be paid based on the current fee schedule adopted by the City.

Section 105.3.2 Extensions is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 105.4.1 Submittals is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.4.1 Submittals. Construction documents and supporting data shall be submitted in accordance with the applicable requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority and in accordance with the requirements set forth in Sections 105.4.2 through 105.4.3 and all subsections therein, and in Section 107.3.4 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, as applicable and as otherwise supplemented herein. In the event of a conflict, the most restrictive provisions shall apply. All construction documents and supporting data shall be prepared by a professional registrant with the Arizona Board of Technical registration, or in lieu of being designed by a professional registrant with the Arizona Board of Technical registration, fire sprinkler installation drawings shall bear a review certification of a minimum Level III National Institute for the Certification of Engineering Technologies (NICET) in Fire Sprinkler Systems, and fire alarm installation drawings shall bear a review certification of a minimum Level III National Institute for the Certification of Engineering Technologies (NICET) in Fire Alarm Systems.

Exception: The building official shall have the authority to waive the submission of construction documents, calculations or other data if the nature of the work applied for is such that the reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to determine compliance with this code and the authority to waive the requirement that construction documents, calculations and or other data be prepared and designed by a professional registrant if compliance with the requirements of this code can be determined by the building official.

Section 105.4.1.1 Examination of documents is hereby renumbered 105.4.1.2 Examination of documents and the following is hereby added as 105.4.1.1 Record Electronic Files as follows:

105.4.1.1 Record Electronic Files. CAD files (.dwg) shall be provided in the latest commercially available release of AutoCAD. Drawings are to be purged of all extraneous information, shall be "bound" to insert all reference files, shall be accompanied by any non- native fonts, and shall be free of complex file pathing which complicates file opening when transferred from the CDROM. Binding of reference files shall be done using AutoCAD’s SREF "insert" option so as to avoid layer and block name corruption. Other formats may be submitted with approval from the Fire Code Official.

Section 105.6 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.6 Required Operational Permits. Operational permits are required for the operations set forth in section 105.6.1 through 105.6.47. Operational permits are in addition to required construction permits. The Fire Chief is authorized to issue the operational permits required herein.

Section 105.6.3 Aviation facilities is hereby amended by adding the following to the end of this section:

In addition, an annual operation permit is required by the Fire Department to use Group H or Group S occupancy for aircraft servicing or repair and aircraft fuel-servicing vehicles.

Section 105.6.15 Fire hydrants and valves is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.6.15 Fire hydrants and valves. Except for authorized employees of the City of Goodyear Fire Department or any fire department that is subject to an automatic aid or mutual aid agreement with the City of Goodyear for the assistance in responding to fires and other types of emergency incidents, an operational permit is required to use or operate fire hydrants or valves intended for fire suppression purposes that are installed on the City of Goodyear’s water system and accessible to a fire apparatus access road that is open to or generally used by the public. Approval to use or operate fire hydrants or valves that are part of private water company’s water system is regulated by the private water company.

Section 105.6.16, Flammable and Combustible Liquids is hereby amended by adding the following to the end of this section:

12. In addition, an annual operation permit is required by the Fire Department for any of the uses described in 1-11 above.

Section 105.6.20 Hazardous Materials is hereby amended by adding the following to the end of this section:

An annual operational permit is required by the Fire Department to store, transport on site, dispense, use or handle hazardous materials in excess of the amounts listed in Table 105.6.20. A Hazardous Materials Assessment Fee shall be required for the annual inventory assessment, administrative process and code research activities.

Section 105.6.27 LP-gas is hereby amended as follows:

Item 2 requiring an operation permit for the operation of cargo tankers that transport LP-gas is hereby deleted.

Section 105.6.43 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.6.43 Temporary membrane structures, tents and canopies. An operational permit is required to operate an air-supported temporary membrane structure having an area in excess of 400 square feet, a tent having an area in excess of 400 square feet, or a canopy in excess of 700 square feet. No temporary membrane structure, tent or canopy as noted herein shall be erected, operated or maintained for any purpose without first obtaining a permit and approval from the fire code official. Membrane structures, tents and canopies grouped together shall be considered as one unit unless separated by at least 12 feet.

Exceptions:

1. Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes.

2. Tents open on all sides, which comply with all of the following:

2.1. Individual tents having a maximum size of 700 square feet (65 m2); and

2.2. The aggregate area of multiple tents placed side by side without a fire break clearance of not less than 12 feet (3,658 mm) shall not exceed 700 square feet (65 m2) total; and

2.3. A minimum clearance of 12 feet (3,658 mm) to structures and other tents shall be provided.

Section 105.6.47 Carbon dioxide systems used in beverage dispensing applications is hereby added as follows:

105.6.47 Carbon dioxide systems used in beverage dispensing applications. An operational permit is required for carbon dioxide systems used in beverage dispensing applications having more than 100 pounds of carbon dioxide.

Section 105.7 Required construction permits is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.7 Required construction permits. The building official is authorized to issue construction permits for work as set forth in sections 105.7.1 through 105.7.11 and 105.7.13 through 105.7.17. The City Engineer is authorized to issue construction permits for work set forth in section 105.7.12.

Section 105.7.16 Temporary membrane structures, tents and canopies is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.7.16 Temporary membrane structures, tents and canopies. A construction permit is required to operate an air-supported temporary membrane structure having an area in excess of 400 square feet, a tent having an area in excess of 400 square feet, or a canopy in excess of 700 square feet. No membrane structure, tent or canopy shall be erected, operated or maintained for any purpose without first obtaining a permit and approval from the Fire Code Official. Membrane structures, tents and canopies grouped together shall be considered as one unit unless separated by 12 feet.

Exceptions:

1. Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes.

2. Funeral tents and curtains, or extension attached thereto, when used for funeral services.

3. Tents open on all sides, which comply with all of the following:

3.1. Individual tents having a maximum size of 700 square feet (65m2).

3.2. The aggregate area of multiple tents placed side by side without a fire break clearance of not less than 12 feet (3,658 mm) shall not exceed 700 square feet (65m2) total.

3.3. A minimum clearance of 12 feet (3,658 mm) to structures and other tents shall be provided.

Section 105.7.17 Gate access automatic control device is hereby added as follows:

105.7.17 Gate access automatic control device. A construction permit is required for the installation of automatic gates across fire department access roads.

Section 108 Board of Appeals including sections 108.1 through 108.3 and all subsections therein is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

SECTION 108

BOARD OF APPEALS

108.1 Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the fire code official to the Board of Appeals as provided in Section 113 Board of Appeals, Sections 113.1 through 113.5 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 109.1 Unlawful acts is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

109.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for:

1. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any of the provision of this code; or to cause or allow same to be done;

2. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, or demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment in violation of approved construction plans or any direction of the fire code official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code or to cause or allow same to be done;

3. Any person to occupy or use any building, structure, premises, system, or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any provisions of this code or any direction of the fire code official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, or to cause or allow same to be done;

4. Any Owner to fail to take actions necessary to correct conditions in any building, structure, or equipment regulated by this code that is in violation of any provisions to bring such building, structure or equipment in compliance with the provisions of this code;

5. Any person to violate or fail to comply with notices and orders issued pursuant to the enforcement of this code, including by way of example, but not limitation, provisions of notices of violations, notices of unsafe conditions, and stop work orders.

Section 109.3 Notice of violation is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

109.3 Notice of violation. Whenever the fire code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, the fire code official may provide a written warning by attaching the warning in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Such warnings shall include at least the following, a description of the real estate sufficient for identification, description of the violation(s) and why the notice is being issued and the corrective actions that need to be taken. Whenever the fire code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred and the fire code official wants to prosecute such violation, a notice of the violation shall be given to the person(s) responsible for the violation as prescribed in section 109.3.1 below and the notice of violation shall be in accordance with all of the following:

1. Be in writing.

2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.

3. Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.

4. Correction orders shall be included in the notice which shall provide a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required or to take other such actions needed for compliance with the provisions of this code.

5. Include information on the right to appeal the notice of violation.

6. Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with the provisions of Section 109.3.3 Prosecution of violation.

Section 109.3.1 Service is hereby added as follows:

109.3.1 Service. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section 109.3 shall be deemed to be served if a copy of the notice or order is:

1. Delivered personally; or

2. Sent by certified or first class mail with return receipt requested addressed to the last known address; or

3. If the notice or order is returned showing that the notice or order was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice or order.

4. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested to the last known address.

If more than one person owns a building or structure that is the subject of a notice or order service to just one of the owners satisfies the requirement of providing the owner notice.

Service of a notice or order in the foregoing manner upon an owner’s agent, or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.

Section 109.3.3 Prosecution of violations is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

109.3.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections 109.3 and 109.3.1 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Such violations shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with the fire code official is authorized to request legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity(or both)to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provision of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.

Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.

Section 109.3.5 Transfer of ownership is hereby added as follows:

Section 109.3.5 Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building or structure who has received a notice of violation or order or upon whom a notice of violation or order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such building or structure to another until the provisions of the notice of violation or order have been complied with or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any notice of violation or order issued by the building official and shall furnish to the building official a signed and notarized statement that the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such notice of violation or order and fully accepting responsibility without condition for making the correction of repairs required by such notice of violation or order.

Section 109.4 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

109.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof; erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code; or who fails to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections 109.3 and 109.3.1 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Violations shall be deed a strict liability offense. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

Section 113.1 Imminent danger is hereby added as follows:

113.1 Imminent danger. Where an imminent danger exists, the fire code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping work.

Section 111.4 Failure to comply is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

111.4 Unlawful continuances. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law.

Section 113.1 Fees is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

113.1 Fees. A permit shall not be issued and shall not be valid until all fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until all additional fees, if any, have been paid. All permit fees and plan review fees shall be paid at the time of application supplemental. If the fees paid at the time of application are based on estimates, final fee adjustments will be made and any additional fees owed shall be made prior to the issuance of the applicable permits.

Section 113.2 Schedule of permit fees is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

113.2 Schedule of permit fees. The fees for each permit shall be paid in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority, including the fees set forth in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 113.3 Work commencing before permit issuance is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

113.3 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work, activity, or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an additional fee equal to 100% of the amount of the permit fee(s) required for the permit(s) necessary for the work performed, which will result in double the amount of the adopted permit fees being paid when work is commenced before the appropriate permits have been obtained. The payment of such fee shall not exempt an applicant from complying with the provisions of either this code or other applicable requirements nor does it exempt an applicant from any other penalties prescribed by law.

Section 113.5 Refunds is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

113.5 Refunds. The fire code official shall be permitted to authorize the refunding of fees as follows:

1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or collected.

2. Not more than 65 percent (65%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.

3. Not more than 65 percent (65%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

The fire code official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee no later than 90 days after the date of fee payment.

(2) CHAPTER 2 "DEFINITIONS" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 201.1 Scope is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meaning shown in this chapter regardless of whether the words are italicized, capitalized, or otherwise designated in the text as being a defined term.

Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Energy Conservation Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Fire Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, International Property Maintenance Code, or International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in those codes.

Section 202 General Definitions is hereby amended as follows:

Section 202 is amended to add the following definitions:

CONFLICT: A situation in which it is impossible to comply with provisions applicable to the same subject; a conflict does not exist when different provisions address the same subject and can be complied with without violating either provision.

EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lots.

GOVERNING AUTHORITY. The Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way including any structures thereon.

STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

The definition of FIRE CODE OFFICIAL in Section 202 General Definitions is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. The person(s) charged with the administration and enforcement of this code or their duly authorized representatives. For purposes of administering and enforcing the provisions of this code related to the erection, installation, alteration, extension, repair, removal or demolishment of any building, structure, premises, system or equipment regulated by this code, the fire code official is the Building Official as defined in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority or such other official as expressly designated in writing by the chief appointing authority for the jurisdiction and filed with the City Clerk. For purposes of administering and enforcing the provisions of this code related to all other matters, including fire investigations and operational permits, the fire code official is the Fire Chief.

The definition of Institutional Group I-1 under Occupancy Classification in Section 202 General Definitions is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

Institutional Group I-1. This occupancy shall include buildings, structures or parts thereof for more than 16 persons who reside on a 24-hour basis in a supervised environment and receive custodial care. The persons receiving care are capable of self preservation. This group shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Alcohol and drug centers

Assisted living facilities

Congregate care facilities

Convalescent facilities

Group homes

Half-way houses

Residential board and custodial care facilities

Social rehabilitation

EXCEPTIONS:

Five or fewer persons receiving care. A facility such as above with five or fewer persons receiving such care shall be classified as Group R-3 or shall comply with the International Residential Code provided an automatic sprinkler system is installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 as amended or Section P2904 of the International Residential Code. Automatic sprinkler systems are not required in one- and two- family (Group R-3) structures complying with the exceptions noted under Section 903.2.8 of this code as amended by this ordinance.

Six to sixteen persons receiving care. A facility such as above, housing at least six and not more than 16 persons receiving such care shall be classified as Group R-4.

Arizona State Department of Health Facilities. All facilities as licensed by the State of Arizona Department of Health, further known, but not limited to, as direct care, personal care, supervisory care and behavioral residential agency, housing at least six and not more than 10 persons shall be considered a Group R-4.

The definition of Residential Group R-3 under Occupancy Classification in Section 202 General Definitions is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

Residential Group R-3. Residential occupancies where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature and not classified as Group R-1, R-2, R-4 or I, including:

Boarding houses (nontransient) with 16 or fewer occupants

Boarding houses (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants

Buildings that do not contain more than two dwelling units

Care facilities that provide accommodations for five or fewer persons receiving care

Congregate living facilities (nontransient) with 16 or fewer occupants

Congregate living facilities (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants

Care facilities within a dwelling. Care facilities for five or fewer persons receiving care that are within a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply with the International Residential Code provided an automatic sprinkler system is installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 with amendments or Section P2904 of the International Residential Code. Automatic sprinkler systems are not required in one- and two- family (Group R-3) structures complying with the exceptions noted under Section 903.2.8 of this code as amended by this ordinance.

The definition of Residential Group R-4 under Occupancy Classification in Section 202 General Definitions is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

Residential Group R-4. This occupancy shall include buildings, structures or portions thereof for more than five but not more than 16 persons, excluding staff, who reside on a 24- hour basis in a supervised residential environment and receive custodial care. The persons receiving care are capable of self-preservation. This group shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Alcohol and drug centers

Assisted living facilities

Congregate care facilities

Convalescent facilities

Group homes

Halfway houses

Residential board and custodial care facilities

Social rehabilitation facilities

Arizona State Department of Health Facilities, which includes all facilities as licensed by the State of Arizona Department of Health, further known, but not limited to, as direct care, personal care, supervisory care and behavioral residential agency, housing at least six and not more than 10 persons shall be considered a Group R-4 occupancy.

Group R-4 occupancies shall meet the requirements for construction as defined for Group R-3, except as otherwise provided for in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

The definition of OWNER in Section 202 General Definitions is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

The definition of PERSON in Section 202 General Definitions is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.

(3) CHAPTER 3 "GENERAL REQUIREMENTS" is amended as follows:

Section 316.6 Structures and outdoor storage underneath high-voltage transmission lines is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

316.6 Structures and outdoor storage underneath or abutting high voltage transmission lines. Structures and outdoor storage underneath or abutting high-voltage transmission lines shall comply with Sections 316.6.1 through 316.6.3, respectively.

Section 316.6.3 Required fire lanes and open yard space is hereby added as follows:

316.6.3 Required fire lanes and open yard space. There shall be fire lanes and/or open yard spaces ("open space") of not less than 60 feet (18, 288 mm) in width between structures and transmission lines, which shall be measured from the easement provided for the transmission lines abutting the proposed structure to the structure. No reduction in the amount of open space required herein shall be permitted regardless of whether the structure would be eligible for a reduction pursuant to section 507.5 of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

(4) CHAPTER 5 "FIRE SERVICE FEATURES" is amended as follows:

Section 503.1.1 Buildings and Facilities is hereby amended as follows:

Exceptions one (1) and three (3) are deleted.

Section 503.3 Marking is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

503.3 Marking. Where required by the fire code official, approved signs or other approved notices or markings that include the words "NO PARKING—FIRE LANE" shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Signage shall be in accordance with the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual as adopted and amended from time to time. Signs shall be installed perpendicular and double sided when placed on one side of a fire apparatus access roads. The means by which fire lanes are designated shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility.

In addition to or in lieu of the required fire lane signage the Fire Code Official may approve curb, street or driveway painted red to indicate fire lane and labeled "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" in white block letters 3 inches (76.2 mm) in height, 3/4 inch (19.5 mm) stroke, on the vertical face of the curb to indicate fire lane. Lettering shall not be greater than 50'0" (15.24 m) apart and shall be posted at the beginning and end of the fire lane.

Section 503.7 Key switch and sensor preemption location and type is hereby added as follows:

503.7 Key switch and sensor preemption location and type. A key switch and preemption sensor shall be required on all electric entry control gates. Key switch shall be installed in a location on the gate control panel that is readily visible and accessible. In the event that there is a power failure, the gate shall default to the open position.

Section 505.1 Address Identification is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

505.1, Address Identification

New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. Landscaping or structures cannot obscure addresses or required signage. These numbers shall contrast with their background and shall be weather resistant. Where required by the fire code official, address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Unless otherwise provided herein, numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (101.6 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address numbers shall be maintained and sized in accordance with the following:

1. One and two-family dwellings and commercial businesses being conducted in a one or two-family dwelling shall require minimum 4" high numbers or letters with a minimum 5/8 inch stroke width.

2. Triplexes, multifamily dwellings and commercial buildings located less than 75 feet from a public right-of-way (the street on which the property is addressed) shall post minimum 12 inch numbers or letters having a minimum 2 inch stroke width.

3. Triplexes, multifamily dwellings and commercial buildings located 75 feet to 200 feet from a public right-of-way (the street on which the property is addressed) shall post minimum 16 inch numbers or letters having a minimum 3 inch stroke width.

4. Triplexes, multifamily dwellings and commercial buildings located more than 200 feet from a public right-of-way (the street on which the property is addressed) shall post 24 inch numbers or letters having a 4 inch stroke width.

5. Unit or suite numerals and/or letters shall be required on or adjacent to the front door and on the rear door of multi-tenant buildings to be immediately visible. Letters or numerals shall be a minimum 4 inch in height with a minimum 5/8 inch stroke width in a color contrasting to the door and shall be weather-resistant.

6. Exceptions to these requirements shall be approved by the Fire Code Official.

Section 507.5 Fire hydrant systems is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

507.5 Fire hydrant systems. Fire hydrant systems shall comply with Sections 507.5.1 through 507.5.6, and on-site fire hydrants spacing and mains shall be provided where required by the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual and the fire code official.

Section 507.5.1 is hereby amended as follows:

Exceptions #1 and #2 are deleted in their entirety.

(5) CHAPTER 9 "FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS" is amended as follows:

Section 903.2 Where required is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12 as amended herein, except for telecommunication buildings, existing structures, special amusement buildings and exempt locations as follows:

Exceptions:

Telecommunications building: Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic smoke detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 and are separated from the remainder of the building by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the International Building Code or not less than 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the International Building Code, or both.

Existing Structures: An automatic sprinkler system shall not be required to be retrofitted in existing buildings where the occupancy is changed provided the new or proposed use is less hazardous, based on life safety and fire risk, than the existing use and the existing structure is not increased more than an aggregate total of all additions of 500 square feet. The determination of whether the new or proposed use is less hazardous shall be made by the fire code official in his/her discretion.

Special Amusement Buildings: Automatic sprinkler systems shall not be required for temporary special amusement buildings pursuant to the Exception in Section 411.4 of the International Building Code.

Section 903.2.1.1 Group A-1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-1 occupancies.

Section 903.2.1.2 Group A-2 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-2 occupancies.

Section 903.2.1.3 Group A-3 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-3 occupancies.

Section 903.2.1.4 Group A-4 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-4 occupancies.

Section 903.2.1.5 Group A-5 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.2.1.5 Group A-5. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-5 occupancies, including all accessory use areas, which includes, but is not limited to: concession stands, retail areas, and press boxes.

Section 903.2.2 Ambulatory care facilities is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.2.2 Ambulatory care facilities. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for in ambulatory care facilities.

Section 903.2.3 Group E is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group E occupancies.

Section 903.2.4 Group F-1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.2.4 Groups B, F-1, F-2 and U. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Groups B, F-1, F-2 and U occupancies.

Section 903.2.4.1 Woodworking operations is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 903.2.7 Group M is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing a Group M occupancy.

Section 903.2.71 High-piled storage is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 903.2.8 Group R is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area except as follows:

Exception:

Automatic sprinkler systems shall not be required in one- and two-family dwellings and R-3 occupancies that are less than 5,000 square feet when there is adequate water supply and an approved fire apparatus access road. When there is inadequate water supply or limited fire department access, automatic sprinkler systems shall not be required in one- and two-family dwellings and R-3 occupancies that are less than 3,600 square feet. The square footage shall be determined based on the total floor area, which includes the living area, attached garages and areas under roof or horizontal projections, including but not limited to, porches, sunrooms, courts, etc. Detached structures not satisfying the required fire separation distance shall be considered as part of the total square footage of the main structure. (This exemption does not apply to town houses consisting of 3 or more units; nor does it apply to occupancies and/or care facilities located in one- or two-family dwellings where the occupants are incapable of self-preservation.)

Section 903.2.8.3 Special Requirements for Arizona State Department of Health Facilities is hereby added as follows:

903.2.8.3 Special Requirements for Arizona State Department of Health Facilities. All facilities as licensed by the State of Arizona Department of Health, further known, but not limited to, as direct care, personal care, supervisory care and behavioral residential agency, housing at least six and not more than 10 persons shall be considered a Group R-4. An automatic sprinkler system in accordance with 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 as applicable shall be provided in these type of facilities except that sprinklers shall be installed in bathrooms, kitchens, closets in excess of 24 square feet, rooms containing electrical and/or mechanical equipment, foyers, attached garages, accessible areas under interior stairs and/or landings, and attics.

Section 903.2.8.4 Special Requirements for Groups R-1 and R-2 Occupancies is hereby added as follows:

903.2.8.4 Special Requirements for Groups R-1 and R-2 Occupancies. In Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies, sprinklers shall be installed in bathrooms, kitchens, closets in excess of 24 square feet, rooms containing electrical and/or mechanical equipment, foyers, attached garages, and accessible areas under interior stairs and/or landings.

In R-1 occupancies, sprinklers shall be installed in attics and concealed spaces containing combustible materials.

Section 903.2.8.5 Special Requirements for Groups R-3 and R-4 Occupancies is hereby added as follows:

903.2.8.5 Special Requirements for Groups R-3 and R-4 Occupancies. In Group R-3 and R-4 occupancies, sprinklers shall be installed in bathrooms, kitchens, closets in excess of 24 square feet, rooms containing electrical and/or mechanical equipment, foyers, attached garages, and accessible areas under interior stairs and/or landings.

In R-4 occupancies, sprinklers shall be installed in attics and concealed spaces containing combustible materials.

Section 903.2.9 Group S-1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.2.9 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group S-1 occupancy.

Section 903.2.9.1 Repair garages is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 903.2.10 Group S-2 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.2.10 Group S-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group S-2 occupancies.

Section 903.2.10.1 Commercial parking garages is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 903.2.11 Specific buildings areas and hazards is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.2.11 Specific buildings areas and hazards. In all occupancies requiring automatic sprinkler systems, an automatic sprinkler system shall be installed for building design or hazards in locations set forth in Sections 903.2.11.1 through 903.2.11.6 as amended herein:

Section 903.2.11.1 Stories without openings is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.2.11.1 Stories without openings. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all stories, including basements.

Section 903.2.11.3, Buildings 55 feet or more in height is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.2.11.3, Buildings height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all buildings regardless of the occupant load and the use.

Section 903.3.1.1.2 Accessory exempt locations is hereby added as follows:

903.3.1.1.2 Accessory exempt locations. An automatic sprinkler system shall not be required in the following buildings, rooms or areas:

1. Detached storage sheds, detached private garages, detached gazebos and ramadas for private, residential and non-commercial uses not exceeding 1,500 square feet.

2. Detached restroom buildings at parks, golf courses and similar locations not exceeding 1,500 square feet with storage areas not exceeding 100 square feet.

3. Non-combustible detached gazebos, ramadas and greenhouses for public use not exceeding 1,500 square feet.

4. Non-combustible detached fuel dispensing canopies, detached wash racks, non- combustible canopies with flame retardant sunscreen.

5. Agricultural buildings, animal shelters, greenhouses, grain silos and barn accessories to a residential occupancy not exceeding 1,500 square feet with no habitable space.

6. Detached hay barns with no accessory storage or uses and no habitation areas.

7. Open shade horse stalls of non-combustible construction for private, residential non- commercial use not exceeding 5,000 square feet with no storage of combustible products, vehicles, or agricultural equipment.

8. Detached non-combustible carports for residential and commercial developments with covered parking. Each non-combustible carport shall not exceed 2,000 square feet and shall be separated a minimum of ten (10) feet from the main building. Where there are a group of carports and each one does not exceed 2,000 square feet, the minimum separation required between carports shall be ten (10) feet.

9. Temporary tents and membrane structures for approved special events.

10. Detached temporary modular sales offices.

11. Special use structures as approved by the fire code official.

Section 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13 sprinkler systems is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.3.1.3 NFPA 13 sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in required one- and two-family dwellings and use groups R-3, R-4 congregate living and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D. Automatic sprinkler systems for required one- and two-family dwellings designed in accordance to the International Residential Code shall be permitted to be designed in accordance to P2904 of the International Residential Code. Automatic sprinkler systems designed in accordance with NFPA 13D or Section P2904 of the International Residential Code shall provide protection in attached garages, attached carports, enclosed attached entry ways, enclosed attached porches, attached storage areas and similar areas.

Section 903.3.7, Fire department connections, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.3.7 Fire department connections. Unless waived by the fire code official or exempted by the NFPA 13 or 13R standards, approved fire department connections are required on automatic sprinkler systems designed in accordance to NFPA 13 and 13R in locations approved by the fire code official and in accordance to the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual. Automatic sprinkler systems designed in accordance to NFPA 13D and Section P2904 of the International Residential Code are not required to have a fire department connection.

Section 903.4.2 Alarms is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.4.2 Alarms. An approved audible device, located on the exterior of the building in an approved location, shall be connected to each automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system.

Where a fire alarm system is not required and the automatic sprinkler system is being supervised, at least one manual fire alarm box shall be provided at an approved location to initiate the fire alarm signal.

Section 907.2.10.1 Group R-4 Manual Fire Alarm System, is amended to add Exception 4 as follows:

4. A manual fire alarm system is not required in a Group R4 occupancy when the occupant load does not exceed 10 residents and is located in a one- or two-family dwelling.

Section 912.5 Backflow protection is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

912.5 Backflow protection. The potable water supply to automatic sprinkler and standpipe systems shall be protected against backflow as required by the International Plumbing Code and the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual.

(6) Chapter 23 "MOTOR FUEL-DISPENSING FACILITIES AND REPAIR GARAGES" is amended as follows:

Section 2308.3.2, Vehicle impact protection, is hereby added as follows:

2308.3.2, Vehicle impact protection. Vehicle impact protection for CNG gas storage containers, pumps and dispensers shall be provided in accordance with section 312 of the International Fire Code.

(7) Chapter 53 "COMPRESSED GASES" is amended as follows:

Section 5308 Carbon dioxide (CO2) systems used in beverage dispensing applications is hereby added as follows:

5308 Carbon dioxide (CO2) systems used in beverage dispensing applications. New and existing carbon dioxide systems with more than 100 pounds (45.4 kg) of carbon dioxide used in beverage dispensing applications shall comply with Sections 5307.2 through 5307.5.2.

Section 5308.1 Permits is hereby added as follows:

5308.1 Permits. Permits for carbon dioxide systems shall be required as set forth in Section 105.6.47.

Section 5308.2 Equipment is hereby added as follows:

5308.2 Equipment. The storage, use, and handling of liquid carbon dioxide shall be in accordance with Chapter 53 and the applicable requirements of NFPA 55, Chapter 13. Insulated liquid carbon dioxide systems shall have pressure relief devices vented in accordance with NFPA 55.

Section 5308.3 Protection from damage is hereby added as follows:

5308.3 Protection from damage. Carbon dioxide systems shall be installed so the storage tanks, cylinders, piping and fittings are protected from damage by occupants or equipment during normal facility operations.

Section 5308.4 Required protection is hereby added as follows:

5308.4 Required protection. Where carbon dioxide storage tanks, cylinders, piping and equipment are located indoors, rooms or areas containing carbon dioxide storage tanks, cylinders, piping and fittings and other areas where a leak of carbon dioxide can collect shall be provided with either ventilation in accordance with Section 5308.4.1 or an emergency alarm system in accordance with Section 5308.4.2.

Section 5308.4.1 Ventilation is hereby added as follows:

5308.4.1 Ventilation. Mechanical ventilation of carbon dioxide systems shall be in provided accordance with the International Mechanical Code and shall comply with all of the following:

1. Mechanical ventilation in the room or area shall be at a rate of not less than 1 cubic foot per minute per square foot [0.00508 m3/(s • m2)].

2. Exhaust shall be taken from a point within 12 inches (305 mm) of the floor.

3. The ventilation system shall be designed to operate at a negative pressure in relation to the surrounding area.

Section 5308.4.2 Emergency alarm system is hereby added as follows:

5308.4.2 Emergency alarm system. An emergency alarm system for carbon dioxide systems shall be installed in accordance with all of the following:

1. Continuous gas detection shall be provided to monitor areas where carbon dioxide can accumulate.

2. The threshold for activation of an alarm shall not exceed 5,000 parts per million (9,000 mg/m3).

3. Activation of the emergency alarm system shall initiate a local alarm within the room or area in which the system is installed and if the area in which the local alarm is located is not continuously monitored, the emergency alarm system must be monitored by a monitoring company.

(8) Appendix D: FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROAD is hereby amended as follows:

Section D101.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

D101.1 Scope. Fire apparatus access roads shall be in accordance with this appendix, all other applicable requirements of the International Fire Code, and the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual.

Section D103.1, Access road width with a hydrant is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

D103.1 Access road width with a hydrant. Where a fire hydrant is located on a fire apparatus access road, the minimum width shall be as required by the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual.

Figure D103.1 Dead-end Fire Apparatus Access Road Turnaround, is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

Figure D103.1 Dead End Fire Apparatus Access Road Turnaround

Dead ends and fire apparatus access road turnarounds shall comply with the requirements for dead ends and fire apparatus access road turnarounds in the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual.

Section D103.2 Grade is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

D103.2 Grade. Fire apparatus access road shall not exceed the grade of 8% as required in the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual.

Exception: Grades steeper than 8% as approved by the fire chief.

Section D103.3 Turning radius is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

D103.3 Turning radius. The minimum turning radius shall be in accordance with the requirements in the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual.

Section D103.4 Dead ends and Table D103.4 are hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

D103.4 Dead ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet (45720 mm) shall be provided with width and turnaround provisions in accordance with the requirements of the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual.

Section D103.6, Signs is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

D103.6 Signs. Where required by the fire code official, fire apparatus access roads shall be marked with permanent signs complying with the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual and/or provide curb markings in accordance with Section 503.3 of the International Fire Code as amended herein.

Section D104.2 Buildings exceeding 62,000 square feet in area is hereby amended as follows:

The exception allowing projects having a gross building area of up to 124,000 square feet to have a single approved fire apparatus road when all buildings are equipped throughout with approved automatic sprinkler systems is deleted in its entirety.

Section D106.1 Projects having more than 100 dwelling units is hereby amended as follows:

The exception is hereby deleted.

Section D106.2 is hereby deleted in its entirety.

(9) Appendix K REQUIREMENTS FOR FIREFIGHTER AIR REPLENISHMENT SYSTEMS is hereby added and adopted as follows:

APPENDIX K

REQUIREMENTS FOR FIREFIGHTER AIR REPLENISHMENT SYSTEMS

K101.1 Scope. Firefighter air replenishment systems (FARS) shall be provided in accordance with this appendix.

K101.2 When required. A Fire Fighter Air Replenishment System (FARS) shall be required in all new buildings or structures that meet any of the following:

1. The building or structure has five (5) or more floors above grade; or

2. The building or structure is a high rise building as defined by the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority; or

3. The building, structure or components thereof are underground and the square footage of the underground building, structure, or component thereof is ten thousand (10,000) feet or more and is located either more than two (2) floors below grade or more than thirty (30) feet below grade.

SECTION K102

DEFINITIONS

K102.1 Definitions. For the purposes of this Appendix K, the following terms are defined as follows:

FIRE FIGHTER AIR REPLENISHMENT SYSTEM (FARS). A permanently installed arrangement of piping, valves, fittings and equipment to facilitate the replenishment of breathing air in self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) for fire fighters engaged in emergency operations.

SECTION K103

PERMITS

K103.1 Permits. Permits shall be required to install and maintain a FARS. Permits shall be in accordance with Sections K103.2 and K103.3.

K103.2 Construction permit. A construction permit is required for installation of or modification to a FARS. The construction permit application shall include documentation of an acceptance and testing plan as specified in Section K105.

K103.3 Operational permit. An operational permit is required to maintain a FARS.

SECTION K104

DESIGN AND INSTALLATION

K104.1 Design and installation. A FARS shall be designed and installed in accordance with Sections K104.2 through K104.15.

K104.2 Standards. Fire fighter air replenishment systems shall be in accordance with Sections K104.2.1 and K104.2.2.

K104.2.1 Pressurized system components. Pressurized system components shall be designed and installed in accordance with ASME B31.3.

K104.2.2 Air quality. The system shall be designed to convey breathing air complying with NFPA 1989.

K104.3 Design and operating pressure. The minimum design pressure shall be 110 percent of the fire department’s normal SCBA fill pressure. The system design pressure shall be marked in an approved manner at the supply connections, and adjacent to pressure gauges on any fixed air supply components. Pressure shall be maintained in the system within 5 percent of the design pressure.

K104.4 Cylinder refill rate. The FARS shall be capable of refilling breathing air cylinders of a size and pressure used by the fire department at a rate of not less than two empty cylinders in 2 minutes.

K104.5 Breathing air supply. Where a fire department mobile air unit is available, the FARS shall be supplied by an external mobile air connection in accordance with Section K104.14. Where a fire department mobile air unit is not available, a stored pressure air supply shall be provided in accordance with Section K104.5.1. A stored pressure air supply shall be permitted to be added to a system supplied by an external mobile air connection provided that a means to bypass the stored pressure air supply is located at the external mobile air connection.

K104.5.1. Stored pressure air supply. A stored pressure air supply shall be designed based on Chapter 24 of NFPA 1901 except that provisions applicable only to mobile apparatus or not applicable to system design shall not apply. A stored pressure air supply shall be capable of refilling not less than 50 empty breathing air cylinders of a size and pressure used by the fire department.

K104.5.2. Retrofit of external mobile air connection. A FARS not initially provided with an external mobile air connection due to the lack of a mobile air unit shall be retrofitted with an external mobile air connection where a mobile air unit becomes available. Where an external mobile air connection is provided, a means to bypass the stored pressure air supply shall be located at the external mobile air connection. The retrofit shall be completed not more than 12 months after notification by the fire code official.

K104.6 Isolation valves. System isolation valves that are accessible to the fire department shall be installed on the system riser to allow piping beyond any air cylinder refill panel to be blocked.

K104.7 Pressure relief valve. Pressure relief valves shall be installed at each point of supply and at the top or end of every riser. The relief valve shall meet the requirements of CGA S-1.3 and shall not be field adjustable. Pressure relief valves shall discharge in a manner that does not endanger personnel who are in the area. Valves,plugs or caps shall not be installed in the discharge of a pressure relief valve. Where discharge piping is used the end shall not be threaded.

K104.8 Materials and equipment. Pressurized system components shall be listed or approved for their intended use and rated for the maximum allowable design pressure in the system. Piping and fittings shall be stainless steel.

K104.9 Welded connections. Piping connections that are concealed shall be welded.

K104.10 Protection of piping. System piping shall be protected from physical damage in an approved manner.

K104.11 Compatibility. Fittings and connections intended to be used by the fire department shall be compatible with the fire department’s equipment.

K104.12 Security. Connections to a FARS shall be safeguarded from unauthorized access in an approved manner.

K104.13 Fill stations. Fire fighter air replenishment fill stations shall comply with Section K104.13.1 through K104.13.3.

K104.13.1 Location. Fill stations for refilling breathing air cylinders shall be located as follows:

1. Fill stations shall be provided at the fifth floor above and below the ground level floor and every third floor level thereafter.

2. On floor levels requiring fill stations, one fill station shall be provided adjacent to a required exit stair at a location designated by the fire code official. In buildings required to have three or more exit stairs, additional fill stations shall be provided at a ratio of one fill station for every three stairways.

K104.13.2 Design. Fill stations for breathing air cylinders shall be designed to meet the following requirements:

1. A pressure gauge and pressure-regulating devices and controls shall be provided to allow the operator to control the fill pressure and fill rate on each cylinder fill hose.

2. Valves controlling cylinder fill hoses shall be slow operating valves.

3. A separate flow restriction device shall be provided on each fill hose.

4. A method shall be provided to bleed each cylinder fill hose.

5. The fill station shall be designed to provide a containment area that fully encloses any cylinder being filled and flexible cylinder fill hoses, and directs the energy from a failure away from personnel. Fill stations shall be designed to prohibit filling of cylinders that are not enclosed within the containment area.

Exception: Where required or approved by the fire chief, fill stations providing for the direct refilling of the fire fighters’ breathing air cylinders using Rapid Intervention Crew/Company Universal Air Connection (RIC/UAC) fittings shall be used in lieu of cylinder fill stations that utilize containment areas.

K104.13.3 Cylinder refill rate. Fill stations shall be capable of simultaneously filling two or more empty breathing air cylinders equivalent to those used by the fire department to the cylinders’ design pressure within 2 minutes.

K104.14 External mobile air connection. An external mobile air connection shall be provided for fire department mobile air apparatus where required by Section K104.5 to supply the system with breathing air.

K104.14.1 Location. The location of the external mobile air connection shall be accessible to mobile air apparatus and approved by the fire chief.

K104.14.2 Protection from vehicles. A means of vehicle impact protection in accordance with Section 312 shall be provided to protect mobile air connections that are subject to vehicular impact.

K104.14.3 Clear space around connections. A working space of not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in width, 36 inches (914 mm) in depth and 78 inches (1,981 mm) in height shall be provided and maintained in front of and to the sides of external mobile air connections.

K104.15 Air monitoring system. An approved air monitoring system shall be provided. The system shall automatically monitor air quality, moisture and pressure on a continual basis. The air monitoring system shall be equipped with not less than two content analyzers capable of detecting carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, nitrogen, oxygen, moisture and hydrocarbons.

K104.15.1 Alarm conditions. The air monitoring system shall transmit a supervisory signal when any of the following levels are detected:

1. Carbon monoxide exceeds 5 ppm.

2. Carbon dioxide exceeds 1,000 ppm.

3. An oxygen level below 19.5 percent or above 23.5 percent.

4. A nitrogen level below 75 percent or above 81 percent.

5. Hydrocarbon (condensed) content exceeds 5 milligrams per cubic meter of air.

6. The moisture concentration exceeds 24 ppm by volume.

7. The pressure falls below 90 percent of the maintenance pressure specified in Section K104.3.

K104.15.2 Alarm supervision, monitoring and notification. The air monitoring system shall be electrically supervised and monitored by an approved supervising station, or where approved, shall initiate audible and visual supervisory signals at a constantly attended location.

K104.15.3 Air quality status display. Air quality status shall be visually displayed at the external mobile air connection required by Section K104.14.

SECTION K105

ACCEPTANCE TESTS

K105.1 Acceptance tests. Upon completion of the installation, a FARS shall be acceptance tested to verify compliance with equipment manufacturers’ instructions and design documents. Oversight of the acceptance tests shall be provided by a registered design professional. Acceptance testing shall include all of the following:

1. A pneumatic test in accordance with ASME B31.3 of the complete system at a minimum test pressure of 110 percent of the system design pressure using oil free dry air, nitrogen or argon shall be conducted. Test pressure shall be maintained for not less than 24 hours. During this test, all fittings, joints and system components shall be inspected for leaks. Defects in the system or leaks detected shall be documented and repaired.

2. A cylinder-filling performance test shall be conducted to verify compliance with the required breathing air cylinder refill rate from the exterior mobile air connection and, where provided, a stored air pressure supply system.

3. The air quality monitoring system shall be tested to verify both of the following conditions:

3.1. Visual indicators required by Section K104.15.1 function properly.

3.2. Supervisory signals are transmitted as required by Section K104.15.2 for each sensor based on a sensor function test.

4. Connections intended for fire department use shall be confirmed as compatible with the fire department’s mobile air unit, SCBA cylinders and, where provided, RIC/UAC connections.

5. Air samples shall be taken from not less than two fill stations and submitted to an approved gas analysis laboratory to verify compliance with NFPA 1989. The FARS shall not be placed into service until a written report verifying compliance with NFPA 1989 has been provided to the fire code official.

SECTION K106

INSPECTION, TESTING AND MAINTENANCE

K106.1 Periodic inspection, testing and maintenance. A FARS shall be continuously maintained in an operative condition and shall be inspected not less than annually. Not less than quarterly, an air sample shall be taken from the system and tested to verify compliance with NFPA 1989. The laboratory test results shall be maintained on site and readily available for review by the fire code official.

SECTION K107

REFERENCED STANDARDS

ASME B31.3—2012 Process Piping L104.2.1, L105.1

CGA S-1.3—2008 Pressure Relief Device Standards – Part 3 Stationary Storage Containers for Compressed Gases L104.7

NFPA 1901—09 Standard for Automotive Fire Apparatus L104.5.1

NFPA 1989—13 Breathing Air Quality for Fire Emergency Services Respiratory Protection L104.2.2, L105.1, L106.1

(Prior Code, Art. 5-2) (Am. Ord. 92-454, passed 1-14-1992; Am. Ord. 93-479, passed 3-11-1993; Am. Ord. 99-647, passed 12-6-1999; Am. Ord. 02-776, passed 2-25-2002; Am. Ord. 02-834, passed 1-6-2003; Am. Ord. 04-896, passed 5-10-2004; Am. Ord. 05-928, passed 1-10-2005; Am. Ord. 07-1057, passed 1-22-2007; Am. Ord. 15-1320, passed 5-18-2015)




ARTICLE 5-3 Penalties

Section

5-3-1    Penalties

5-3-2    Each day a separate violation

5-3-3    Violations not exclusive

5-3-4    Injunctions

Prior legislation: Prior Code, Art. 5-3 and Ords. 02-776, 02-834, 04-896 and 05-928.


5-3-1 PENALTIES.

(A) Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association, whether principal, owner, agent, tenant or otherwise found guilty of violating any of the provisions of Article 5-2 of the Goodyear City Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not less than $50 and not greater than $2,500 for an individual or not less than $400 and not greater than $20,000 for an Enterprise, or imprisonment not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. The term ENTERPRISE as used in this subsection shall mean any corporation, partnership, association, labor union, or other entity or any group of associated persons although not a legal entity.

(B) Notwithstanding the provisions in subsection (A) of this section providing for the enforcement of violations of provisions of Article 5-2 of the Goodyear City Code as misdemeanors, violation of any of the provisions of Article 5-2 of the Goodyear City Code are declared to be civil code violations that may be adjudicated and enforced by the city court pursuant to Chapter 18 of the Goodyear City Code, as an additional enforcement alternative to other remedies provided in this section. Use of this civil code enforcement alternative is not mandatory and shall be at the discretion of the city official undertaking enforcement action on an alleged violation of any of the provisions of Article 5-2 of the Goodyear City Code.

(C) Upon a finding of responsible to a civil violation of any of the provisions of Article 5-2 of the Goodyear City Code, the court shall impose a civil sanction not less than $50 and not greater than $2,500 for an Individual and not less than $250 and not less than $400 and not greater than $20,000 for an Enterprise. The term ENTERPRISE as used in this subsection shall mean any corporation, partnership, association, labor union, or other entity or any group of associated persons although not a legal entity. 

(Ord. 15-1320, passed 5-18-2015)


5-3-2 EACH DAY A SEPARATE VIOLATION.

Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 

(Ord. 15-1320, passed 5-18-2015)


5-3-3 VIOLATIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE.

Violations of the provisions of Article 5-2 of the Goodyear City Code are in addition to any other violation of applicable Goodyear ordinance or code provision and in no way limits the penalties, actions, or abatement procedures which may be taken by the City of Goodyear for any violation of the provisions of Article 5-2 of the Goodyear City Code which is also a violation of any other ordinance or code provision of the City of Goodyear, or statutes of the State of Arizona. 

(Ord. 15-1320, passed 5-18-2015)


5-3-4 INJUNCTIONS.

(A) If any building or structure is constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of the provisions of Article 5-2 of the Goodyear City Code, the City, or any property owner or tenant in such building or structure, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings:

(1) To prevent the unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use;

(2) To prevent the occupancy of the building structure or land;

(3) To prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the premises; or

(4) To restrain, correct or abate the violation.

(B) When any such action is instituted by a property owner or tenant, notice of such action shall be served upon the City at the time suit is begun, by serving a copy of the complaint on the City Clerk.

(C) In any such action or proceeding, the court with jurisdiction thereof has the power and in its discretion may issue a restraining order, or a preliminary injunction, as well as a permanent injunction, upon such terms and under such conditions as will do justice and enforce the purpose of Article 5-2 of the Goodyear City Code. 

(Ord. 15-1320, passed 5-18-2015) 


ARTICLE 5-4 Fire Prevention Fees

Section

5-4-1    Fees established; adoption


5-4-1 FEES ESTABLISHED; ADOPTION.

The Council shall adopt from time to time by resolution fees for plan review, permit, inspection, occupancy permit and annual occupancy inspection and such other fees as the Council shall deem reasonable and appropriate for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the city. A schedule of fees containing fees as established by resolution of the Council and as they exist from time to time shall be kept on file with the City Clerk and with the Fire Department for public inspection.

(Prior Code, § 5-4-1) (Am. Ord. 92-460, passed 5-26-1992)


CHAPTER 6: City Court

Article

6-1.    MUNICIPAL COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION

6-2.    MUNICIPAL JUDGE

6-3.    PROCEEDINGS, CONDUCT AND MANAGEMENT OF COURT


ARTICLE 6-1 Municipal Court Established; Jurisdiction

Section

6-1-1    Municipal court established; jurisdiction


6-1-1 MUNICIPAL COURT ESTABLISHED; JURISDICTION.

There is established a municipal court which shall have jurisdiction of all violations of this code and concurrent jurisdiction with justices of the peace of precincts in which the city is located of violations of state laws committed within the city. The municipal court is established pursuant to the Arizona Constitution and A.R.S. § 22-402 and shall be known as The Municipal Court of the City of Goodyear, Maricopa County, State of Arizona. The court may also be referred to as the Goodyear Municipal Court.

(Prior Code, Art. 6-1) (Am. Ord. 99-641, passed 2-8-1999)


ARTICLE 6-2 Municipal Judge

Section

6-2-1    Appointment; compensation

6-2-2    Powers and duties

6-2-3    Hearing officers


6-2-1 APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION.

The city court shall be composed of a presiding Municipal Judge who shall be appointed by the Council for a term of two years and who may be re appointed. Compensation for the term of office shall be as determined by the Council. The Council may remove the Municipal Judge for cause.

(Prior Code, § 6-2-1) (Am. Ord. 99-641, passed 2-8-1999)


6-2-2 POWERS AND DUTIES.

The Municipal Judge shall exercise powers, duties and responsibilities provided by the Arizona Constitution and state law and this code. The powers and duties shall include, but are not limited to, the following:

(A) Submitting all reports required by the Constitution and the laws of the state;

(B) Reporting on the activities of the court as the Council may require;

(C) Fixing and receiving all bonds and bails and receiving all fines, penalties, fees and other monies as provided by law;

(D) Paying all fines, penalties, fees and other monies collected by the court to the City Finance Director;

(E) Supervising all court employees and the administration of the court.

(Prior Code, § 6-2-2) (Am. Ord. 99-641, passed 2-8-1999)


6-2-3 HEARING OFFICERS.

The Council may appoint one or more hearing officers to preside over civil traffic violation matters appealable to the Superior Court pursuant to A.R.S. § 28-1553 when such appointment is necessary for the prompt disposition of such cases. Hearing officers shall be under the supervision of the Municipal Judge.

(Prior Code, § 6-2-3) (Am. Ord. 99-641, passed 2-8-1999)


ARTICLE 6-3 Proceedings, Conduct and Management of Court

Section

6-3-1    Proceedings

6-3-2    Management; City Manager; Council

6-3-3    Default fee

6-3-4    Warrant fee

6-3-5    Court Enhancement Fund

6-3-6    Administrative fee


6-3-1 PROCEEDINGS.

Proceedings in the court shall be in accordance with the state constitution, state statutes and applicable rules promulgated by the Arizona Supreme Court and the Superior Court of the county in which it is located. The court shall be open on all judicial days.

(Prior Code, § 6-3-1) (Am. Ord. 99-641, passed 2-8-1999)


6-3-2 MANAGEMENT; CITY MANAGER; COUNCIL.

(A) The City Manager shall organize, administer and plan for all nonjudicial operations of the city court, including personnel and payroll, to the extent permitted by law.

(B) The Council shall provide for the financial, physical, personnel and consulting requirements of the court and may adopt additional ordinances as may be deemed necessary for the consistent implementation of this code.

(Prior Code, § 6-3-2) (Am. Ord. 99-641, passed 2-8-1999)


6-3-3 DEFAULT FEE.

Commencing on the first day of December 1995, the Municipal Judge or hearing officer of the court shall assess a defendant a default fee of $35 for each default judgment entered in a civil traffic violation case upon a failure of such defendant to appear or upon such defendant’s failure to pay a civil sanction, unless such default judgment is set aside under Rules of Procedure in Civil Traffic Violation Cases, Rule 28. The Municipal Judge or hearing officer may waive all or any part of the fee if the payment of the fee would cause undue hardship to the defendant.

(Prior Code, § 6-3-3) (Am. Ord. 99-641, passed 2-8-1999; Am. Ord. 18-1386, passed 5-14-2018)


6-3-4 WARRANT FEE.

The city court shall assess an administrative fee not to exceed $250 for the issuance of a warrant due to the failure of a defendant to appear or to pay any fine, fee or restitution imposed by the court or the failure of a defendant to comply with any other sanction or any other order regarding probation, counseling or diversion programs.

(Prior Code, § 6-3-4) (Ord. 98-602, passed 4-27-1998)


6-3-5 COURT ENHANCEMENT FUND.

(A) There is created a Court Enhancement Fund, which shall be used exclusively to enhance the technological and security capabilities of the court.

(B) The Court Enhancement Fund shall be funded by an enhancement fee in the amount of $20 which shall be applied by the city court on all fines, sanctions, penalties and assessments imposed by the city court. The enhancement fee shall also apply to fees collected for court authorized diversion programs. COURT AUTHORIZED DIVERSION PROGRAM, as used in this section, means a program in which an individual charged with any civil, criminal or petty offense is not prosecuted for the offense on successful completion of an authorized diversion program and it includes authorized defensive driving courses.

(C) The Court Enhancement Fund shall be established as a designated fund account with the City Finance Director. The city court shall collect enhancement fees and deposit them in the Court Enhancement Fund Account. The City Finance Director shall invest the monies in the Fund in the same manner as city funds. Interest earned on Fund monies shall be deposited in the Fund.

(D) The city court shall administer the Fund and may make expenditures from the Fund for the purposes provided in this section. Monies from the Fund shall supplement monies already provided in the city court for the general purposes stated in this section.

(E) The city court shall annually submit to the Mayor and City Council and the City Manager a report detailing the amount of money collected and expended during the reporting period and the progress made in court enhancement.

(Prior Code, § 6-3-5) (Ord. 98-602, passed 4-27-1998; Am. Ord. 18-1386, passed 5-14-2018)


6-3-6 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.

The city court may assess and collect an administrative fee of $100 with regard to any defendant who is permitted and elects to participate in any counseling or diversionary programs as an alternative to a judicial resolution of any charge against the defendant.

(Prior Code, § 6-3-6) (Ord. 98-602, passed 4-27-1998; Am. Ord. 18-1386, passed 5-14-2018)


CHAPTER 7: Animals

Article

7-1.    RULES AND REGULATIONS

7-2.    RABIES/ANIMAL CONTROL LEASH LAW

7-3.    REPEALED

7-4.    ANIMALS AT LARGE


ARTICLE 7-1 Rules and Regulations

Section

7-1-1    Dangerous animals

7-1-2    Killing dangerous animals

7-1-3    Noises

7-1-4    Restrictions on keeping animals

Cross-reference:

Sexual assault of an animal, see § 11-1-22


7-1-1 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.

It is unlawful to permit any dangerous, vicious animal of any kind to run at large within the city, and such animals shall be immediately impounded by the enforcement agent. Exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the Chief of Police or such person that he or she may appoint.

(Prior Code, § 7-1-1) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


7-1-2 KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.

The members of the Police Department or the enforcement agent are authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property.

(Prior Code, § 7-1-2)


7-1-3 NOISES.

It is unlawful to harbor or keep any animals or fowl that disturb the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night.

(Prior Code, § 7-1-3) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


7-1-4 RESTRICTIONS ON KEEPING ANIMALS.

(A) Unless permitted by this code or the zoning regulations of the city, it is unlawful to keep or cause to be kept any horses, mules, cattle, burros, goats, sheep, swine or pigs or livestock, pigeons or poultry within the corporate limits of the city.

(B) Household pets, as defined in Article 7-2 of this chapter, and service animals, as defined by federal and state law, may be kept in the City, but it shall be unlawful to keep, harbor or maintain more than four household pets, to include no more than one potbellied pig (not to exceed 100 pounds) on any residential property within the City.

(C) The maintaining or keeping of all animals within the city in accordance with this code and applicable regulations shall be allowed only as long as they do not cause, create or contribute to or become a public or private nuisance due to noise any time of the day or night, the presence of flies, mosquitos, insects, vermin, rodent harborage, odors, dust, ponded water, accumulation of manure, garbage, refuse or other obnoxious or putrescible material or for any other like reason.

(D) Manure and droppings shall be removed from yards, pens, stables, cages and other enclosures at least twice weekly and shall be removed from the premises at least twice each week or more frequently as dictated by customary husbandlike health and sanitary conditions due to weather and other circumstances. For the purposes of this provision, PREMISES means the lot or parcel of ground upon which the yard, pen, stable, cage or other enclosure is located. Spillage and leftovers from animal feedings shall be disposed of in the same manner as the aforesaid manure and droppings.

(E) An owner or handler of a household pet, which is required to be leashed or harnessed, shall be required to remove any droppings or feces at the time of discharge when said animal is on public or private property other than that of such owner or handler which such household pet is leashed or harnessed.

(F) All enclosures or other structures used for the purpose of housing, keeping or caring for any animal shall be structurally sound so as to contain such animals safely and securely.

(Prior Code, § 7-1-4) (Am. Ord. 92-470, passed 9-22-1992; Am. Ord. 12-1260, passed 6-11-2012; Am. Ord. 13-1287, passed 8-19-2013) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


ARTICLE 7-2 Rabies/Animal Control Leash Law

Section

7-2-1    Definitions

7-2-2    Powers and duties of the State Veterinarian and the Livestock Board

7-2-3    Powers and duties of State Department of Health Services

7-2-4    Powers and duties of Enforcement Agent

7-2-5    License fees for dogs; tags; records; penalties; classification

7-2-6    Anti rabies vaccination; vaccination and license stations

7-2-7    Kennel permit; fee; violation

7-2-8    Rabies Control Fund

7-2-9    Dogs not permitted at large; wearing license

7-2-10    Establishment of pounds; impounding and disposing of dogs and cats; reclaiming impounded dogs and cats; pound fees

7-2-11    Handling of biting animals; responsibility for reporting animal bites

7-2-12    Unlawful interference with enforcement agent

7-2-13    Removing impounded animals

7-2-14    Unlawful keeping of dogs

7-2-15    Violation; classification

7-2-16    Dogs; liability

7-2-17    Proper care, maintenance and destruction of impounded animals


7-2-1 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

ANIMAL. Any animal of a species that is susceptible to rabies, except man.

AT LARGE On or off premises of the owner and not under control of the owner or other person acting for the owner. Any dog in a suitable enclosure or confined shall not be considered to be running at large.

DEPARTMENT. The State Department of Health Services.

ENFORCEMENT AGENT. That person in each county who is responsible for the enforcement of this article and the regulations promulgated thereunder.

HOUSEHOLD PETS. Those dogs, cats and potbellied pigs which are commonly kept as pets and whose primary value is personal enjoyment which shall not be raised for breeding or commercial purposes and which shall be limited to species whose presence in the neighborhood does not arouse unusual community interest or curiosity sufficient to attract the community residents to a specific neighborhood.

IMPOUND. The act of taking or receiving into custody by the enforcement agent any dog or other animal for the purpose of confinement in an authorized pound in accordance with the provisions of this article.

KENNEL. An enclosed, controlled area, inaccessible to other animals, in which a person keeps, harbors or maintains five or more dogs under controlled conditions.

LIVESTOCK. Neat animals, horses, sheep, goats, swine, mules and asses.

OWNER. Any person keeping an animal other than livestock for more than six consecutive days.

POUND. Any establishment authorized for the confinement, maintenance, safekeeping and control of dogs and other animals that come into the custody of the enforcement agent in the performance of his or her official duties.

RABIES QUARANTINE AREA. Any area in which a state of emergency has been declared to exist due to the occurrence of rabies in animals in or adjacent to this area.

RABIES VACCINATION CERTIFICATE. A method of recording and duplicating rabies information that is in compliance with the county enforcement agent’s licensing system and/or county enforcement agent’s prescribed forms.

STRAY DOG. Any dog four months of age or older running at large that is not wearing a valid license tag.

VACCINATION. The administration of an anti rabies vaccine to animals by a veterinarian or in authorized pounds by employees trained by a veterinarian.

VETERINARIAN. Unless otherwise indicated, means any veterinarian licensed to practice in this state or any veterinarian employed in this state by a governmental agency.

VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Any establishment operated by a veterinarian licensed to practice in this state that provides clinical facilities and houses animals or birds for dental, medical or surgical treatment. A veterinary hospital may have adjacent to it or in conjunction with it, or as an integral part of it, pens, stalls, cages or kennels for quarantine, observation or boarding.

VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal of the order carnivora that has a propensity to bite human beings without provocation and has been so declared after a hearing before a justice of the peace or a city magistrate.

(Prior Code, § 7-2-1) (Am. Ord. 12-1260, passed 6-11-2012)


7-2-2 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE STATE VETERINARIAN AND THE LIVESTOCK BOARD.

(A) The state veterinarian shall designate the type or types of anti-rabies vaccines that may be used for vaccination of animals, the period of time between vaccination and revaccination and the dosage and method of administration of the vaccine.

(B) The Arizona Livestock Board shall regulate the handling and disposition of animals classed as livestock that have been bitten by a rabid or suspected rabid animal or are showing symptoms suggestive of rabies.

(Prior code, § 7-2-2)


7-2-3 POWERS AND DUTIES OF STATE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SERVICES.

(A) The State Department of Health Services shall regulate the handling and disposition of animals other than livestock that have been bitten by a rabid or suspected rabid animal or are showing symptoms suggestive of rabies.

(B) The State Department of Health Services may require the enforcement agent to submit a record of all dog licenses issued and in addition any information deemed necessary to aid in the control of rabies.

(Prior Code, § 7-2-3)


7-2-4 POWERS AND DUTIES OF ENFORCEMENT AGENT.

(A) The enforcement agent shall:

(1) Enforce the provisions of this article and the regulations promulgated thereunder;

(2) Issue citations for the violation of the provisions of this article and the regulations promulgated thereunder. The procedure for the issuance of notices to appear shall be as provided for peace officers in A.R.S. § 13-3903, except that the enforcement agent shall not make an arrest before issuing the notice;

(3) Be responsible for declaring a rabies quarantine area within the area of jurisdiction. When a quarantine area has been declared, the enforcement agent shall meet with the state veterinarian and representatives from the Department of Health Services and the Game and Fish Department to implement an emergency program for the control of rabies within the area. Any regulations restricting or involving movements of livestock within the area shall be subject to approval by the state veterinarian.

(B) The issuance of citations pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of A.R.S. § 13-3899.

(C) The enforcement agent may designate deputies.

(Prior Code, § 7-2-4)


7-2-5 LICENSE FEES FOR DOGS; TAGS; RECORDS; PENALTIES; CLASSIFICATION.

All persons who keep or harbor or maintain a dog or dogs within the boundaries of the City of Goodyear shall comply with all Maricopa County licensing, tags, reporting and records requirements for dogs as provided in Title 11, Chapter 7, Article 6 of the Arizona Revised Statutes and as amended.

(Prior Code, § 7-2-5) (Am. Ord. 13-1287, passed 8-19-2013)


7-2-6 ANTI-RABIES VACCINATION; VACCINATION AND LICENSE STATIONS.

(A) Before a license is issued for any dog, the owner must present a vaccination certificate signed by a veterinarian stating the owner’s name and address and giving the dog’s description, date of vaccination and type, manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine used and date revaccination is due.

A duplicate of each rabies vaccination certificate issued shall be transmitted to the enforcement agent on or before the tenth day of the month following the month during which the dog was vaccinated. No dog shall be licensed unless it is vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this article and the regulations promulgated thereunder.

(B) A dog vaccinated in any other state prior to entry into Arizona may be licensed in Arizona, provided that, at the time of licensing, the owner of such dog presents a vaccination certificate, signed by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the state or a veterinarian employed by a governmental agency in that state, stating the owner’s name and address and giving the dog’s description, date of vaccination and type, manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine used. The vaccination must be in conformity with the provisions of this article and the regulations promulgated thereunder.

(C) The enforcement agent shall make provisions for vaccination clinics as deemed necessary. The vaccination shall be performed by a veterinarian.

(Prior Code, § 7-2-6)


7-2-7 KENNEL PERMIT; FEE; VIOLATION.

(A) A person operating a kennel shall obtain a permit issued by the Board of Supervisors of the county where the kennel is located except if each individual dog is licensed.

(B) The annual fee for the kennel permit shall be set by the Maricopa County Board of Supervisors.

(C) A dog remaining within the kennel is not required to be licensed individually under A.R.S. § 11-1008. A dog leaving the controlled kennel conditions shall be licensed under A.R.S. § 11-1008, except if the dog is only being transported to another kennel which has a permit issued under this section.

(D) A person who fails to obtain a kennel permit under this section is subject to a penalty of $25 dollars in addition to the annual fee.

(E) A person who knowingly fails within 30 days after written notification from the county enforcement agent to obtain a kennel permit is guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor.

(Prior Code, § 7-2-7)


7-2-8 RABIES CONTROL FUND.

(A) The enforcement agent or his or her authorized representative shall place the monies collected by him or her under the provisions of this article in a special fund to be known as the Rabies Control Fund to be used for the enforcement of the provisions of this article and the regulations promulgated thereunder.

(B) Any unencumbered balance remaining in the Rabies Control Fund at the end of a fiscal year shall be carried over into the following fiscal year.

(Prior Code, § 7-2-8)


7-2-9 DOGS NOT PERMITTED AT LARGE; WEARING LICENSE.

(A) In a rabies quarantine area, no dogs shall be permitted at large. Each dog shall be confined within an enclosure on the owner’s property, secured so that a dog is confined entirely to the owner’s property or on a leash not to exceed six feet in length and directly under the owner’s control when not on the owner’s property.

(B) Any dog over the age of four months running at large shall wear a collar or harness to which is attached a valid license tag. Dogs used for control of livestock or while being used or trained for hunting, dogs while being exhibited or trained at a kennel club event or dogs while engaged in races approved by the Arizona Racing Commission, and such dogs while being transported to and from such events need not wear a collar or harness with a valid license attached provided that they are properly vaccinated, licensed and controlled.

(C) If any dog is at large on the public streets, public parks or public property, then said dog’s owner or custodian is in violation of this article.

(D) Any person whose dog is at large is in violation of this article. A dog is not at large if:

(1) The dog is restrained by a leash, chain, rope or cord of not more than six feet in length and of sufficient strength to control action of said dog;

(2) The dog is used for control of livestock, while being used or trained for hunting or being exhibited or trained at a kennel club event or while engaged in races approved by the Arizona Racing Commission;

(3) While the dog is actively engaged in dog obedience training, accompanied by and under the control of his or her owner or trainer, provided that the person training said dog has in his or her possession a dog leash of not more than six feet in length and of sufficient strength to control said dog, and further, that said dog is actually enrolled in or has graduated from a dog obedience training school;

(4) The dog, whether on or off the premises of the owner, or person acting for the owner, is controlled as provided in subsection (1) or is within a suitable enclosure which actually confines the dog.

(E) Any dog at large shall be apprehended and impounded by an enforcement agent.

(1) The agent shall have the right to enter upon private property when it is necessary to do so in order to apprehend any dog that has been running at large. Such entrance upon private property shall be in reasonable pursuit of such dog and shall not include entry into a domicile unless it be at the invitation of the occupant.

(2) The agent may issue a citation to the dog owner when the dog is at large. The procedure for the issuance of notice to appear shall be as provided for peace officers in A.R.S. § 13-3903, except the enforcement agent shall not make an arrest before issuing the notice. The issuance of citations pursuant to this article shall be subject to the provisions of A.R.S. § 13-3899.

(3) In the judgment of the enforcement agent, if any dog at large or other animal that is dangerous or fierce and a threat to human safety cannot be safely impounded, it may be immediately slain.

(Prior Code, § 7-2-9)


7-2-10 ESTABLISHMENT OF POUNDS; IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSING OF DOGS AND CATS; RECLAIMING IMPOUNDED DOGS AND CATS; POUND FEES.

(A) Any stray dog shall be impounded. All dogs and cats impounded shall be given proper care and maintenance.

(B) Each stray dog or any cat impounded shall be kept and maintained at the pound for a minimum of 72 hours unless claimed by its owner. Any person may purchase such a dog or cat upon expiration of the impoundment period, provided such person pays all pound fees and complies with the licensing and vaccinating provisions of this article. If the dog or cat is not claimed within the impoundment period, the enforcement agent shall take possession and may place the dog or cat for sale or may dispose of the dog or cat in a humane manner. If such dog or cat is to be used for medical research, no license or vaccination shall be required. The enforcement agent may destroy impounded sick or injured dogs or cats whenever such destruction is necessary to prevent such dog or cat from suffering or to prevent the spread of disease.

(C) Any impounded licensed dog or any cat may be reclaimed by its owner or such owner’s agent, provided that the person reclaiming the dog or cat furnishes proof of right to do so and pays all pound fees. If the dog or cat is not reclaimed within the impoundment period, the enforcement agent shall take possession and may place the dog or cat for sale or may dispose of the dog or cat in a humane manner. Any person purchasing such dog or cat shall pay all pound fees.

(Prior Code, § 7-2-10)


7-2-11 HANDLING OF BITING ANIMALS; RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPORTING ANIMAL BITES.

(A) An unlicensed or unvaccinated dog or cat that bites any person shall be confined and quarantined in an authorized pound or, upon request of and at the expense of the owner, at a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than seven days. A dog properly licensed and vaccinated pursuant to this article that bites any person may be confined at the home of the owner or wherever the dog is harbored and maintained with the consent of and in a manner prescribed by the enforcement agent.

(B) Any animal other than a dog or cat that bites any person shall be confined and quarantined in an authorized pound or, upon the request of and at the expense of the owner, at a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than 14 days, provided that livestock shall be confined and quarantined for the 14 day period in a manner regulated by the Arizona Livestock Board. If the animal is a caged rodent, it may be confined and quarantined at the home of the owner or where it is harbored or maintained, for the required period of time, with the consent of and in a manner prescribed by the enforcement agent.

(C) Any wild animal which bites any person may be killed and submitted to the enforcement agent or his or her deputies for transmission to an appropriate diagnostic laboratory.

(D) Whenever an animal bites any person, the incident shall be reported to the enforcement agent immediately by any person having direct knowledge.

(E) The county enforcement agent may destroy any animal confined and quarantined pursuant to this article prior to the termination of the minimum confinement period for laboratory examination for rabies if:

(1) Such animal shows clear clinical signs of rabies;

(2) The owner of such animal consents to its destruction.

(F) Any animal subject to licensing under this article found without a tag identifying its owner shall be deemed unowned.

(G) The county enforcement agent shall destroy a vicious animal upon an order of a justice of the peace or a city magistrate. A justice of the peace or city magistrate may issue such an order after notice to the owner, if any, and a hearing.

(Prior Code, § 7-2-11)


7-2-12 UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT AGENT.

It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the enforcement agent in the performance of his or her duties.

(Prior Code, § 7-2-12) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


7-2-13 REMOVING IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.

No person may remove or attempt to remove an animal which has been impounded or which is in the possession of the enforcement agent except in accordance with the provisions of this article and the regulations promulgated thereunder.

(Prior Code, § 7-2-13)


7-2-14 UNLAWFUL KEEPING OF DOGS.

It is unlawful for a person to keep, harbor or maintain a dog within the city except as provided by the terms of this article.

(Prior Code, § 7-2-14) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


7-2-15 VIOLATION; CLASSIFICATION.

Any person who fails to comply with the requirements of this article, or violates any of its provisions, is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Prior Code, § 7-2-15) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


7-2-16 DOGS; LIABILITY.

Injury to any person or damage to any property by a dog while at large shall be the full responsibility of the dog’s owner or person or persons responsible for the dog when such damages were inflicted.

(Prior Code, § 7-2-16)


7-2-17 PROPER CARE, MAINTENANCE AND DESTRUCTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.

(A) Any animal impounded in a county or city pound shall be given proper and humane care and maintenance.

(B) Any dog or cat destroyed while impounded in a county or city pound shall be destroyed only by the use of one of the following:

(1) Sodium pentobarbital or a derivative of sodium pentobarbital;

(2) Nitrogen gas;

(3) T 61 Euthanasia solution or its generic equivalent.

(C) If an animal is destroyed by means specified in (B)(1) or (3) of this section, it shall be done by a licensed veterinarian or in accordance with procedures established by the state veterinarian pursuant to A.R.S. § 3-1213.

(D) The governing body of any county or city which operates a pound shall establish procedures for the humane destruction of impounded animals by the methods described in subsections (B) and (C) of this section.

(Prior Code, § 7-2-17)


ARTICLE 7-3 Potbellied Pigs

(Repealed by Ord. 12-1260. Prior legislation: Ord. 92-470)




ARTICLE 7-4 Animals at Large

Section

7-4-1    Definitions

7-4-2    Animals prohibited at large

7-4-3    Disposition of animals at large

7-4-4    Penalties

7-4-5    Exception


7-4-1 DEFINITIONS.

For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

ANIMAL means and includes any species or crossbreeding of livestock, fowl, swine, exotic animal, primate, reptile or rodent or other similar animal including dogs.

AT LARGE means any animal which is:

(1) on any public land or land belonging to a person other than the owner of the animal while not restrained and under the immediate control of the owner or other person acting for the owner by means of a leash, chain or other physical restraint of sufficient strength to control the animal while off the premises of its owner; or

(2) left unattended in a motor vehicle or the bed of a pickup truck and is not tethered or confined in a manner sufficient to prevent the animal from exiting the vehicle of its own volition or posing a risk to passersby.

Exception: Dogs are not considered to be at large when inside the fenced enclosure of the City of Goodyear designated off leash dog areas and parks.

CATTLE means any cow, bull and/or steer.

DAMAGE means any physical or visual impairment of any surface and/or property and/or physical injury to any person.

EXOTIC ANIMAL means and includes any species or crossbreeding of llama, alpaca, camel, lion, tiger, bear, bobcat, fox, or other similar animal.

FOWL means and includes any species or crossbreeding of chickens, turkeys, ostriches, emus, peacocks, ducks, geese, guineas, pigeons, pheasants or bird.

LIVESTOCK means and includes any species or crossbreeding of cattle, horse, mule, donkey, burro, antelope, deer, bison, swine, sheep, goat, zebra, bovine or other similar farm or ranch animal, excluding dogs.

OWNER means any person that has possession of, custody, control, owns, keeps, harbors, maintains or is responsible for an animal, livestock, or fowl.

PERSON means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity.

PRIMATE means and includes any species or crossbreeding of any placental mammal of the order Primates, including lemurs, lorises, monkeys, and apes, but excluding humans.

PROPERTY means anything tangible, whether public or private, real or personal, which has value.

REPTILE means and includes any species or crossbreeding of snakes, lizards, alligators or crocodiles.

RODENT means and includes any species or crossbreeding of rat, rabbits, chinchillas and other similar mammals.

SWINE means and includes any species or crossbreeding of pigs, hogs, potbellied pigs or any member of the Suidae Family.

WORKING ANIMAL means an animal specifically trained or inherently designed to assist in maintaining and working livestock, or providing assistance to any person with a disability, or providing a service to a governmental agency or private rescue and tracking organization. This does not include guard dogs for personal property.

(Ord. 11-1247, passed 10-24-2011)


7-4-2 ANIMALS PROHIBITED AT LARGE.

(A) It is unlawful for any person to turn loose, abandon, allow, permit, cause, enable or fail to prevent any animal to be or remain at large within the City.

(B) It is unlawful for any person to tether or tie any animal in such a manner that it may go upon or into any street or public place, or upon the property owned or possessed by another.

(C) It shall be a defense to subsections (A) and (B) of this section that consent of the affected property owner(s) was obtained prior to the animal being at large or if the animal was a working animal and in the performance of their assigned tasks.

(D) Presumptions:

(1) A rebuttable presumption of ownership exists for animals that bear the recorded brand or earmark of the person as shown by a certified copy of the record as provided in A.R.S. § 3-1261 as amended; or

(2) A rebuttable presumption of ownership exists with respect to each adult resident of the premises upon which animals are kept, maintained, harbored, controlled, cared for or possessed on the date of the violation; or

(3) A rebuttable presumption of ownership exists if the person temporarily or permanently provides food or shelter to the animal.

(Ord. 11-1247, passed 10-24-2011)


7-4-3 DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS AT LARGE.

Animals found in violation of this article may be impounded and disposed of as provided by law.

(Ord. 11-1247, passed 10-24-2011)


7-4-4 PENALTIES.

(A) Violations of any provisions of this article are subject to all criminal and civil penalties available as provided in Article 1-8 and Chapter 18 in Goodyear City Code.

(B) In addition to the penalties provided in Article 1-8 and Chapter 18, the court shall have the authority to order restitution for any and all damages, costs, impoundment, losses and/or expenses resulting from or related to the animal being at large, unless otherwise prohibited by law.

(Ord. 11-1247, passed 10-24-2011)


7-4-5 EXCEPTION.

(A) This article does not apply to cattle found south of Patterson Rd. in the City of Goodyear.

(B) Any penalties imposed pursuant to this article relating to livestock at large shall not apply to lands that are annexed or incorporated into the City for two years after annexation or incorporation.

(Ord. 11-1247, passed 10-24-2011)


CHAPTER 8: Business Regulations

Article

8-1.    PEDDLERS

8-2.    REPEALED

8-3.    PARK AND SWAP OPERATIONS

8-4.    ESCORTS AND ESCORT BUREAUS

8-5.    OFF-TRACK BETTING

8-6.    RESERVED

8-7.    BUSINESS REGISTRATION PERMITS


ARTICLE 8-1 Peddlers

Section

8-1-1    Definitions

8-1-2    Peddler Permit Required

8-1-3    Application to Police Chief

8-1-4    Issuance of Permit

8-1-5    Expiration and Revocation of Permits; Appeal

8-1-6    Prohibited Acts

8-1-7    Exemptions


8-1-1 DEFINITIONS.

Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

APPLICANT means the person seeking a peddler permit.

CHIEF OF POLICE means the City of Goodyear Chief of Police or designee.

CITY MANAGER means the City Manager of the City of Goodyear or designee.

OFFICIAL PHOTO IDENTIFICATION means a valid driver’s license or identification card issued by any state in the U.S., U.S. military identification or passport.

PEDDLER OR HAWKER OR VENDOR means any person, solicitor, or canvasser, either principal or agent, who, from any public street or public place, or by going from house to house or from place of business to place of business, on foot or on or from any vehicle, sells or barters, offers for sale or barter or carries or exposes for sale or barter any goods, wares or merchandise, except newspapers.

PEDDLER PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS GUIDELINE OR GUIDELINE means the guideline contained in the City of Goodyear administrative manual adopted by the City Council as amended from time to time.

PERMIT means a permit authorized under this section.

PERMITTEE means the recipient of the permit authorized under this chapter.

SERVICES means any form of profession or trade service to another.

SOLICITOR OR CANVASSER means and shall include any person who goes from place to place or from house to house or who stands in any street or public place taking or offers to take orders for: goods, wares or merchandise, except newspapers, services to be performed in the future; or making, manufacturing or repairing any article or thing whatsoever for future delivery.

(Ord. 12-1274, passed 12-10-2012)


8-1-2 PEDDLER PERMIT REQUIRED.

Unless otherwise exempted under this article, any person, any business and any person acting on behalf of a business in any capacity, that will be conducting any business as a solicitor, peddler, hawker, canvasser, salesperson or vendor of goods, wares, merchandise, newspapers, magazines or services for profit who goes from dwelling to dwelling or to only one dwelling in the City shall obtain a peddler permit from the Chief of Police. A peddler permit is for a limited duration and a specific purpose.

(Prior Code, § 8-1-1) (Am. Ord. 94-499, passed 5-10-1994; Am. Ord. 12-1274, passed 12-10-2012)


8-1-3 APPLICATION TO POLICE CHIEF.

(A) An application for a permit required by this article shall be submitted to the Chief of Police in accordance with the procedures and timeframes provided in the peddler permit application process guideline, along with a nonrefundable application fee which will be set by resolution of Council.

(B) Upon receipt of this information, the Chief of Police shall approve and deny the application in accordance with the procedures and timeframes provided in the peddler permit application process guideline and as provided in this article.

(Prior Code, § 8-1-2) (Am. Ord. 94-499, passed 5-10-1994; Am. Ord. 12-1274, passed 12-10-2012)


8-1-4 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.

(A) Upon receipt of the completed application and any fee(s) required by this article, the Chief of Police shall issue the permit unless denied for any of the following reasons:

(1) Required application fees have not been paid;

(2) Incomplete, false, inaccurate or unverifiable information is provided on the application;

(3) Misrepresentation of nature of the business, any business or related activity or ownership;

(4) As otherwise provided in the guideline.

(B) No permits will be issued for any activity that would result in a violation of any law, code, rule or regulation. It is the sole responsibility of the applicant/permittee to ensure that the applicant/permittee are acting in compliance with the law and has obtained all required permits, licenses and approvals. The issuance of a permit shall not be deemed to validate the conduct of the permittee.

(C) Application fees shall be set by resolution of City Council.

(D) Peddler permits may not be assigned or transferred.

(Prior Code, § 8-1-3) (Am. Ord. 94-499, passed 5-10-1994; Am. Ord. 12-1274, passed 12-10-2012)


8-1-5 EXPIRATION AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS; APPEAL.

(A) All permits issued under the provisions of this article shall identify the specific purpose for which the permit is requested and the duration of the permit. The duration of the permit shall not exceed one year or the period of time requested by the applicant, whichever is less.

(B) A permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked at any time by the Chief of Police after notice and opportunity to appeal in writing to the City Manager or designee, for any of the following reasons:

(1) If any statement made by the applicant in the application proves to be incomplete, false, incorrect or unverifiable; or

(2) If the applicant fails to produce the permit issued under the provisions of this article upon demand to do so by any law enforcement officer of the City or any occupant of any residence or business in the City; or

(3) As provided in the guideline or article; or

(4) For any violation of any provision of this article, law, code, rule or regulation.

(C) Notice of the revocation shall be given in writing by setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the applicant at the local address provided on the application.

(D) The denial of the application for a permit as provided herein, or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a permit, may be appealed to the City Manager or designee in writing. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Manager within 14 calendar days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to the aggrieved person’s local address as provided on the application submitted to the City along with a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal and the relief requested. The City Manager shall issue a written decision, in the same manner as provided for notice of revocation, within 14 working days from the City Manager’s receipt of the appeal. The decision and order of the City Manager on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.

(Prior Code, § 8-1-4) (Am. Ord. 94-499, passed 5-10-1994; Am. Ord. 12-1274, passed 12-10-2012)


8-1-6 PROHIBITED ACTS.

(A) It is unlawful for a person to knowingly do any of the following:

(1) Act as a hawker, peddler, canvasser and/or solicitor in the City of Goodyear without a current and valid permit issued by the City of Goodyear to do so;

(2) Improper use of the peddler permit;

(3) Falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quantity, character or quality of any article offered for sale or service;

(4) Conduct door to door business between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and between 5:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday;

(5) Claim to be endorsed by the City of Goodyear solely based on the City having issued the permit;

(6) Remain on the property of another when requested to leave either orally or in written signage or other written form of notice; or

(7) Conduct business in a manner that a reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive; or

(8) Fail or refuse to display a valid peddler’s permit and official photo identification when requested by City or law enforcement personnel to do so.

(B) Violation of any provision of this article is a class 1 misdemeanor subject to any and all criminal and civil penalties and provisions provided in Articles 1-8 and 18-1 of the Goodyear City Code. Each violation is a separate and distinct offense and in case of a continuing violation, each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense, for which a separate penalty shall be assessed. In addition to all other criminal and civil penalties and provisions imposed, the permit issued pursuant to this article will be revoked.

(Prior Code, § 8-1-6) (Am. Ord. 94-499, passed 5-10-1994; Am. Ord. 12-1274, passed 12-10-2012) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


8-1-7 EXEMPTIONS

The following persons are exempt from the registration provisions of this article, but remain subject to the remaining provisions of this article:

(A) Persons engaging in the sale of newspaper subscriptions;

(B) Members of nationally recognized youth organizations, including, but not limited to, the Boy Scouts of America, the Girl Scouts of America and the Boys and Girls Clubs of America, engaging in organization sponsored fund raising activities;

(C) School children engaging in authorized or school sponsored fund raising activities;

(D) Religious organizations engaging in the act of disseminating information regarding the beliefs of their faith.

(E) Political activities for the purpose of disseminating information regarding political issues.

(Prior Code, § 8-1-9) (Am. Ord. 94-499, passed 5-10-1994; Am. Ord. 12-1274, passed 12-10-2012)




ARTICLE 8-2 Transient Lodging, Dining and Beverage Tax

(Repealed by Ord. 12-1264. Prior legislation: Ords. 91-327, 91-440, 95-534, 97-573 and 2000-712)




ARTICLE 8-3 Park and Swap Operations

Section

8-3-1    Definitions

8-3-2    Payment schedule

8-3-3    Reports required of proprietor

8-3-4    Reports required of participants

8-3-5    Trading area

8-3-6    Exemption


8-3-1 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

PARK AND SWAP LOT. A building, structure, enclosure, lot or other area into which persons are admitted to display, exchange, barter, buy, sell or bargain for new and used merchandise, excluding those places normally engaged in the business of making sales at retail.

PARK AND SWAP MEET. The activity carried on at the park and swap lot and consists of the admitting of persons into a park and swap lot for the purpose of displaying, exchanging, bartering, buying, selling or bargaining for new and used merchandise.

PARTICIPANT OF A PARK AND SWAP MEET. Any person other than the proprietor who brings goods, wares and merchandise, both new and second hand, to a park and swap meet for the purpose of displaying, exchanging, bartering, buying, selling or bargaining these goods, wares and merchandise.

POLICE CHIEF. The Chief of the City of Goodyear Police Department or designee.

PROPRIETOR OF A PARK AND SWAP LOT OR PARK AND SWAP MEET. The person who controls the admission, directly or through agents, of persons and merchandise into the trading area.

(Prior Code, § 8-3-1)


8-3-2 PAYMENT SCHEDULE.

All participants shall pay an additional 10% fee of the cost of rental space or stall to the proprietor. In the event the 10% additional fee is less than $.50 per rental space or stall, a minimum fee of $.50 shall be collected by the park and swap meet proprietor. All such fees shall be payable at the same time as the rental fees prescribed by the swap meet proprietor. All 10% fees are to be paid to the city on or before the fifteenth day of the following month for the preceding month.

(Prior Code, § 8-3-2)


8-3-3 REPORTS REQUIRED OF PROPRIETOR.

(A) On each day of operation of a park and swap lot, the proprietor shall submit to the Police Chief on forms provided by the city the following information on each park and swap meet participant:

(1) Name and address of participant;

(2) Date and time of entry;

(3) Vehicle description and license plate number, if any;

(4) A general description of all property brought into the trading area. For any item of property with an initial asking price of $25 or more or which has or did have a serial number, a complete description shall be furnished including the name, make and any identifying numbers;

(5) Signature of park and swap meet participant;

(6) Driver’s license number and the state where issued;

(7) Social security number, if available.

(B) These forms and admission records shall be available for police inspection during normal business hours. These forms shall be filled out by the participants and turned over to the owner, operator or his or her designated employee.

(C) The city’s cost of furnishing report forms shall be borne by the proprietor at actual cost plus 10% due and payable upon receipt of forms.

(Prior Code, § 8-3-3)


8-3-4 REPORTS REQUIRED OF PARTICIPANTS.

Each park and swap meet participant shall submit daily to the proprietor or his or her designee a list giving the complete description of each item of property traded, bartered or sold by him or her which had a sale price of $25 or more or had or did have a serial number and the name and address of the person receiving the property. The proprietor shall be responsible for forwarding these reports to the Police Chief at the close of each day’s business. Forms for these reports will be provided to the proprietor by the city.

(Prior Code, § 8-3-4)


8-3-5 TRADING AREA.

The swap meet activities shall be conducted only in a building, structure or other area which is sufficiently enclosed to enable the proprietor or his or her employees to control effectively all persons and merchandise.

(Prior Code, § 8-3-5)


8-3-6 EXEMPTION.

The provisions of this article shall not be applied to any charitable organization having a valid solicitation permit for this activity from the city. This article shall not apply to activities carried on by charitable organizations established and operated exclusively for a religious or charitable purpose if conducted solely among its members and guests by other members serving without remuneration or if such activities are conducted at the assemblies or services of the organization.

(Prior Code, § 8-3-6)


ARTICLE 8-4 Escorts and Escort Bureaus

Section

8-4-1    Definitions

8-4-2    Exemptions

8-4-3    License required

8-4-4    Term of license; nontransferability and assignability

8-4-5    Application for escort bureau license; content

8-4-6    Prohibition against employment as escort; exception

8-4-7    Escort license identification card

8-4-8    Duties of Escort Bureau

8-4-9    Advertising without a license

8-4-10    Information update

8-4-11    Services to minors

8-4-12    License renewal

8-4-13    Fees

8-4-14    License revocation, grounds, procedure and appeal

8-4-15    Applicability of regulations to existing businesses

8-4-16    Appeals


8-4-1 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CITY CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Goodyear or his or her designee.

CONSIDERATION. Money or other items of monetary value.

ESCORT. Any person who for monetary consideration in the form of a fee, commission or salary is held out to the public as available for hire, to consort with or to accompany another or others to social affairs, places of amusement or entertainment within any place of public resort or within any private quarters.

ESCORT BUREAU. Any person who for a fee, commission, profit, payment or other monetary consideration, furnishes, refers or offers to furnish or refer escorts or provides or offers to introduce patrons to escorts.

ESCORT BUREAU RUNNER. Any person, not an escort, who for a salary, fee, hire, reward or profit, as the agent for either an escort bureau or a patron, contacts or meets with escort patrons or escort bureaus at any location other than the established open office, as defined hereunder, whether that person is self employed or is employed by the escort bureau or any business.

LICENSEE. A person who is the holder of a valid license under this article. A LICENSEE includes an agent, servant, employee or other person while acting on behalf of that licensee, whether such a licensee is or would be prohibited from performing an act or acts under this article.

OFFER TO PROVIDE ACTS OF SEXUAL CONDUCT. To offer, propose or solicit to provide sexual conduct to a patron. Such definitions include all conversations, advertisements and acts which would lead a reasonably prudent person to conclude that such acts were to be provided.

OPEN OFFICE. The office of a licensed escort bureau address from which escort business is transacted. To qualify as an open office it is required that:

(1) Business hours be established and posted and that the office be open to the public and patrons or prospective patrons during such business hours and that the office be accessible to business invitees, business license officials and law enforcement officers through a security system during all other hours that escorts are working;

(2) The office be managed by the owner or a management employee of the owner having authority to bind the bureau to escort and patron contracts and adjust patron and consumer complaints;

(3) All telephone lines and numbers listed to the escort bureau or advertised as escort bureau numbers terminate at the open office and at no other location;

(4) An index of all employees and escorts be kept in the open office;

(5) All business records be kept in the open office, including records of escort calls and referrals, stating the name and address, including the hotel or motel room of the patron, the date and time of referral, name of escort sent and whether the referral resulted in an escort service and the total fee received from the patron, if any.

PERSON. Any individual or any firm, partnership, corporation or association of any kind.

PERSON FINANCIALLY INTERESTED. For a corporation, any person who is an officer or director or shareholder holding more than 5% of the shares thereof; for a noncorporate business, any person who shares in any financial gain attributable to the business as a proprietor or owner on the basis of a percentage in excess of 5% of the gross or 10% of the net revenue.

SERVICE ORIENTED ESCORT. An escort who:

(1) Operates from an open office;

(2) Does not employ or use an escort bureau runner;

(3) Does not advertise that sexual conduct will be provided or work for an escort bureau that so advertises; and

(4) Does not offer, solicit, agree to provide or provide sexual conduct.

SERVICE ORIENTED ESCORT BUREAU. An escort bureau which:

(1) Maintains an open office at an established place of business;

(2) Does not use an escort bureau runner;

(3) Does not advertise, offer, solicit, agree to or provide sexual conduct to a patron; and

(4) Provides only escorts who possess escort identification cards.

SEXUAL CONDUCT. Engaging in or the commission of an act of sexual intercourse, oral genital contact or the touching of the sexual organs, pubic region, buttocks or female breast of a person for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of the person being touched or that of another person.

SEXUALLY ORIENTED ESCORT. An escort who:

(1) Employs an escort bureau runner as an employee, agent or independent contractor;

(2) Works for, has an agent, employee or independent contractor or was referred to a patron by a sexually oriented escort bureau;

(3) Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided, or works for as an agent, employee or independent contractor, or was referred to a patron by an escort bureau which so advertises;

(4) Solicits, offers, agrees to provide or does provide acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron; or

(5) Accepts an offer or solicitation to provide acts of sexual conduct for a fee in addition to the fee charged by the escort bureau.

SEXUALLY ORIENTED ESCORT BUREAU. An escort bureau which:

(1) Engages in advertising to make the prospective patron believe that acts of sexual conduct or sexual stimulation will be provided;

(2) Uses, as escorts, persons known to have violated the laws regarding prostitution;

(3) Does not maintain an open office;

(4) Employs as an employee, agent or independent contractor, or uses, an escort bureau runner;

(5) Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided or that escorts which provide such sexual conduct will be provided, referred or introduced to a patron;

(6) Solicits, offers or agrees to provide, or does provide acts of sexual conduct to a patron;

(7) Employs, contracts with or provides or refers escorts who do not possess escort identification cards as required herein;

(8) Does not deliver contracts to every patron or customer; or

(9) Employs, contracts with or refers or provides to a patron a sexually oriented escort.

SEXUAL STIMULATION. To excite or arouse a prurient interest or to offer or solicit acts of sexual conduct as defined herein.

(Prior Code, § 8-4-1) (Am. Ord. 12-1273, passed 12-10-2012)


8-4-2 EXEMPTIONS.

An organization which is qualified for exemption from taxation of income under A.R.S. § 43-1201, subsections (1), (2), (4), (5), (6), (7), (10) or (11), and all professions, occupations and businesses which are licensed by the State of Arizona or any political subdivision thereof pursuant to a specific statute or ordinance, and all employees employed by business so licensed, and which perform an escort or escort bureau function as a service merely incidental to the primary function of such organization, profession, occupation or business and which do not hold themselves out to the public as an escort or an escort bureau are exempt from the licensing provisions of this article. Any employment agency, licensed by the state, which provides escorts as defined herein, must, however, obtain a license as required by this article.

(Prior Code, § 8-4-2) (Am. Ord. 12-1273, passed 12-10-2012)


8-4-3 LICENSE REQUIRED.

It shall be unlawful for any person to work as, perform services as, conduct, manage, operate or maintain an escort bureau unless licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article. It shall also be unlawful for any person to work as, perform services as, conduct, operate, manage or maintain a sexually oriented escort bureau, regardless of license. A separate license is required for each location and name by which the escort bureau conducts business or advertises.

(Prior Code, § 8-4-3) (Am. Ord. 12-1273, passed 12-10-2012) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


8-4-4 TERM OF LICENSE; NONTRANSFERABILITY AND ASSIGNABILITY.

The term of the license issued to the provisions of this article is one year. All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this article are nontransferable and nonassignable.

(Prior Code, § 8-4-4) (Am. Ord. 12-1273, passed 12-10-2012)


8-4-5 APPLICATION FOR ESCORT BUREAU LICENSE; CONTENT.

(A) An applicant for an escort bureau license shall file an application with the City Clerk in accordance with the procedures and timeframes outlined in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual, accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in Section 8-4-13.

(B) The City Clerk shall grant the license upon the following circumstances:

(1) The required fees have been paid;

(2) The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article;

(3) The applicant has not made any material misrepresentation of facts on the application; that neither the applicant, if an individual, or any person financially interested, if a corporation, nor any of the partners, including limited partners, the holder of any profit interest, nor the manager or person principally in charge of the operation of the existing or proposed escort bureau, nor any individual employed or contracted with to be an escort or to provide escort services has been convicted of, pled nolo contendere to or guilty to any felony or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within five years prior to the issuance of the license. This section shall be inapplicable to an individual whose civil rights have been restored in accordance with the law, unless the violation involves a criminal violation of this article;

(4) The applicant has not had a license similar to the one issued pursuant to the provisions of this article issued by another authority, suspended or revoked within the five year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application;

(5) The escort bureau complies with all the applicable laws of the City, the County of Maricopa and the State of Arizona;

(6) The applicant, manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business is at least 18 years of age.

(C) The City Clerk shall deny the application if all of the requirements set forth in this article have not been met. In the event of denial, the applicant shall be notified by mail in accordance with the procedures and timeframes outlined in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual of the denial and the reasons therefor.

(Prior Code, § 8-4-5) (Am. Ord. 12-1273, passed 12-10-2012)


8-4-6 PROHIBITION AGAINST EMPLOYMENT AS AN ESCORT; EXCEPTION.

It shall be unlawful for any person to work or perform services as an escort within the City unless employed by a licensed escort bureau or licensed as an escort bureau. It shall also be unlawful for any person to work or perform services as a sexually oriented escort regardless of license.

(Prior Code, § 8-4-6) (Am. Ord. 12-1273, passed 12-10-2012) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


8-4-7 ESCORT LICENSE IDENTIFICATION CARD.

Each escort bureau licensee shall be issued a license in its name and in the names of each person who shall engage in the activity as an escort on its behalf. This license must be carried on the person of any individual while such person is engaged in the activity of an escort within the City and immediately available for display upon the request of any City police officer or other law enforcement official.

(Prior Code, § 8-4-7) (Am. Ord. 12-1273, passed 12-10-2012)


8-4-8 DUTIES OF ESCORT BUREAU.

(A) The escort bureau shall provide to each patron a written contract and receipt of payment for services. The contract shall clearly state the type of services to be performed, the length of time such services shall be performed, the total amount of money such services shall cost the patron and any special terms or conditions relating to the services to be performed.

(B) The escort bureau shall maintain an open office at the licensed location. The address of that office shall be included in all patron contracts and published advertisements. Private rooms or booths where the patron may meet with the escort shall not be provided by the open office or at any other location by the escort bureau.

(C) The escort bureau, in terms of licensing consequences, is responsible and liable for the acts of all its employees and subcontractors, including, but not limited to, the telephone receptionist and any escorts who are referred by that bureau while the escort is with the patron.

(Prior Code, § 8-4-8) (Am. Ord. 12-1273, passed 12-10-2012)


8-4-9 ADVERTISING WITHOUT A LICENSE.

It is unlawful to advertise or hold out to the public the availability of an escort or escort bureau without obtaining a license therefor as provided in this article, whether the actual business of escort or escort bureau as defined in this article is performed. The escort bureau license number must be prominently displayed in such advertisements.

(Prior Code, § 8-4-9) (Am. Ord. 12-1273, passed 12-10-2012) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


8-4-10 INFORMATION UPDATE.

Any changes in information required to be submitted by this article must be given to the City Clerk within 10 days of any such change.

(Prior Code, § 8-4-10) (Am. Ord. 12-1273, passed 12-10-2012)


8-4-11 SERVICES TO MINORS.

It shall be unlawful for a licensee to provide escort services as described in this article to individuals under 18 years of age unless written authorization by a parent or legal guardian is issued to the escort when acting as such.

(Prior Code, § 8-4-11) (Am. Ord. 12-1273, passed 12-10-2012) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


8-4-12 LICENSE RENEWAL.

Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, which has not been suspended or revoked, may be renewed for a period of not to exceed one year upon written application to the City Clerk made at least 45 days prior to the expiration date of the current valid license. The renewal application shall be on a form provided by the City Clerk and shall contain all of the information required by Section 8-4-5.

(Prior Code, § 8-4-12) (Am. Ord. 12-1273, passed 12-10-2012)


8-4-13 FEES.

A nonrefundable initial or renewal application fee in the amount of $50 shall accompany each application for a license as an escort. A nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $100 shall accompany each application for a license as an escort bureau. A renewal fee of $25 shall accompany each renewal application. All fees may be set by resolution of Council.

(Prior Code, § 8-4-13) (Am. Ord. 12-1273, passed 12-10-2012)


8-4-14 LICENSE REVOCATION, GROUNDS, PROCEDURE AND APPEAL.

(A) Any license issued pursuant to this article shall be revoked upon any one or more of the following grounds:

(1) The licensee, any employee, agent or any other person connected or associated with the license as a partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager or any person financially interested, as defined in Section 8-4-1, has violated any provision of this article in conducting activity licensed under the provisions of this article;

(2) The licensee, any employee, agent or any other person connected or associated with the licensee as a partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager or any person financially interested as defined in Section 8-4-1 has made a material misrepresentation of fact on the application for any license required in this article;

(3) The licensee has been convicted, subsequent to the issuance of any license, of a crime which is either a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or has offered or agreed to render the service of a sexually oriented escort;

(4) The licensee has violated a provision of this article in conducting a license activity pursuant to this article;

(5) If the licensee is a corporation and is not or is no longer qualified to transact business in the State of Arizona.

(B) To revoke a license, the City Clerk shall notify the licensee in writing by mail to the address as shown on the application or otherwise more recently of record, the license is revoked. The cause for such revocation shall be set forth on the notice. Service shall be complete upon mailing to the address of record in the office of the City Clerk.

(C) Exceptions otherwise provided in this article, the license shall terminate should the licensee fail to pay any license fee owed either when due or the end of any renewal period.

(D) Appeals for revocation or termination of a license provided for in this article may be appealed as provided for in Section 8-4-16.

(E) A revoked license shall be surrendered to the City Clerk upon demand at the expiration of the appeals process.

(Prior Code, § 8-4-14) (Am. Ord. 12-1273, passed 12-10-2012)


8-4-15 APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS TO EXISTING BUSINESSES.

The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all persons and activities described herein whether the herein activities were established before or after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this article into law. All such persons or businesses shall have 60 days from said effective date hereof to comply with the provisions of this article.

(Prior Code, § 8-4-15) (Am. Ord. 12-1273, passed 12-10-2012)


8-4-16 APPEALS.

Any person aggrieved by the denial of an application for a license as provided for in this article, or by the decision with reference to the revocation or termination of such license, shall have the right to appeal to the City Manager or designee in writing. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Manager or designee, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to the aggrieved person at the address identified in their application, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal and the relief requested. The City Manager shall issue a written decision, in the same manner as provided for notice of revocation, within 30 days from receipt of the appeal. The decision and order of the City Manager shall be final and conclusive.

(Prior Code, § 8-4-16) (Am. Ord. 12-1273, passed 12-10-2012)




ARTICLE 8-5 Off-Track Betting

Section

8-5-1    Filing of application

8-5-2    Contents of application

8-5-3    Fee

8-5-4    Notice and hearing

8-5-5    Council action


8-5-1 FILING OF APPLICATION.

In any instance in which a person or entity has applied for a state license which would permit off-track betting at a facility within the corporate limits of the city, the applicant shall complete and file with the City Clerk an application for city approval.

(Ord. 2001-754, passed 5-14-2001)


8-5-2 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.

An application shall contain information reasonably required by the City Clerk, including, but not limited to the following:

(A) The name of the applicant;

(B) The address of the facility;

(C) The name, address and phone number of the manager of the facility;

(D) A brief description of the anticipated business activities;

(E) Whether a liquor license is to be applied for, and, if so, what class of license;

(F) A statement of the training to be required of all employees involved in the proposed pari mutual betting and/or any other authorized gaming activities.

(Ord. 2001-754, passed 5-14-2001)


8-5-3 FEE.

The applicant shall submit with its initial application for each site a nonrefundable fee in the amount of $400. Any application for renewal of approval shall require the payment of a fee of $250, but shall not require a public hearing or Council action unless the applicant has been found by the Racing Commission or a court of proper jurisdiction to have violated laws or regulations governing the off-track betting during the past 12 months. Upon verification by state authorities that no such violation has been found to exist, the Clerk may issue the renewal letter.

(Ord. 2001-754, passed 5-14-2001)


8-5-4 NOTICE AND HEARING.

The City Clerk will provide notice to all property owners within 500 feet of the facility of the date, time and place of a public hearing on the application.

(Ord. 2001-754, passed 5-14-2001)


8-5-5 COUNCIL ACTION.

The Council will take action on the application by roll call vote with each Council member voting, unless precluded by conflict of interest rules, for approval, disapproval or no recommendation. The results will be reported to the appropriate state authorities.

(Ord. 2001-754, passed 5-14-2001)


ARTICLE 8-6 Reserved


ARTICLE 8-7 Business Registration Permits

Section

8-7-1    Definitions

8-7-2    Business registration permit required

8-7-3    General requirements

8-7-4    Business registration permit

8-7-5    [Reserved]

8-7-6    Display or posting of permit

8-7-7    Inspection of permit

8-7-8    Location restrictions

8-7-9    Penalty

8-7-10    Enforcement


8-7-1 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

BUSINESS. All activities or acts, personal or corporate, engaged in and caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, either direct or indirect, or owners/operators of more than one residential rental unit, but not casual activities or sales. The term BUSINESS shall include any trade, business, game, amusement, calling, profession or occupation. BUSINESS does not include schools, churches, athletic groups or nonprofit organizations as deemed by the IRS. For purposes of this chapter, BUSINESS shall not include peddlers (Ch. 8-1 et seq.), special events, or park and swap operation (Ch. 8-3 et seq.).

CASUAL ACTIVITY OR SALE. A transaction of an isolated nature made by a person who neither represents himself to be nor is engaged in a business subject to a registration permit imposed by this chapter.

PERSON. A sole proprietor, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, or broker.

(Ord. 04-902, passed 6-14-2004; Am. Ord. 06-1029, passed 10-10-2006)


8-7-2 BUSINESS REGISTRATION PERMIT REQUIRED.

(A) Any person engaged in business within the city is required to first obtain a business registration permit. This includes businesses subject to a transaction privilege tax or a use tax, as well as businesses not subject to a transaction privilege tax or use tax, but which has a physical presence within the city.

(B) All permits shall be issued for a period of one year and shall run January 1 through December 31. Registration permits issued shall not be transferable.

(Ord. 04-902, passed 6-14-2004; Am. Ord. 06-1029, passed 10-10-2006)


8-7-3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.

(A) Every person conducting business within the city must obtain a permit, whether you have a fixed location within the city or not.

(B) A separate permit must be obtained for each physical location within the city in which any business is conducted.

(C) When more than one business is carried on, transacted or practiced in the same location by the same person, only one permit shall be required.

(D) When more than one business is carried on, transacted, or practiced in one location by a different person, a separate permit shall be obtained for each person conducting the business at that location.

(Ord. 04-902, passed 6-14-2004; Am. Ord. 06-1029, passed 10-10-2006)


8-7-4 BUSINESS REGISTRATION PERMIT.

(A) Issuance of business registration permits.

(1) Applications for business permits or renewals of business registration permits shall be submitted to the Finance Department. Upon compliance with this article, it shall be the duty of the Finance Department to issue business registration permits within 30 days of submittal of a complete application.

(2) The Finance Department shall provide copies of completed business registration permit applications to the Community Development Department, Fire Department, and such other city departments as deemed advisable for review or inspection.

(3) Nothing herein, including the issuance of a permit, shall be deemed to legalize any act which otherwise may be in violation of the law, including the violation of the city’s zoning codes, or to exempt any person from any penalty for such violations.

(B) Payment of fees and renewal of business registration permit.

(1) All fees may be set by resolution.

(2) All permits will expire on December 31 of the year in which it is obtained. Renewal applications for business registration permits must be received by the Finance Department no later than the date of expiration. Renewals not received by such date will be suspended and an administrative fee may be levied for late renewal.

(Ord. 04-902, passed 6-14-2004; Am. Ord. 06-1029, passed 10-10-2006)


8-7-5 [RESERVED].


8-7-6 DISPLAY OR POSTING OF PERMIT.

(A) Every person engaged in business at a fixed location within the city shall display a business registration permit issued hereunder in some conspicuous part of the place of business.

(B) Every person engaged in business within the city but that does not have a fixed place of business shall carry a business registration permit with him or her at all times while carrying on the business or other activity for which the permit or any renewal thereof was granted, provided that persons who are engaged in the business of leasing or renting buildings or other structures used for commercial or business purposes are not required to display a permit at such premises or to carry such permits with them. Other structures used for commercial or business purposes are not required to display a permit at such premises or to carry such permits with them.

(C) Every person having a business registration permit under the provisions of this article shall produce and exhibit a business registration permit whenever requested to do so by any police officer, code compliance officer, or by any other authorized person.

(Ord. 04-902, passed 6-14-2004; Am. Ord. 06-1029, passed 10-10-2006)


8-7-7 INSPECTION OF PERMIT.

The city’s code compliance officers, the Chief of Police or any other duly authorized law enforcement official have the authority to:

(A) Enter, free of charge and at any reasonable time, any place of business open to the public for which a business registration permit is required by this article;

(B) To request exhibition of the business registration permit for the current period of time from any person engaged or employed in carrying on any business at the place of business; and

(C) If a business registration permit is not produced pursuant to such request, to require the disclosure of any or all of the information requested in the city’s business registration permit application.

(Ord. 04-902, passed 6-14-2004; Am. Ord. 06-1029, passed 10-10-2006)


8-7-8 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.

(A) No permittee hereunder shall have any exclusive right to any location in a public street, nor shall the permittee be permitted to operate in any congested area where their operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this article, the judgement of a police officer or code compliance officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public is impeded or inconvenienced.

(B) It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to ensure that the city’s zoning regulations are complied with before applying for a business registration permit and during the term of the permit. The issuance of a permit shall not be deemed to validate the conduct of any business, activity, calling, vocation, profession, or trade at the address.

(Ord. 04-902, passed 6-14-2004; Am. Ord. 06-1029, passed 10-10-2006)


8-7-9 PENALTY.

(A) A person who fails or refuses to apply for or renew a business registration permit within 30 days of having received a written notice of demand from the Finance Department shall pay a penalty of $250 except upon a demonstration that the failure to apply for or renew a business registration permit was due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect.

(B) A person who fails to comply with any request of any city code compliance officer, the Chief of Police or any other duly authorized law enforcement official pursuant to the authority granted hereunder shall pay a penalty of $500.

(Ord. 04-902, passed 6-14-2004; Am. Ord. 06-1029, passed 10-10-2006)


8-7-10 ENFORCEMENT.

(A) Violation of any section of this article is a civil violation, and Article 18-1 of this code governs the enforcement of the provisions of this article.

(B) In any action brought under or arising out of any of the provisions of this article, the fact that the defendant engaged in any business for which a permit is required by this article or that the party exhibited a sign indicating the existence of a business shall be prima facie evidence that the person is engaged in business.

(Ord. 04-902, passed 6-14-2004; Am. Ord. 06-1029, passed 10-10-2006)


CHAPTER 8A: Transaction Privilege Tax

Article

8A-1.    MODEL TAX CODE


ARTICLE 8A-1 Model Tax Code

Section

8A-1-1    Adoption of Model Tax Code


8A-1-1 ADOPTION OF MODEL TAX CODE.

The Model City Tax Code adopted by Ordinance 87-210, and amendments thereto, is adopted by reference. Three copies of the code are on file with the City Clerk.

(Prior Code, Art. 8A-1) (Am. Ord. 90-300, passed 6-26-1990; Am. Ord. 91-445, passed 11-12-1991; Am. Ord. 92-463, passed 7-14-1992; Am. Ord. 98-609, passed 5-26-1998; Am. Ord. 2000-712, passed 10-10-2000; Am. Ord. 05-932, passed 1-24-2005)

Editor’s note:

Please contact the Finance Department to obtain specific information or to review the Model Tax Code Manual.


CHAPTER 9: Buildings and Building Regulations

Article

9-1.    TECHNICAL CODES

9-2.    FIREPLACE RESTRICTIONS

9-3.    RESERVED

9-4.    RESERVED

9-5.    PENALTIES

9-6.    MAG STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND UNIFORM DETAILS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION

9-7.    BUILDING OFFICIAL

9-8.    DEVELOPMENT FEES

9-9.    UTILITY POLES AND WIRES

9-10.    MAILBOX EXCEPTION; OBSTRUCTION OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND THE LIKE

9-11.    RESERVED

9-12.    LOW FLOW FIXTURES AND DEVICES


ARTICLE 9-1 Technical Codes

Section

9-1-1    Adoption by reference

9-1-2    Conformance to zoning ordinance

9-1-3    Penalties

9-1-4    Each day a separate violation

9-1-5    Violations not exclusive

9-1-6    Injunctions 


9-1-1 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.

(A) Adoption of International Building Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as the International Building Code 2012 Edition including only the following appendices: Appendix C – Group U – Agricultural Buildings and Appendix E – Supplementary Accessibility Requirements ("International Building Code") as published by the International Code Council, and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein.

(1) Adoption of Amendment 1 to International Building Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as "Amendment 1 to International Building Code 2012 Edition" and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697, is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein amending the International Building Code as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

AMENDMENT 1 TO THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE 2012 EDITION

The International Building Code 2012 Edition, as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) CHAPTER 1, "ADMINISTRATION" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 101.1 Title is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Goodyear, hereinafter referred to as "this code." The fees and administrative provisions of this Chapter of this Code, as amended, shall apply to all technical codes adopted by the City of Goodyear.

Section 101.4 Referenced Codes is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

101.4 Referenced codes. The other technical codes listed in Section 101.4.1 through 101.4.11, adopted by the City of Goodyear, as amended, and referenced elsewhere in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.

Section 101.4.1 Gas is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

101.4.1 Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the governing authority shall apply to the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories.

Section 101.4.2 Mechanical is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

101.4.2 Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the governing authority shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems.

Section 101.4.3 Plumbing is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

101.4.3 Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the governing authority shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system.

Section 101.4.4 Property maintenance is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

101.4.4 Property maintenance. The provisions of the International Property Maintenance, as adopted and amended by the governing authority shall apply to existing structures and premises; equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and structures.

Section 101.4.5 Fire prevention is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

101.4.5 Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code, including Appendix Chapters B, D, E, F, G, H, I and K, as adopted and amended by the governing authority shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression, automatic sprinkler systems and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation.

Section 101.4.6 Energy is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

101.4.6 Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the governing authority shall apply only to the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency regulated by the International Residential Code, as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 101.4.7 Pools and spas code is hereby added as follows:

101.4.7 Pools and spas. The provisions of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of pools and spas except as otherwise provided by Arizona law governing swimming pool enclosure requirements.

Section 101.4.8 Accessibility is hereby added as follows:

101.4.8 Accessibility. The provisions of the ICC A117.O9 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, as adopted and amended by the governing authority shall apply to all matters governed by this code. In addition, the 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design, as adopted and amended by the governing authority. In the event of a conflict between the two, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.

Section 101.4.9 Electric is hereby added as follows:

101.4.9 Electric. The provisions of NFPA 70 National Electric Code, including Annexes A-I, as adopted and amended by the governing authority shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of electrical systems for all buildings and structures except those regulated by the International Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings, as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 101.4.10 Health care facilities is hereby added as follows:

101.4.10 Health care facilities. The provisions of NFPA 99 Health Care Facilities Code as adopted and by the governing authority shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of Health Care Facilities.

Section 101.4.11 Residential is hereby added as follows:

101.4.11 Residential. The provisions of the International Residential Code For One and Two-Family Dwellings as adopted and amended by the governing authority shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of one and two-family dwelling units.

Section 102.4.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

102.4.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and standards referenced in this code or between the provision of this code and any state, local and/or federal laws, rules, and regulations, including by way of example, the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies as adopted and amended by the governing authority and technical codes as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the most restrictive requirements apply.

Exceptions:

1. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of equipment or appliances as approved by the City of Goodyear, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.

2. Where there is a provision contained in another technical code as adopted and amended by the governing authority that is not addressed in this code then the provision of the technical code shall apply.

Section 102.4.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 102.7 Change in occupancy is hereby added as follows:

102.7 Change in occupancy. It shall be unlawful to make any change in the occupancy of any structure that will subject the structure to any special provision of this code applicable to the new occupancy without approval of the building official. The building official shall certify that such structure meets the intent of the provisions of law governing building construction for the proposed new occupancy and that such change of occupancy does not result in any hazard to the public health, safety or welfare.

Section 105.1 Required is hereby amended as follows:

The following sentence is hereby added to the end of this section: Permits are non- transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require a new permit.

Section 105.1.1 Annual permit is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 105.1.2 Annual permit records is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 105.2 item 2 under Building is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

2. Fences not over 6 feet (1,828.8 mm) high.

Section 105.3 Application for permit is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall submit a written application, all required supporting documentation and all applicable fees in accordance with the applicable requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority and as supplemented herein. If the applicable permit application requires the disclosure of occupancy classifications, the application shall indicate the proposed occupancy classifications for all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any not covered by the building or structure.

Section 105.3.1 Action on application is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.3.1 Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto in accordance with the requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority as supplemented herein. If the application and/or supporting documentation does not conform to the requirements of applicable laws, the building official shall reject such application in writing stating the reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto and all applicable fees have been paid, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.

Section 105.3.2 Time limitation of application is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.3.2 Time limitation of application. In the event a permit has not been issued or an application for a permit has not been denied, an application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, except that the Building Official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated before any extension is granted.

Section 105.3.3 Approved construction documents is hereby added:

Section 105.3.3 Approved construction documents. When the building official issues the permit where construction documents are required, the construction documents shall be endorsed in writing and stamped "APPROVED." Such approved construction documents shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the building official. All work shall be done in accordance with the approved construction documents.

Section 105.5 Expiration is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days after its issuance or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work is commenced. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a permittee holding an unexpired permit shall have the right to apply in writing to extend the expiration deadlines set forth herein. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one extension of time for a period of not more than 180 days provided that the permittee has demonstrated in writing that no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for the permitted work and that justifiable cause exists for the failure to commence the work within 180 days or for the suspension or abandonment of the work after it was commenced. The fee for the extension shall be the cost of reviewing the application at a rate of $100.00 per hour with a minimum charge of one hour. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, a new full permit fee shall be paid based on the current fee schedule adopted by the City.

Section 107.1 General is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

107.1 General. The supporting documentation submitted in support of a permit application shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority and as supplemented herein. All Construction documents, computations and specifications are to be prepared and designed by a registered design professional. Construction documents for buildings more than two stories in height shall indicate where penetrations will be made for pipes, fittings, and components and shall indicate the materials, and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire-resistance rating and fireblocking. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

Exception: The building official shall have the authority to waive the submission of construction documents, calculations or other data if the nature of the work applied for is such that the reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to determine compliance with this code and the authority to waive the requirement that construction documents, calculations and or other data be prepared and designed by a registered design professional if compliance with the requirements of this code can be determined by the building official.

Section 107.2 Construction documents is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

107.2 Construction documents. Construction documents shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority and in accordance with Sections 107.2.1 through 107.2.5 and all subsections therein and in accordance with Sections 107.3.4 and all subsections therein. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the Administrative Process Manual, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.

Section 109.1 Payment of fees is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

109.1 Payment of Fees. A permit shall not be issued and shall not be valid until all fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until all additional fees, if any, have been paid. All permit fees and plan review views shall be paid at the time of application supplemental. If the fees paid at the time of application are based on estimates, final fee adjustments will be made and any additional fees owed shall be made prior to the issuance of the applicable permits.

Section 109.1.1 Building Permit Fees is hereby added as follows:

Section 109.1.1 Building Permit Fees. The following shall apply to building permit fees:

A. Building permit fees for permits for new construction, buildings, additions, and tenant improvements are to be calculated based on the fees for the valuations reflected in Table 1-A set forth in section 109.8 herein, which valuations are to be calculated pursuant to the requirements of Section 109.3 Building Permit valuation;

B. Miscellaneous building related permit and review fees, including fire fees, are calculated using Tables 1-B through Table 1-H set forth in section 109.8 herein.

Section 109.1.2 Building Plan Review Fees is hereby added as follows:

109.1.2 Building Plan Review Fees. The following shall apply to building plan review fees:

A. Building plan review fees for permits for new construction, buildings, additions, and tenant improvements shall be calculated as follows:

1. If no outside consultants are used for reviewing building plans, building plan review fees shall be 65 percent (65%) of the calculated building permit fees;

2. If outside consultants are used for reviewing building plans, building plan review fees shall be the greater of the following: 65 percent (65%) of the calculated building permit fee or actual costs, which shall include all consultant’s fees in addition to city administration and overhead costs at a rate of $100.00 per hour with a minimum charge of one hour.

B. In no case shall any plan review fee be less than $35.00,unless expressly stated otherwise in subsection 109.8.

C. Any submittals that require three or more reviews shall be charged for each review at a rate of $100.00 per hour with a minimum one hour charge per each additional review.

Section 109.1.3 Fire Permit Fees is hereby added as follows:

109.1.3 Fire Permit Fees. The following shall apply to fire permit fees.

A. Fire permit fees for new, ground up, construction are to be calculated based on the fees for the valuations reflected in Table 1-F set forth in section 109.8 herein, which valuations are to be thirty-five percent (35%) of valuation used in calculating the Building Permit Fee.

B. Modifications to existing fire protection systems, or installations of new systems in existing structures are calculated using Table 1-G, as noted in subsection 109.8 herein.

Section 109.1.4 Fire Plan Review Fees is hereby added as follows:

109.1.4 Fire Plan Review Fees. Fire plan review fees for permits issued under Table 1-F are calculated as follows:

A. Fire Plan review fees for fire protection systems shall be calculated as follows:

1. For new, ground up, construction, with no use of outside consultants, fire plan review fees shall be 35% of the calculated building permit fee subject to a minimum of $35.00.

2. For modifications to existing fire protection systems, or installations of new systems in existing structures, with no use of outside consultants, fire plan review fees shall be 35% of the permit fee calculated using Table 1-G subject to a minimum of $35.00.

3. If outside consultants are used for reviewing fire plans, fire plan review fees shall be the greater of the following: 65 percent (65%) of the calculated fire permit fee or actual costs, which shall include all consultant’s fees in addition to city administration and overhead costs at a rate of $100.00 per hour with a minimum charge of one hour.

B. In no case shall any plan review fee be less than $35.00, except as stated otherwise in subsection 109.8.

C. Any submittals that require three or more reviews shall be charged for each additional review at a rate of $100.00 per hour with a minimum one hour charge for each additional review.

Section 109.3 Building permit valuations is hereby amended as follows:

The following paragraphs shall be added after the last sentence in section 109.3:

For the purposes of determining valuations, the most current building valuation data table published by the International Code Council in Building Safety Journal magazine, shall be used. The valuation for any shell-only buildings shall be permitted to be reduced by 20 percent (20%). The valuation for any foundation-only permit shall be permitted to be reduced by 65 percent (65%). When a foundation only permit is authorized by the Building Official, it shall be permitted to include the foundation, interior underground utilities and any interior slab-work when so specified. Any valuation not specifically provided for shall be determined by the Building Official and shall be classified in the use and construction type it most nearly resembles.

For the purposes of determining the fire permit valuation, the most current building valuation data table as published by the International Code Council in Building Safety Journal magazine, shall be used to determine fire permit fee from Table 1-F. Any valuation not specifically provided for shall be determined by the Building Official and shall be classified in the use and construction type it most nearly resembles.

Section 109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance is hereby amended as follows:

The following is added to the end of section 109.4:

This additional fee shall be equal to 100% of the amount of the permit fee(s) required for the permit(s) necessary for the work performed, which will result in double the amount of the adopted permit fees being paid when work is commenced before the appropriate permits have been obtained. The payment of such fee shall not exempt an applicant from complying with the provisions of either this code or other applicable requirements nor does it exempt an applicant from any other penalties prescribed by law.

Section 109.6 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

109.6. Refunds. The Building Official shall be permitted to authorize the refunding of fees as follows:

1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or collected.

2. Not more than 65 percent (65%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.

3. Not more than 65 percent (65%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

The Building Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 90 days after the date of fee payment.

Section 109.7 Public School Permit Fee Waiver is hereby added as follows:

Section 109.7 Public School Permit Fee Waiver. Except as otherwise provided herein, the permit fees adopted in Section 109.8 below shall not apply to permitted work for public schools providing educational instruction for pupils in any combination of elementary grades or secondary grades one through twelve. The fee waiver provided herein extends only to work on improvements that are owned by the public school. This waiver does not apply to the other fees set forth in Table 1-H in Section 109.8 below such as inspections outside of normal business hours, reinspection fees, replications of plans, stamping of additional approved plans, replication of plans and providing written responses to requests for information related to the building code or Building Safety Division policy issues. Public schools for purposes of this section are those schools that are funded wholly by public funds.

Section 109.8 Fee Schedule is hereby added as follows:

Section 109.8 Fee Schedule. Unless otherwise indicated, the following fees will be applicable to residential and non-residential projects.

Table 1-A, BUILDING PERMIT FEES  

	TOTAL VALUATION	FEE

	$1.00 to $500.00	$34.00

	$501.00 to $2,000.00	$34.00 for the first $500.00 plus $5.00 for each additional $100.00 or fraction thereof, up to and including $2,000.00.

	$2,001.00 to $25,000.00	$98.00 for the first $2,000.00 plus $19.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, up to and including $25,000.00.

	$25,001.00 to $50,000.00	$554.00 for the first $25,000.00 plus $14.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, up to and including $50,000.00.

	$50,001.00 to $100,000.00	$912.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $10.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, up to and including $100,000.00.

	$100,001 to $500,000.00	$1,408.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $8.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, up to and including $500,000.00.

	$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00	$4,579.00 for the first $500,000 plus $7.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, up to and including $1,000,000.00.

	$1,000,001.00 and up	$7,042.00 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $5.00 for each $1,000.00 or fraction thereof.

 

TABLE 1-B, MISCELLANEOUS PERMITS  

	Swimming Pools

	Above Ground     $50.00*

	In-Ground (Residential)     $150.00*

	In-Ground (Non-residential)     $250.00*

	 

	Spas/Hot Tubs     $75.00*

	*When standard pool/spa/hot tub plans are not on file with the Building Official, an additional $75.00 plan review fee will also be charged.

	 

	Re-Roof (One- and Two-Dwelling Structures Only)

	Shingles- overlay     $25.00

	Shingles and sheathing     $50.00

	Tile and sheathing     $50.00

	Other types of roofs shall be based on valuation of the project.

	 

	Vacuum Breaker (For residential landscape irrigation systems only)

	1 through 5 devices     $36.00*

	Over 5, each additional     $2.00*

	*Includes only the electrical required to operate the system.

	 

	Demolition of Buildings

	Residential accessory building or garage (per structure)     $25.00

	Single-family residence (per structure)     $100.00

	Structures other than residential single-family (per structure)     $200.00

	 

	Temporary Sales Trailers

	Building permit     $200.00

	Plan review     $75.00

	(Note: These fees do not include electrical or development fees.)

	 

	Generators

	Temporary Generators (Each)     $75.00

	 

	Mobile Home Hook Up

	(Includes sewer, water and electrical, where applicable)     $50.00

	 

	Permits for Existing Residential (R-3) Buildings (except swimming pools), including but not limited to, interior alterations, detached garages, carports, storage sheds, patio covers and gazebos, shall be charged a building permit fee based on Table 1-A and a plan review fee of $35.00.

	 

	For habitable room additions, the permit fee shall be based on Table 1-A, and the plan review fee shall be $100.00 per plan set.

	 

	Revisions to any of the above types of plans shall be charged a $35.00 plan review fee.

 

TABLE 1-C, ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEES  

	Permit Issuance

	For the issuance of each electrical permit     $36.00

	For the issuing of each supplemental permit for which the original permit has not expired or been cancelled or finalized     $15.00

	 

	System Fee Schedule (Note: The following do not include permit-issuing fee.)

	 

	Carnivals and Circuses

	Carnivals, circuses, or other traveling shows or exhibitions utilizing transportable-type rides, booths, displays and attractions     $175.00

	 

	Temporary Power Service

	Temporary Power Pole and Service, each     $35.00

	For a temporary distribution system and temporary lighting and receptacle outlets for construction sites, decorative lights, Christmas tree sales lots, etc., each.     $20.00

	 

	Unit Fee Schedule (Note: The following do not include permit-issuing fee.)

	 

	Receptacle, Switch and Light Outlets

	For receptacle, switch, light or other outlets at which current is used or controlled, except services, feeders and meters:

	First 20 fixtures, each     $2.00

	Additional fixtures, each     $1.00

	Note: For multi-outlet assemblies, each 5 feet or fraction thereof may be considered as one outlet.

	 

	Lighting Fixtures

	For lighting fixtures, sockets or other lamp-holding devices:

	First 20 fixtures, each     $2.00

	Additional fixtures, each     $1.00

	For pole or platform-mounted lighting fixtures each     $2.00

	For theatrical-type lighting fixtures or assemblies, each     $2.00

	 

	Additional Circuits to Existing Panels

	Each additional circuit     $5.00

	 

	Residential Appliances

	For fixed residential appliances or receptacle outlets for same, including wall-mounted electric ovens, counter-mounted cooking tops; electric ranges; self-contained room, console or through-wall air conditioners; space heaters; food waste grinders; dishwashers; washing machines; water heaters; clothes dryers; or other motor-operated appliances not exceeding one horsepower(HP) in rating, each     $8.00

	 

	Note: For other types of air conditioners and other motor-driven appliances having larger electrical ratings, see Power Apparatus.

	 

	Nonresidential Appliances

	For nonresidential appliances and self-contained factory-wired, nonresidential appliances not exceeding one horsepower (HP), kilowatt (kW) or kilovolt-ampere (kVA), in rating including medical and dental devices; food, beverage and ice cream cabinets; illuminated show cases, drinking fountains; vending machines, laundry machines; or other similar types of equipment, each     $8.00

	 

	Note: For other types of air conditioners and other motor-driven appliances having larger electrical ratings, see Power Apparatus.

	 

	Power Apparatus

	For motors, transformers, rectifiers, synchronous converters, capacitors, industrial heating, air conditioners and heat pumps, cooking or baking equipment and other apparatus, as follows:

	Rating in horsepower (HP), kilowatts (kw), kilovolt-amperes (kva) or kilovolt-amperes- reactive (kvar): Up to and including 1, each     $15.00

	Over 1 and not over 10, each     $25.00

	Over 10 and not over 50, each     $45.00

	Over 50 and not over 100, each     $65.00

	Over 100, each     $85.00

	 

	Notes:

	1. For equipment or other appliances having more than one motor, transformer, heater, etc., the sum of the combined ratings may be used.

	2. These fees include all switches, circuit breakers, contractors, thermostats, relays and other directly related control equipment.

	 

	Busways

	For trolley and plug-in-type busways, each 100 feet or fraction thereof     $15.00

	Note: An additional fee is required for lighting fixtures, motors and other appliances that are connected to trolley and plug-in type busways. A fee is not required for portable tools.

	 

	Services

	For services of 600 volts or less and not over 200 amperes in rating, each     $55.00

	For services of 600 volts or less and over 200 amperes to 1,000 amperes, each     $80.00

	For services over 600 volts or over 1,000 amperes in rating, each     $175.00

	Electrical services of 400 amperes or larger shall require plans with an approved Arizona engineer’s seal and shall be charged an additional $100.00 plan review fee.

	Miscellaneous Apparatus, Conduits and Conductors

	For electrical apparatus, conduits and conductors for which no fee is herein set forth

	Each     $30.00

	 

	Note: This Miscellaneous Apparatus, Conduits and Conductors fee is not applicable when a fee is paid for one or more services, outlets, fixtures, appliances, power apparatus, busways, signs or other equipment.

 

TABLE 1-D, MECHANICAL PERMIT FEES  

	Permit Issuance

	For the issuance of each mechanical permit     $36.00

	For issuing each supplemental permit for which the original permit has not expired, been canceled or finalized     $15.00

	 

	Unit Fee Schedule

	(Note: The following do not include permit-issuing fee.)

	 

	Furnaces

	For the installation or relocation of each forced-air or gravity-type furnace or burner, including ducts and vents attached to such appliance, up to and including 100,000 Btu/h     $25.00

	For the installation or relocation of each forced-air or gravity-type furnace or burner, including ducts and vents attached to such appliance over 100,000 Btu/h     $30.00

	For the installation or relocation of each floor furnace, including vent     $25.00

	For the installation or relocation of each suspended heater, recessed wall heater or floor-mounted unit heater.     $25.00

	 

	Appliance Vents

	For the installation, relocation or replacement of each appliance vent installed and not included in an appliance permit.     $15.00

	 

	Repairs or Additions

	For the repair of, alteration of, or addition to each heating appliance, refrigeration unit, cooling unit, absorption unit, or each heating, cooling absorption or evaporative cooling system, including installation of controls regulated by the International Mechanical Code     $25.00

	 

	Boilers, Compressors and Absorption Systems

	For the installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor to and including three horsepower, or each absorption system to and including 100,000 Btu/h.     $25.00

	For the installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor over three horsepower to and including 15 horsepower, or each absorption system over 100,000 Btu/h to and including

	500,000 Btu/h     $35.00

	For the installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor over 15 horsepower to and including 30 horsepower, or each absorption system over 500,000 Btu/h to and including

	1,000,000 Btu/h     $45.00

	For the installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor over 30 horsepower, or each absorption system over 1,000,000 Btu/h to and including 1,750,000 Btu/h     $65.00

	For the installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor over 50 horsepower, or each absorption system over 1,750,000 Btu/h     $120.00

	 

	Air Handlers

	For each air-handling unit to and including 10,000 cubic feet per minute, including ducts attached thereto     $20.00

	For each air-handling unit over 10,000 cfm     $25.00

	 

	Note: This fee does not apply to an air-handling unit which is a portion of a factory-assembled appliance, cooling unit, evaporative cooler or absorption unit for which a permit is required elsewhere in the Mechanical Code.

	 

	Evaporative Coolers

	For each evaporative cooler other than portable type     $20.00

	 

	Air Conditioning

	Residential Single-Family (per unit, with or without ductwork, including associated electrical work)     $25.00

	Other Than Residential Single-Family (per unit, without duct work)     $70.00

	Other Than Residential Single-Family (per unit, with duct work)     $115.00

	 

	Ventilation and Exhaust

	For each ventilation fan connected to a single duct     $10.00

	For each ventilation system which is not a portion of any heating or air-conditioning system authorized by a permit     $20.00

	For the installation of each hood which is served by mechanical exhaust, including the ducts for such hood     $20.00

	 

	Incinerators

	For the installation or relocation of each residential-type incinerator.     $25.00

	For the installation or relocation of each commercial or industrial-type incinerator     $80.00

	 

	Miscellaneous

	For each appliance or piece of equipment regulated by the Mechanical Code but not classed in other appliance categories, or for which no other fee is listed in the table     $30.00

 

TABLE 1-E, PLUMBING PERMIT FEES  

	Permit Issuance

	For the issuance of each plumbing permit.     $36.00

	For issuing each supplemental permit for which the original permit has not expired, been canceled or finalized     $15.00

	 

	Unit Fee Schedule

	(Note: The following do not include permit-issuing fee.)

	 

	Fixtures and Vents

	For each plumbing fixture or trap or set of fixtures on one trap (including water, drainage piping and backflow protection thereof)     $15.00

	For repair or alteration of drainage or vent piping, each fixture     $10.00

	 

	Sewers, Disposal Systems and Interceptors

	For each building sewer and each trailer park sewer (including repairs)     $35.00

	For each cesspool     $45.00

	For each private sewage disposal system     $90.00

	For each industrial waste pretreatment interceptor including its trap and vent, excepting kitchen-type grease interceptors functioning as fixture traps     $30.00

	Rainwater systems – per drain (inside building)     $20.00

	 

	Water Piping and Water Heaters

	For installation, alteration, or repair of water piping or water-treating equipment, or both, each     $15.00

	For each water heater, including vent     $20.00

	For vents only, see Mechanical Permit Fees Table 1-D.

	 

	Gas Piping Systems

	For each gas piping system of one to five outlets     $10.00

	For each additional outlet over five, each     $2.00

	When plans are submitted for review     $35.00

	 

	Lawn Sprinklers, Vacuum Breakers and Backflow Protection Devices for Other Than Residential Landscape Irrigation Systems

	For each lawn sprinkler system on any one meter, including backflow protection devices, thereof     $25.00

	For atmospheric-type vacuum breakers or backflow protection devices:

	1 to 5 devices     $20.00

	Over 5 devices, each     $3.00

	For each backflow-protection device other than atmospheric-type vacuum breakers:

	2 inches and smaller     $20.00

	Over 2 inches     $30.00

	 

	Miscellaneous

	For each appliance or piece of equipment regulated by the Plumbing Code but not classed in any other categories or for which no other fee is listed in code     $30.00

 

TABLE 1-F, FIRE PERMIT FEES  

	TOTAL VALUATION	FEE*

	$1.00 to $500.00	$34.00

	$501.00 to $2,000.00	$34.00 for the first $500.00 plus $5.00 for each additional $100.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.00.

	$2,001.00 to $25,000.00	$98.00 for the first $2,000.00 plus $19.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00.

	$25,001.00 to $50,000.00	$554.00 for the first $25,000.00 plus $14.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00.

	$50,001.00 to $100,000.00	$912.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $10.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00.

	$100,001.00 to $500,000.00	$1,408.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $8.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00.

	$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00	$4,579.00 for the first $500,000 plus $7.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00

	$1,000,001.00 and up	$7,042.00 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $5.00 for each $1,000.00 or fraction thereof.

 

TABLE 1-G, FIRE MISCELLANEOUS PERMIT FEES  

	Permit Issuance for the following     $100.00

	 

	Automatic sprinkler systems – New Installation in Existing Structure

	1 to 10,000 square feet     $375.00

	10,001 to 50,000 square feet     $450.00

	Each additional 50,000 square feet or fraction thereof     $450.00

	Each story above or below     $200.00

	 

	Automatic sprinkler systems – Modifications/Replacements to Existing System

	1 – 20 heads     $75.00

	21 – 50 heads     $100.00

	51 – 100 heads     $250.00

	101 – 500 heads     $300.00

	Each additional 100 heads or fraction thereof     $100.00

	 

	Extinguishing Systems (Clean Agent, Halon, Dry Chemical, and Carbon Dioxide and Others) – New Installation in Existing Structure

	1 – 5,000 square feet     $200.00

	Each additional 5,000 square feet or fraction thereof     $50.00

	 

	Automatic Hood Extinguishing Systems – New Installation in Existing Structure

	Each system     .$150.00

	 

	Automatic Hood Extinguishing Systems – Modifications/Replacements to Existing System

	Each system     $75.00

	 

	Fire Pumps – New Installation in Existing Structure

	First pump     $500.00

	Each additional pump     $300.00

	 

	Fire Pumps – Modifications/Replacements to Existing System

	Each pump     $100.00

	 

	Standpipes – New Installation in Existing Structure

	Up to four     $200.00

	Each additional standpipe     $25.00

	 

	Standpipes – Modifications/Replacements to Existing System

	Each standpipe     $50.00

	 

	Fire Alarm System – New Installations in Existing Structure

	1 – 1,000 square feet     $225.00

	1,001 – 2,000 square feet     $300.00

	2,001 – 10,000 square feet     $450.00

	10,001 – 50,000 square feet     $500.00

	Each additional 50,000 square feet or fraction thereof     $200.00

	Each story above or below first story     $200.00

	Area Detection throughout     50% increase of fee

	 

	Fire Alarm System – Modifications/Replacements to Existing System

	For a system with 1-5 devices     $100.00

	For a system with more than 5 devices     .$150.00

 

TABLE 1-H OTHER FEES  

	Applicable to All Categories of Permits and Plan Reviews

	 

	1. Inspections outside of normal business hours (minimum charge – 4 hours, collected prior to conducting inspection(s))     $100.00 per hour

	 

	2. Re-inspection fees (Minimum charge – 1 hour)     $100.00 per hour

	 

	3. Inspections or administrative services for which no fee is specifically indicated (minimum charge –  1 hour)     $100.00 per hour

	 

	4. Additional review required by changes, additions, or lost plans or plan review comment sheets (minimum charge – 1 hour)     $100.00 per hour

	 

	5. For use of outside consultants for plan review and/or inspections     Actual costs*

	 

	6. Site plan review (or revision) for residential standard plan submittals     $50.00 each

	 

	7. Review of deferred submittals (Submitted after initial plan review)     $175.00 per submittal

	 

	8. Certificate of Occupancy permit (except R-3 single-family accessory uses)     $50.00 per building or "shell" plus $25.00 for each additional non-residential tenant improvement.

	$25.00 per building for R-3 single-family.

	 

	9. Temporary, partial or conditional Certificate of Occupancy     Same as for Certificate Occupancy in #8 above.

	 

	10. Replication of plans (when legally authorized)     Actual replication costs plus $100.00

	 

	11. Expedited plan review of Commercial/Industrial/Multifamily projects     Double plan review fee

	 

	12. Preliminary fee for Standard Residential Plans     $500.00 per standard plan, due at submittal.

	 

	13. Written response to requests for building code or Building Safety Division policy issues     $50.00

	 

	14. Stamping of additional approved plans (after the two initially submitted sets)     $50.00 each

	 

	15. Any submittals that require three (3) or more reviews shall be charged for each review at a rate of $100.00 per hour with a minimum one hour charge per each additional review.

	 

	*Actual costs include all consultant’s fees in addition to city administration and overhead costs at a rate of $100.00 per hour with a minimum charge of one hour or normal plan review fees, whichever is greater.

Section 110.1 General is hereby amended as follows:

Add the following as the first sentence to this section: The building official is authorized to conduct such inspections as are deemed necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this code.

Section 110.6.1 Approval is hereby added as follows:

110.6.1 Approval. After all required tests and inspections indicate that the work complies in all respects with this code, a notice of approval shall be issued by the building official.

Section 110.6.2 Revocation is hereby added as follows:

110.6.2 Revocation. The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a notice of approval, including permits, issued under the provision of this code wherever the notice is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure, premise or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code.

Section 111.4 Revocation is hereby renumbered 111.6 and the following is hereby added as Section 111.4:

111.4 Certificate of Shell Completion. After final inspection of a building or structure for which the permit was issued for only the building shell, if no violations of this code or of related land use and public health ordinances, rules and regulations have been discovered, or if such violations have been discovered and have been corrected, the building official shall issue a certificate of shell completion which shall contain the following:

1. The building permit number.

2. The address of the building.

3. The name and address of the owner.

4. A description of the building or that portion of the building for which the certificate is issued.

5. The name of the building official.

6. A statement that no portion of the building shall be occupied until tenant improvement permits are obtained and occupancy is approved.

7. The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.

8. The type of construction as defined in chapter 6.

9. If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required.

10. Any special stipulation and conditions of the building permit.

11. An explanation that the responsibility for the building’s compliance with the provisions of the city codes and for maintenance of the building rests exclusively with the permit applicants and their agents and the building’s owners.

Section 111.5 Posting Certificate of Occupancy/Certificate of Shell Completion is hereby added as follows:

111.5 Posting Certificate of Occupancy/Certificate of Shell Completion. The certificate of occupancy and/or the certificate of shell completion shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and shall not be removed except by the building official.

Section 112.2 Temporary utilities is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

112.2 Temporary utilities. The code official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to utility sources of energy, fuel or power before the installation has been fully completed and a final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements for temporary lighting, heat or power in all applicable technical codes as adopted and amended by the governing authority, including the NFPA 70 National Electric Code 2011 Edition as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 112.4 Connection after order to disconnect is hereby added as follows:

112.4 Connection after order to disconnect. No person shall make any connections from any energy, fuel, power supply or water distribution system or supply energy, fuel or water to any equipment regulated by this code that has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the building official or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the building official until the building official authorizes the reconnection and use of such equipment.

Section 113 Board of Appeals and all sections therein (113.1 through 113.3) is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

SECTION 113

(BOARD OF APPEALS)

113.1 General. There is hereby created a board of appeals (the "Board") in order to hear and decide appeals of orders, notices, decision, or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code and all other technical codes governing the construction, installation, alteration, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected to or attached to such structures as adopted and amended by the governing authority, including by way of example, but not limitation, the International Fire Code, International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, the International Plumbing Code, the International Fuel Gas Code, the International Mechanical Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, the NFPA 70 National Electric Code, the International Energy Conservation Code, the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, the ICC A117.1 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, the NFPA 99 Standard for Health Care Facilities, 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design, and Sections 1215 through 1229 of appendix Chapter 12 of the Uniform Building Codes and Exhibits and Appendix Thereto Providing for Sound Transmission Control near Luke Air Force Base as adopted and amended by the governing authority. (For purposes of Section 113 and sections 113.1 through 113.8 and all subsections therein the foregoing are collectively referred to as technical codes.) The Board shall be appointed by the governing authority and shall hold office at its pleasure.

113.1.1 By-laws. Subject to the approval of the governing authority, the Board shall adopt by-laws, which shall include rules of procedure for conducting its business, which shall be consistent with applicable ordinances and regulations as adopted by the governing authority, including applicable provisions in the City of Goodyear Administrative Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority, and shall, subject to the approval of the governing authority, have the power to amend the by-laws. If there is a conflict Board’s by-laws and any other applicable legal requirement governing appeals of decisions by the building official, the more restrictive provision shall apply. The governing authority may, at its own direction, amend the Board’s by-laws.

113.2 Membership. The Board shall consist of five member, none of whom can be a employees of the City of Goodyear, appointed by the governing authority and who shall serve for the terms as set forth in the adopted by-laws unless removed by the governing authority.

113.2.1 Qualifications. The Board shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to hear, decide, and make the determinations on the matters for which the Board is created, and who are not employees of the City of Goodyear. To the extent possible, the Board’s membership shall include at least one individual from each of the following professions or discipline:

1. Registered design professional who is a registered architect; or a builder or superintendent of building construction with at least 10 years’ experience, 5 years of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.

2. Registered design professional with structural engineering or architectural experience.

3. Registered design professional with mechanical and plumbing engineering experience; or a mechanical and plumbing contractor with at least 10 years’ experience, 5 years of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.

4. Registered design professional with electrical engineering experience; or an electrical contractor with at least 10 years’ experience, 5 years of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.

5. Registered design professional with fire protection engineering experience; or a fire protection contractor with at least 10 years’ experience, 5 years of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.

If the building official does not receive applications from individuals meeting the foregoing criteria, the governing authority shall appoint other individuals who have been determined by the building official to have experience, and training that will allow them to hear, decide and make the determinations on the matters for which the Board is created.

113.2.2 Alternate members. The governing authority shall appoint two alternate members who shall be called by the Board chairman to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the same qualifications as required for Board membership.

113.2.3 Disqualification of members. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a personal, professional or financial interest.

113.3 Reversal. A decision of the building official or fire code official can be reversed or modified only upon a concurring vote of at least three of the board members hearing an appeal. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the appeal involves a challenge related to the fire code or any fire safety requirements, the decision of the building official or fire code official can be reversed only upon a concurring vote of at least three of the board members hearing an appeal and one of the members voting for the reversal shall be the member of the board appointed based on his/her experience and/or training involving fire protection.

113.4 Hearing. All hearings before the Board shall be open to the public. At least 4 of the members of the Board shall be present to hear any appeal, and for appeals involving a challenge related to the fire code or any fire safety requirements, one of the members hearing the appeal shall be the member of the board appointed based on his/her experience and/or training involving fire protection. The appellant, the appellant’s representative, the building official, the fire code official and any other person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.

113.4.1 Postponed hearing. An appellant is entitled to a hearing before all 5 members of the Board and if all 5 members are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant’s representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing.

113.5 Limitation on authority. An application for an appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code and the technical codes or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The Board shall have no authority to waive the requirement of this code or any other technical code.

Section 113.6 Filing of Appeals. Appeals of notices of violations and orders (other than those involving imminent dangers or unsafe structures and/or equipment) and of determinations or decisions on any application for a permit, including fire permits, shall be filed with building official in writing in a form and containing the information required by the Board of Appeals, within twenty (20) days of the date of such notice, order, decision, or determination. Appeals of notices and orders involving imminent dangers or unsafe structures and/or equipment shall be filed with building official in writing in a form and containing the information required by the Board of Appeals, within three business days of the date of such notice or order.

113.7 Stays of enforcement. Timely and proper appeals of notices and orders (other than Imminent Danger notices or notices of unsafe structures or equipment) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the appeals board.

113.8 Bar. The failure to pursue a timely proper appeal with the Board of Appeals of orders, notices, decision, or determinations made by the building official relative to any of the matters within the Board of Appeals jurisdiction, shall bar a later challenge in any prosecution of a violation as to the building officials application or interpretation of this code and all other technical codes governing the construction, installation, alteration, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected to or attached to such structures as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 114.1 Unlawful acts is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

114.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for:

1. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any of the provision of this code; or to cause or allow same to be done;

2. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, or demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment in violation of approved construction plans or any direction of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code or to cause or allow same to be done;

3. Any person to occupy or use any building, structure, premises, system, or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any provisions of this code or any direction of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, or to cause or allow same to be done;

4. Any Owner to fail to take actions necessary to correct conditions in any building, structure, or equipment regulated by this code that is in violation of any provisions to bring such building, structure or equipment in compliance with the provisions of this code;

5. Any person to violate or fail to comply with notices and orders issued pursuant to the enforcement of this code, including by way of example, but not limitation, provisions of notices of violations, notices of unsafe conditions, and stop work orders.

Section 109.3 Notice of violation is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

109.3 Notice of violation. Whenever the building official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, the building official may provide a written warning by attaching the warning in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Such warnings shall include at least the following, a description of the real estate sufficient for identification, description of the violation(s) and why the notice is being issued and the corrective actions that need to be taken. Whenever the building official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred and the building official wants to prosecute such violation, notice of the violation or order shall be given to the person(s) responsible for the violation in the manner prescribed in Sections 114.2.1 and 114.2.2 below.

Section 114.2.1 Form of notice is hereby added as follows:

114.2.1 Form of notice. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section 114.2 shall be in accordance with all of the following:

1. Be in writing.

2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.

3. Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.

4. Correction orders shall be included in the notice which shall provide a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required or to take other such actions needed for compliance with the provisions of this code.

5. Include information on the right to appeal the notice of violation.

6. Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with the provisions of Section 114.3 Prosecution of violation.

Section 114.2.2 Method of service is hereby added as follows:

114.2.2 Method of service. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section 114.2.1 shall be deemed to be served if a copy of the notice or order is:

1. Delivered personally; or

2. Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the last known address; or

3. If the notice or order is returned showing that the notice or order was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice or order.

4. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested to the last known address.

If more than one person owns a building or structure that is the subject of a notice or order service to just one of the owners satisfies the requirement of providing the owner notice.

Service of a notice or order in the foregoing manner upon an owner’s agent, or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.

Section 114.2.3 Unauthorized Tampering is hereby added as follows:

114.2.3 Unauthorized Tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the building official shall not be mutilated, destroyed, tampered with, or removed without authorization from the building official.

Section 114.3 Prosecution of violation is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

114.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections 114.2.1 and 114.2.2 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Such violations shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with the building official is authorized to request legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity (or both) to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provision of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.

Section 114.4 Violation penalties is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

114.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof; erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code; or who fails to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections 114.2.1 and 114.2.2 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Violations shall be deemed a strict liability offense. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

Section 114.5 Abatement of violation is hereby added as follows:

114.5 Abatement of Violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or use of any of the systems installed on or about any of the premises.

Section 114.6 Transfer of ownership is hereby added as follows:

Section 114.6 Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building or structure who has received a notice of violation or order or upon whom a notice of violation or order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such building or structure to another until the provisions of the notice of violation or order have been complied with or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any notice of violation or order issued by the building official and shall furnish to the building official a signed and notarized statement that the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such notice of violation or order and fully accepting responsibility without condition for making the correction of repairs required by such notice of violation or order.

Section 115.2 Issuance is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

115.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall comply with the requirements of section 114.2.1 as supplemented herein. The stop work order shall include a description of work that is being performed in a manner that is contrary to the provisions of this code, dangerous and or unsafe and the required repairs improvements or actions needed to be taken to remove a violation or unsafe condition. Such notice shall require the person served to declare immediately to the building official his or her acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order.

Section 115.2.1 is hereby added as follows:

The stop work order shall be served on the owner, the owner’s agent or the person doing the work. Service of such order shall be made in accordance with the requirements of 114.2.2.

Section 115.2.2 Imminent danger is hereby added as follows:

115.2.2 Imminent danger. Where an imminent danger exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.

Section 116.3 Notice is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

116.3 Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the building official shall serve a notice on the owner, agent or person in control of the structure, a written notice that complies with the requirements of section 114.2.1 as supplemented herein. The notice shall include a description of the condition deemed unsafe and that includes a description of the required repairs or improvements that need to be made to abate the unsafe condition or that requires the unsafe structure to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the building official his or her acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order.

Section 116.4 Method of service is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

116.4 Method of service. Service of such notice shall be made in accordance with the requirements of section 114.2.2.

(2) CHAPTER 2, DEFINITIONS, is hereby amended as follows:

Section 201.1 Scope is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meaning shown in this chapter regardless of whether the words are italicized, capitalized, or otherwise designated in the text as being a defined term.

Section 201.2 Terms defined in other codes is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

201.2 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Energy Conservation Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Fire Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, International Property Maintenance Code, or International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in those codes.

Section 202 is amended to delete the definition of Building Official in its entirety and to replace it with the following:

BUILDING OFFICIAL. The individual charged with the administration and enforcement of this code and all other technical codes, including the construction related provisions of the International Fire Code, governing the construction, installation, alteration, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected to or attached to such structures as adopted and amended by the governing authority, or that individual’s duly authorized representative(s). The technical codes referred to herein include by way of example, but not limitation, the International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, the International Plumbing Code, the International Fuel Gas Code, the International Mechanical Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, the NFPA 70 National Electric Code, the International Energy Conservation Code, the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, the ICC A117.1 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, the NFPA 99 Standard for Health Care Facilities, 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design, and the Sections 1215 through 1229 of appendix Chapter 12 of the Uniform Building Codes and Exhibits and Appendix Thereto Providing for Sound Transmission Control near Luke Air Force Base as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 202 is amended to delete the definition of Owner in its entirety and to replace it with the following:

OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

Section 202 is amended to delete the definition of Person in its entirety and to replace it with the following:

PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.

Section 202 is amended to add the following definitions:

CONFLICT: A situation in which it is impossible to comply with provisions applicable to the same subject; a conflict does not exist when different provisions address the same subject and can be complied with without violating either provision.

EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lots.

GOVERNING AUTHORITY: The Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building, structure, or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.

OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way including any structures thereon.

STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

(3) CHAPTER 3, "USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION," is hereby amended as follows:

Section 308.3.1 Five or fewer persons receiving care is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

308.3.1 Five or fewer persons receiving care. Five or fewer persons receiving care. A facility such as above with five or fewer persons receiving such care shall be classified as Group R-3 or shall comply with the International Residential Code provided an automatic sprinkler system is installed in accordance with the International Fire Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, Section 903.3.1.3, or Section P2904 of the International Residential Code. Automatic sprinkler systems are not required in one- and two-family (Group R-3) structures complying with the exceptions noted under Section 903.2.8 of the International Fire Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 308.3.3 Arizona State Department of Health Facilities is hereby added as follows:

308.3.3 Arizona State Department of Health Facilities. All facilities as licensed by the State of Arizona Department of Health, further known, but not limited to, as direct care, personal care, supervisory care and behavioral residential agency, housing at least six and not more than 10 persons shall be considered a Group R-4.

Section 308.4.1 Five or fewer persons receiving care is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

308.4.1 Five or fewer persons receiving care. A facility such as above with five or fewer persons receiving such care shall be classified as Group R-3 or shall comply with the International Residential Code provided an automatic sprinkler system is installed in accordance with the International Fire Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, Section 903.3.1.3, or Section P2904 of the International Residential Code.

Section 310.5.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

310.5.1 Care facilities within a dwelling. Care facilities for five or fewer persons receiving care that are within a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply with the International Residential Code provided an automatic sprinkler system is installed in accordance with the International Fire Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, Section 903.3.1.3, or Section P2904 of the International Residential Code. Automatic sprinkler systems are not required in one- and two-family (Group R-3) structures complying with the exceptions noted under Section 903.2.8 of the International Fire Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 310.6 Residential Group R-4 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

310.6 Residential Group R-4. This occupancy shall include buildings, structures or portions thereof for more than five but not more than 16 persons, excluding staff, who reside on a 24- hour basis in a supervised residential environment and receive custodial care. The persons receiving care are capable of self-preservation. This group shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Alcohol and drug centers

Assisted living facilities

Congregate care facilities

Convalescent facilities

Group homes

Halfway houses

Residential board and custodial care facilities

Social rehabilitation facilities

Arizona State Department of Health Facilities. All facilities as licensed by the State of Arizona Department of Health, further known, but not limited to, as direct care, personal care, supervisory care and behavioral residential agency, housing at least six and not more than 10 persons shall be considered a Group R-4 occupancy.

Group R-4 occupancies shall meet the requirements for construction as defined for Group R-3, except as otherwise provided for in this code.

(4) CHAPTER 5, "GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS", is hereby amended as follows:

Section 507.2 Nonsprinkered, one story, is hereby deleted in its entirety.

(5) CHAPTER 9, "FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS", is hereby amended as follows:

Section 903.1 General, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

903.1 General. Approved automatic fire extinguishing systems shall be provided and installed in accordance with the International Fire Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 907.2.10.1, Manual Fire Alarm System, Exception 4 is hereby added as follows:

4. A manual fire alarm system is not required in a Group R-4 occupancy when the occupant load does not exceed 10 residents and is located in a one- or two-family dwelling.

Section 912.5 Backflow protection is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

912.5 Backflow protection. The potable water supply to automatic sprinkler and standpipe systems shall be protected against backflow as required by the International Plumbing Code adopted by the City of Goodyear and the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual.

(6) CHAPTER 10, "MEANS OF EGRESS" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 1007.2.1 Elevators required is hereby amended as follows:

The first paragraph is hereby amended to read: In buildings with a use and occupancy classification other than Institutional Group I, where a required accessible floor is four or more stories above or below grade plane, at least one required accessible means of egress shall be an elevator complying with Section 1007.4.

The exceptions remain unchanged.

Section 1007.2.2 Elevators for Institutional Group I Occupancy is hereby added as follows:

1007.2.2 Elevators for Institutional Group I Occupancy. At least one elevator complying with Section 1007.4 shall be provided in buildings with two or more stories above or below grade plane if all or part of the use and occupancy classification for such building is Institutional Group I.

Section 1016.2.2 Group F-1 and S-1 increase is hereby added as follows:

1016.2.2 Group F-1 and S-1 increase. The maximum exit access travel distance shall be 400 feet (122 m) in Group F-1 or S-1 occupancies where all of the following conditions are met:

1. The portion of the building classified as Group F-1 or S-1 is limited to one story in height.

2. The minimum height from the finished floor to the bottom of the ceiling or roof slab or deck is 24 feet (7,315 mm).

3. The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

(7) CHAPTER 11, "ACCESSIBILITY", is hereby amended as follows:

Section 1101.2 Design is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

1101.2 Design. Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to be accessible in accordance with this code, ICC A117.1 as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design, as adopted and amended by the governing authority; the Arizonans with Disabilities Act" (Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 41, Chapter 9, Article 8) as amended, and the "Arizonans with Disabilities Act Implementing Rules" (Arizona Administrative Code, Title 10, Chapter 3, Article 4), which rules incorporate the federal "Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities." The requirements herein shall apply to new construction and alterations and are not required in buildings or portions of existing buildings that do not meet the standards and specifications unless expressly required by federal or state law.

(8) CHAPTER 12, "INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 1207.4 Sound Attenuation is hereby added as follows:

1207.4 Sound attenuation. Except as expressly provided otherwise in this Section 1207.4, all residential buildings or portions of buildings where the public is received, office areas and where normal noise level is low for first occupancy, including libraries, schools and churches located within a "high noise or accident potential zone" as defined in A.R.S. § 28-8461(9) shall comply with the requirements set forth in that certain document titled "Sections 1215 through 1229 of Appendix Chapter 12 of the Uniform Building Code and Exhibits and Appendix Thereto Providing for Sound Transmission Control Near Luke Air Force Base" as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

These sound attenuation requirements do not apply to ancillary buildings used in agricultural land use. If the gross floor area of a structure or project is expanded by less than fifty percent (50%), the requirements of this section apply only to the area of expansion. If the gross floor area of a structure or project is expanded by fifty percent (50%) or more, the requirements of this section apply to the entire structure, except for single family, mobile home, manufactured housing unit or duplex dwellings or any multifamily property used for residential purposes.

The Building Official may approve as an alternative, a certification by an architect or engineer registered pursuant to Title 32, Chapter 1 to achieve a maximum interior noise level of forty-five (45) decibels at time of final construction.

(9) CHAPTER 13, "ENERGY EFFICIENCY" is deleted.

(10) CHAPTER 29, "PLUMBING SYSTEMS," is hereby amended as follows:

Table 2902.1, "Minimum Number of Required Plumbing Facilities", footnotes "f" and "g" are hereby deleted in their entirety and replaced with the following:

"f" Drinking fountains are not required for an occupant load of 25 or fewer, except for mercantile use groups which do not require drinking fountains for an occupant load of 50 or fewer.

"g" For business and mercantile occupancies with an occupant load of 50 or fewer, service sinks shall not be required.

Section 2902.2, Exception 2 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

2. Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant spaces with a total occupant load, including both employees and customers, of 25 or less.

(11) CHAPTER 30, "ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 3002.4 Elevator car to accommodate ambulance stretcher, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

3002.4 Elevator car to accommodate ambulance stretcher. Where elevators are provided in buildings four or more stories above, or four or more stories below, grade plane pursuant to Section 1007.1.2 or where elevators are providing in buildings two or more stories above or below grade plan pursuant to 1007.2.2, at least one elevator shall be provided for fire department emergency access to all floors. The elevator car shall be of such a size and arrangement to accommodate an ambulance stretcher 24 inches by 84 inches (610 mm by 2134 mm) with not less than 5-inch (127 mm) radius corners, in the horizontal, open position and shall be identified by the international symbol for emergency medical services (star of life). The symbol shall not be less than 3 inches (76 mm) in height and shall be placed inside on both sides of the hoistway door frame.

(12) CHAPTER 31, "Special Construction" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 3109 Swimming Pool Enclosures and Safety Devices, including section 3109.1 through 3109.5 and all subsections therein, is hereby deleted in its entirety, and replaced with the following:

Section 3109

Swimming Pool Enclosures and Safety Devices

3109.1 General. The City of Goodyear Zoning Code shall be used to determine barrier requirements for swimming pools.

(13) CHAPTER 34, "EXISTING BUILDING AND STRUCTURES" is deleted.

(B) Adoption of International Residential Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as the International Residential Code For One and Two Family Dwellings, 2012 Edition, including the following appendices: Appendix A (IFGS) Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping; Appendix B Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliances Equipped with Draft Hoods, Category I Appliances and Appliances Listed for Use and Type B Vents; and Appendix C Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct Vent Venting Systems as published by the International Code Council and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution No. 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as fully and completely as if fully set forth herein.

(1) Adoption of Amendment 1 to International Residential Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as Amendment 1 to International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings 2012 Edition and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697, is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein amending the International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings for One and Two Family dwellings as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

AMENDMENT 1 TO THE INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE FOR ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLINGS 2012 EDITION

The International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings 2012 Edition, as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) CHAPTER 1, "ADMINISTRATION" is hereby amended as follows:

Section R101.1 Title is hereby amended as follows:

Insert the words "City of Goodyear" as the name of the jurisdiction.

Section R102.4.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

R102.4.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and standards referenced in this code or between the provision of this code and any state, local and/or federal laws, rules, and regulations, including by way of example, the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies as adopted and amended by the governing authority and technical codes as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the most restrictive requirements apply.

Exceptions:

1. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of equipment or appliances as approved by the City of Goodyear, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.

2. Where there is a provision contained in another technical code as adopted and amended by the governing authority that is not addressed in this code then the provision of the technical code shall apply.

Section 102.4.2 "Provisions in referenced codes and standards" is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section R105.1 Required is hereby amended as follows:

The following sentence is hereby added to the end of this section: Permits are non- transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require a new permit.

Section R105.2 Work exempt from permits, paragraph 2 under "Building" is amended to read as follows:

2. Fences not over 6 feet (1,829 mm) high.

Section R105.3 Application for permit is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

R105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall submit a written application, all required supporting documentation and all applicable fees in accordance with the applicable requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority and as supplemented herein. If the applicable permit application requires the disclosure of occupancy classifications, the application shall indicate the proposed occupancy classifications for all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any not covered by the building or structure.

Section R105.3.1 Action on application is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

R105.3.1 Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto in accordance with the requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority as supplemented herein. If the application and/or supporting documentation does not conform to the requirements of applicable laws, the building official shall reject such application in writing stating the reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto and all applicable fees have been paid, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.

Section R105.3.2 Time limitation of application is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

R105.3.2 Time limitation of application. In the event a permit has not been issued or an application for a permit has not been denied, an application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, except that the Building Official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated before any extension is granted.

Section R105.3.3 Approved construction document is hereby added:

R105.3.3 Approved construction documents. When the building official issues the permit where construction documents are required, the construction documents shall be endorsed in writing and stamped "APPROVED." Such approved construction documents shall not be changed, modified, or altered without authorization from the building official. All work shall be done in accordance with the approved construction documents.

Section R105.5 Expiration is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days after its issuance or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work is commenced. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a permittee holding an unexpired permit shall have the right to apply in writing to extend the expiration deadlines set forth herein. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one extension of time for a period of not more than 180 days provided that the permittee has demonstrated in writing that no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for the permitted work and that justifiable cause exists for the failure to commence the work within 180 days or for the suspension or abandonment of the work after it was commenced. The fee for the extension shall be the cost of reviewing the application at a rate of $100.00 per hour with a minimum charge of one hour. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, a new full permit fee shall be paid based on the current fee schedule adopted by the City.

Section R106.1 Submittal documents is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

R106.1 Submittal documents. The supporting documentation submitted in support of a permit application shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority and as supplemented herein. All Construction documents, computations and specifications are to be prepared and designed by a registered design professional. Construction documents for buildings more than two stories in height shall indicate where penetrations will be made for pipes, fittings, and components and shall indicate the materials, and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire-resistance rating and fireblocking. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

Exception: The building official shall have the authority to waive the submission of construction documents, calculations or other data if the nature of the work applied for is such that the reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to determine compliance with this code and the authority to waive the requirement that construction documents, calculations and or other data be prepared and designed by a registered design professional if compliance with the requirements of this code can be determined by the building official.

Section R108.1 Payment of fees is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

R108.1 Payment of Fees. A permit shall not be issued and shall not be valid until all fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until all additional fees, if any, have been paid. All permit fees and plan review views shall be paid at the time of application supplemental. If the fees paid at the time of application are based on estimates, final fee adjustments will be made and any additional fees owed shall be made prior to the issuance of the applicable permits.

Section R108.2 Schedule of permit fees is hereby amended as follows:

The following is hereby added to the end of the sentence in this section: including the fees set forth in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section R108.3 Building permit valuations is hereby amended as follows:

The following paragraphs shall be added after the last sentence in section R108.3:

For the purposes of determining valuations, the most current building valuation data table published by the International Code Council in Building Safety Journal magazine, shall be used. The valuation for any shell-only buildings shall be permitted to be reduced by 20 percent (20%). The valuation for any foundation-only permit shall be permitted to be reduced by 65 percent (65%). When a foundation only permit is authorized by the building official, it shall be permitted to include the foundation, interior underground utilities and any interior slab-work when so specified. Any valuation not specifically provided for shall be determined by the Building Official and shall be classified in the use and construction type it most nearly resembles.

For the purposes of determining the fire permit valuation, the most current building valuation data table as published by the International Code Council in Building Safety Journal magazine, shall be used to determine fire permit fee from Table 1-F. Any valuation not specifically provided for shall be determined by the Building Official and shall be classified in the use and construction type it most nearly resembles.

Section R108.5 Refunds is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

R108.5 Refunds. The Building Official shall be permitted to authorize the refunding of fees as follows:

1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or collected.

2. Not more than 65 percent (65%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.

3. Not more than 65 percent (65%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

The Building Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 90 days after the date of fee payment.

Section R108.6 Work commencing before permit issuance is hereby amended as follows:

The following is added to the end of section R108.4:

This additional fee shall be equal to 100% of the amount of the permit fee(s) required for the permit(s) necessary for the work performed, which will result in double the amount of the adopted permit fees being paid when work is commenced before the appropriate permits have been obtained. The payment of such fee shall not exempt an applicant from complying with the provisions of either this code or other applicable requirements nor does it exempt an applicant from any other penalties prescribed by law.

Section R109.1 Types of inspections is hereby amended as follows:

Add the following as the first sentence to this section: The building official is authorized to conduct such inspections as are deemed necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this code.

Section R109.4.1 is hereby added as follows:

R109.4.1 Approval. After all required tests and inspections indicate that the work complies in all respect with this code, a notice of approval shall be issued by the building official.

Section R111.4 is hereby added as follows:

R111.4 Connection after order to disconnect. No person shall make any connections from any energy, fuel, power supply or water distribution system or supply energy, fuel or water to any equipment regulated by this code that has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the code official or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the code official until the code official authorizes the reconnection and use of such equipment.

Section R112 Board of Appeals, including section R112.1 through R112.4 and all subsections therein, is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

SECTION R112

BOARD OF APPEALS

R112.1 Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official to the Board of Appeals as provided in Section 113 Board of Appeals, Sections 113.1 through 113.5 and all subsections therein in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section R113.1 Unlawful acts is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

R113.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for:

1. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any of the provision of this code; or to cause or allow same to be done;

2. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, or demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment in violation of approved construction plans or any direction of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code or to cause or allow same to be done;

3. Any person to occupy or use any building, structure, premises, system, or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any provisions of this code or any direction of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, or to cause or allow same to be done;

4. Any Owner to fail to take actions necessary to correct conditions in any building, structure, or equipment regulated by this code that is in violation of any provisions to bring such building, structure or equipment in compliance with the provisions of this code;

5. Any person to violate or fail to comply with notices and orders issued pursuant to the enforcement of this code, including by way of example, but not limitation, provisions of notices of violations, notices of unsafe conditions, and stop work orders.

Section R113.2 Notice of violation is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

R113.2 Notice of violation. Whenever the building official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, the building official may provide a written warning by attaching the warning in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Such warnings shall include at least the following, a description of the real estate sufficient for identification, description of the violation(s) and why the notice is being issued and the corrective actions that need to be taken. Whenever the building official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred and the building official wants to prosecute such violation, notice of the violation or order shall be given to the person(s) responsible for the violation in the manner prescribed in Sections R113.2.1 and R113.2.2 below.

Section R113.2.1 Form of notice is hereby added as follows:

R113.2.1 Form of notice. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section R113.2 shall be in accordance with all of the following:

1. Be in writing.

2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.

3. Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.

4. Correction orders shall be included in the notice which shall provide a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required or to take other such actions needed for compliance with the provisions of this code.

5. Include information on the right to appeal the notice of violation.

6. Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with the provisions of Section 114.3 Prosecution of violation.

Section R113.2.2 Method of service is hereby added as follows:

R113.2.2 Method of service. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section 113.2 shall be deemed to be served if a copy of the notice or order is:

1. Delivered personally; or

2. Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the last known address; or

3. If the notice or order is returned showing that the notice or order was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice or order.

4. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested to the last known address.

If more than one person owns a building or structure that is the subject of a notice of violation, notice to just one of the owners satisfies the requirement of providing the owner notice.

Service of a notice or order in the foregoing manner upon an owner’s agent, or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.

Section R113.2.3 Unauthorized Tampering is hereby added as follows:

R113.2.3 Unauthorized Tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the building official shall not be mutilated, destroyed, tampered with, or removed without authorization from the building official.

Section R113.3 Prosecution of violation is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

R113.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections R113.2.1 and R113.2.2 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law.

Such violations shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with the code official is authorized to request legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity (or both) to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provision of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.

Section R113.4 Violation penalties is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

R113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof; erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code; or who fails to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections R113.2.1 and R113.2.2 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Violations shall be deemed a strict liability offense. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

Section R113.5 Abatement of violation is hereby added as follows:

R113.5 Abatement of Violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or use of any of the systems installed on or about any of the premises.

Section R113.5 Transfer of ownership is hereby added as follows:

Section R113.5 Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building or structure who has received a notice of violation or order or upon whom a notice of violation or order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such building or structure to another until the provisions of the notice of violation or order have been complied with or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any notice of violation or order issued by the building official and shall furnish to the building official a signed and notarized statement that the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such notice of violation or order and fully accepting responsibility without condition for making the correction of repairs required by such notice of violation or order.

Section R114.1 Notice to Owner is hereby renumbered R114.2 Notice to Owner and a new Section R114.1 Authority is hereby added as follows:

R114.1 Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in any manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order.

Section R114.2 Unlawful continuance is hereby renumbered R114.3 Unlawful continuance.

Section R114.4 Imminent danger is hereby added as follows:

R114.4 Imminent danger. Where imminent danger exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.

(2) CHAPTER 2, DEFINITIONS, is hereby amended as follows:

Section R201.1 Scope is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

R201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meaning shown in this chapter regardless of whether the words are italicized, capitalized, or otherwise designated in the text as being a defined term.

Section R201.3 Terms defined in other codes is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

R201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Energy Conservation Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Fire Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, International Property Maintenance Code, or International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in those codes.

Section R202 is amended to delete the definition of Building Official in its entirety and to replace it with the following:

BUILDING OFFICIAL. The individual charged with the administration and enforcement of this code and all other technical codes, including the construction related provisions of the International Fire Code, governing the construction, installation, alteration, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected to or attached to such structures as adopted and amended by the governing authority, or that individual’s duly authorized representative(s). The technical codes referred to herein include by way of example, but not limitation, the International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, the International Plumbing Code, the International Fuel Gas Code, the International Mechanical Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, the NFPA 70 National Electric Code, the International Energy Conservation Code, the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, the ICC A117.1 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, the NFPA 99 Standard for Health Care Facilities, and the 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section R202 is amended to delete the definition of Owner in its entirety and to replace it with the following:

OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

Section R202 is amended to delete the definition of Person in its entirety and to replace it with the following:

PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.

Section R202 is amended to add the following definitions:

CONFLICT: A situation in which it is impossible to comply with provisions applicable to the same subject; a conflict does not exist when different provisions address the same subject and can be complied with without violating either provision.

EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lots.

GOVERNING AUTHORITY: The Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building, structure, or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.

OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way including any structures thereon.

STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

(3) CHAPTER 3, BUILDING PLANNING is hereby amended as follows:

Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria is hereby amended as follows:

Table R301.29(1) is hereby amended to insert the following within the table itself:

Ground Snow Load: N/A

Speedd (mph): 90 mph, Exposure B (Unless otherwise designated by the Building Official)

Topograhic effectsk: No

Seismic Design Categoryf: B

Weatheringa: NEGLIGIBLE

Frost Line Depthh: 12"

Termitec: MODERATE TO HEAVY

Winter Design Temperaturee: 24 degrees F

Ice Barrier Underlayment Requiredh: N/A

Flood Hazardsg: (a)July 9, 1984, (b) July 19, 2001

Air Freezing Indexi: 50 degrees F

Mean Annual Tempj: 70 degrees F

R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems. Is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system may be installed in one- and two-family dwellings in accordance with P2904, manufacturer installation instructions, and/or the International Fire Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section R314.3 Location is hereby amended by adding the following to the end of section R314.3:

4. Where the ceiling height of a room open to the hallway servicing bedrooms exceeds that of the hallway by 24 inches or more, smoke detectors shall be installed in the hallways and in the adjacent room.

Section R324 Sound Attenuation is hereby added as follows:

R324 Sound Attenuation. Buildings covered under the International Residential Code shall be subject to the following provisions:

1. Exterior wall penetrations by pipe ducts or conduits shall be caulked.

2. Mailboxes shall not be used through the door or wall.

3. Windows shall have two panes of glass and sound transmission rating of STC-22. All operable windows shall be weather stripped and airtight in accordance with ASTM R-283-84-T Standard. Perimeter window frames shall be sealed to airtight specifications.

4. All non-glazed portions of exterior side-hinged doors shall be solid-core wood or insulated hollow metal or at least one and three-quarters inch thick and fully weather stripped. The perimeter doorframes shall be sealed to airtight specifications.

5. Fireplaces shall be provided with well fitting dampers, unless otherwise prohibited elsewhere in the Code.

6. Exterior walls shall be at least four inches in nominal depth and shall be finished on the outside with block, siding, sheathing, or stucco on one-inch Styrofoam. Fiberglass or cellulose insulation at least three and one-half inches thick shall be installed continuously throughout the cavity space behind the wall. Total insulation R-value of the exterior wall assembly shall be R-18.

7. Attics and roof rafter spaces shall be insulated with a minimum insulation R-value of at least R-38.

Except as expressly provided otherwise in this Section 1207.4, all residential buildings or portions of buildings where the public is received, office areas and where normal noise level is low for first occupancy, including libraries, schools and churches located within a "high noise or accident potential zone" as defined in A.R.S. § 28-8461(9) shall comply with the requirements set forth in that certain document titled "Sections 1215 through 1229 of Appendix Chapter 12 of the Uniform Building Code and Exhibits and Appendix Thereto Providing for Sound Transmission Control Near Luke Air Force Base" which was adopted as a public record by Resolution No. 2004-911 of the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear, which is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein.

If the specified requirements of section R324 are not met, the Building Official may approve as an alternative, a certification by an architect or engineer registered pursuant to Title 32, Chapter 1 to achieve a maximum interior noise level of forty-five (45) decibels at time of final construction.

(4) CHAPTER 11 ENERGY EFFICIENCY is hereby amended as follows:

Section N1101.15.1 (R401.2.1) Alternative approach for compliance is hereby added as follows:

N1101.15.1 (R401.2.1) Alternative approach for compliance. A Home Energy Rating System ("HERS") Index of 73 or less, confirmed in writing by a Residential Energy Services Network certified energy rater may be used in place of the approach described in section N1101.15. Compliance may be demonstrated by sampling in accordance with Chapter 6 of the Mortgage Industry National Home Energy Rating Systems Standard as adopted by the Residential Energy Services Network.

Section N1102.4.1.2.1 RESNET Testing& Inspection Protocol is hereby added as follows:

N1102.4.1.2.1 RESNET Testing & Inspection Protocol. The Residential Energy Services Network (RESNET) Mortgage Industry National Home Energy Rating System Standards Protocol for third party testing and inspections shall be deemed to meet the requirements of sections N1102.4.1.1, N1102.4.1.2 and N1103.2.2 and shall meet the following conditions:

1. Third Party Testing and Inspections shall be completed by RESNET certified Raters or Rating Field Inspectors and shall be subject to RESNET Quality Assurance Field Review procedures.

2. Sampling in accordance with Chapter 6 of the RESNET Standards shall be performed by Raters or Rating Field Inspectors working under a RESNET Accredited Sampling Provider.

3. Third Party Testing is required for the following items:

a. R402.4.1.1 – Building Envelope – Thermal and Air Barrier Checklist.

b. R402.4.1.2 – Testing – Air Leakage Rate.

c. R403.2.2 – Sealing – Duct Tightness.

4. The other requirements identified as "mandatory" in Chapter 4 of the IECC shall be met.

5. Alternate testing and inspection programs and protocols shall be allowed when approved by the building official.

Section N1103.9.3 (R403.9.3) Covers is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

N1103.9.3 Motors. Motors with a total horsepower of one or more for pools and in-ground permanently installed spas shall have the capability of operating at two or more speeds with a low speed having a rotation rate that is no more than one-half of the motor’s maximum rotation rate and shall be operated with a pump control with the capability of operating the pump at two or more speeds. Residential pool pump motor controls that are sold for use with a two or more speed motor shall have a default circulation speed setting no more than one- half of the motor’s maximum rotation rate. Any high speed override capability shall be for a temporary period not to exceed one 24-Hour cycle without resetting to the default setting.

(C) Adoption of International Plumbing Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as the International Plumbing Code 2012 Edition as published by the International Code Council and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein.

(1) Adoption of Amendment 1 of International Plumbing Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as Amendment 1 to International Plumbing Code 2012 Edition and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein amending the International Plumbing Code as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

AMENDMENT 1 TO INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE 2012 EDITION

The International Plumbing Code 2012 Edition, as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) CHAPTER 1, "SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 101.1 Title is hereby amended as follows:

Insert the words "City of Goodyear" as the name of jurisdiction.

Section 102.8.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

102.8.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and standards referenced in this code or between the provision of this code and any state, local and/or federal laws, rules, and regulations, including by way of example, the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies as adopted and amended by the governing authority and technical codes as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the most restrictive requirements apply.

Exceptions:

1. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of equipment or appliances as approved by the City of Goodyear, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.

2. Where there is a provision contained in another technical code as adopted and amended by the governing authority that is not addressed in this code then the provision of the technical code shall apply.

Section 102.8.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 103.1 General is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency. The Department of Building Safety is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official or in the alternative code official.

Section 106.1 When Required is hereby amended as follows:

The following sentence is hereby added to the end of this section: Permits are non- transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require a new permit.

Section 106.3 Application for permit is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall submit a written application, all required supporting documentation and all applicable fees in accordance with the applicable requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority and as supplemented herein. If the applicable permit application requires the disclosure of occupancy classifications, the application shall indicate the proposed occupancy classifications for all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any not covered by the building or structure.

Section 106.3.1 Construction documents is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.3.1 Construction documents. Construction documents shall be submitted in accordance with the applicable requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority and in accordance with the requirements set forth in Sections 107.2.1 through 107.2.5 and all subsections therein and in Section 107.3.4 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, as applicable and as otherwise supplemented herein. In the event of a conflict the more restrictive provisions shall apply. All Construction documents, computations and specifications are to be prepared and designed by a registered design professional. Construction documents for buildings more than two stories in height shall indicate where penetrations will be made for pipes, fittings, and components and shall indicate the materials, and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire- resistance rating and fireblocking. Where special conditions exist, the code official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

Exception: The code official shall have the authority to waive the submission of construction documents, calculations or other data if the nature of the work applied for is such that the reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to determine compliance with this code.

Section 106.3.3 Time limitation of application is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.3.3 Time limitation of application. In the event a permit has not been issued or an application for a permit has not been denied, an application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, except that the Building Official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated before any extension is granted.

Section 106.4 By whom application is made is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 106.5 Permit issuance is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.5 Permit issuance. The code official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto in accordance with the requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority as supplemented herein. If the application and/or supporting documentation does not conform to the requirements of applicable laws, the code official shall reject such application in writing stating the reasons therefor. If the code official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto and all applicable fees have been paid, the code official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.

Section 106.5.3 Expiration is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.5.3 Expiration. Every permit issued shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days after its issuance or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work is commenced. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a permittee holding an unexpired permit shall have the right to apply in writing to extend the expiration deadlines set forth herein. The code official is authorized to grant, in writing, one extension of time for a period of not more than 180 days provided that the permittee has demonstrated in writing that no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for the permitted work and that justifiable cause exists for the failure to commence the work within 180 days or for the suspension or abandonment of the work after it was commenced.

The fee for the extension shall be the cost of reviewing the application at a rate of $100.00 per hour with a minimum charge of one hour. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, a new full permit fee shall be paid based on the current fee schedule adopted by the City.

Section 106.5.4 Extensions is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 106.6 Fees is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.6 Fees. A permit shall not be issued and shall not be valid until all fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until all additional fees, if any, have been paid. All permit fees and plan review views shall be paid at the time of application supplemental. If the fees paid at the time of application are based on estimates, final fee adjustments will be made and any additional fees owed shall be made prior to the issuance of the applicable permits.

Section 106.6.2 Fee Schedule is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.6.2 Fee Schedule. The fees for permits for all plumbing work shall be paid in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority, including the fees set forth in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 106.6.3 Fee refunds is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.6.3 Refunds. The code official shall be permitted to authorize the refunding of fees as follows:

1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or collected.

2. Not more than 65 percent (65%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.

3. Not more than 65 percent (65%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

The code official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 90 days after the date of fee payment.

Section 106.7 Work commencing before permit issuance is hereby added as follows:

106.7 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work, activity, or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an additional fee equal to 100% of the amount of the permit fee(s) required for the permit(s) necessary for the work performed, which will result in double the amount of the adopted permit fees being paid when work is commenced before the appropriate permits have been obtained. The payment of such fee shall not exempt an applicant from complying with the provisions of either this code or other applicable requirements nor does it exempt an applicant from any other penalties prescribed by law.

Section 108.1 Unlawful acts is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

108.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for:

1. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any of the provision of this code; or to cause or allow same to be done;

2. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, or demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment in violation of approved construction plans or any direction of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code or to cause or allow same to be done;

3. Any person to occupy or use any building, structure, premises, system, or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any provisions of this code or any direction of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, or to cause or allow same to be done;

4. Any Owner to fail to take actions necessary to correct conditions in any building, structure, or equipment regulated by this code that is in violation of any provisions to bring such building, structure or equipment in compliance with the provisions of this code;

5. Any person to violate or fail to comply with notices and orders issued pursuant to the enforcement of this code, including by way of example, but not limitation, provisions of notices of violations, notices of unsafe conditions, and stop work orders.

Section 108.2 Notice of violation is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

108.2 Notice of violation. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, the building official may provide a written warning by attaching the warning in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Such warnings shall include at least the following, a description of the real estate sufficient for identification, description of the violation(s) and why the notice is being issued and the corrective actions that need to be taken. Whenever the building official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred and the building official wants to prosecute such violation, notice of the violation or order shall be given to the person(s) responsible for the violation in the manner prescribed in Sections 108.2.1 and 108.2.2 below.

Section 108.2.1 Form of notice is hereby added as follows:

108.2.1 Form of notice. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section 108.2 shall be in accordance with all of the following:

1. Be in writing.

2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.

3. Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.

4. Correction orders shall be included in the notice which shall provide a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required or to take other such actions needed for compliance with the provisions of this code.

5. Include information on the right to appeal the notice of violation.

6. Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with the provisions of Section 108.3 Prosecution of violation.

Section 108.2.2 Method of service is hereby added as follows:

108.2.2 Method of service. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section 108.2 shall be deemed to be served if a copy of the notice or order is:

1. Delivered personally; or

2. Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the last known address; or

3. If the notice or order is returned showing that the notice or order was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice or order.

4. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested to the last known address.

If more than one person owns a building or structure that is the subject of a notice or order service to just one of the owners satisfies the requirement of providing the owner notice.

Service of a notice or order in the foregoing manner upon an owner’s agent, or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.

Section 108.2.3 Unauthorized Tampering is hereby added as follows:

108.2.3 Unauthorized Tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the building official shall not be mutilated, destroyed, tampered with, or removed without authorization from the building official.

Section 108.2.4 Transfer of ownership is hereby added as follows:

Section 108.2.4 Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building or structure who has received a notice of violation or order or upon whom a notice of violation or order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such building or structure to another until the provisions of the notice of violation or order have been complied with or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any notice of violation or order issued by the building official and shall furnish to the building official a signed and notarized statement that the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such notice of violation or order and fully accepting responsibility without condition for making the correction of repairs required by such notice of violation or order.

Section 108.3 Prosecution of violation is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

108.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections 108.2.1 and 108.2.2 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Such violations shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with the code official is authorized to request legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity (or both) to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provision of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.

Section 108.4 Violation penalties is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof; erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code; or who fails to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections 108.2.1 and 108.2.2 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Violations shall be deemed a strict liability offense. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

Section 108.5 Stop work orders is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

108.5 Stop work orders. Whenever the code official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or danger or unsafe, the code official is authorized to issue a stop work order.

Section 108.5.1 Stop work order notices is hereby added as follows:

108.5.1 Stop work order notices. Stop work orders shall be in writing and shall comply with the requirements of section 108.2.1 as supplemented herein. The notice shall include a description of the work that is being performed in a manner that is contrary to the provision of this code, dangerous and/or unsafe and a description of the required repairs, improvements, or actions needed to remove a violation or unsafe condition. Such notice shall require the person served to immediately declare to the code official his or her acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order.

Section 108.5.2 Method of service is hereby added as follows:

108.5.2 Method of service. The notice shall be served on the owner, the owner’s agent or the person doing the work. Service of such notice shall be made in accordance with the requirements of section 108.2.2.

Section 108.5.3 Imminent danger is hereby added as follows:

108.5.3 Imminent danger. Where an imminent danger exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping work.

Section 108.5.4 Unlawful continuances is hereby added as follows:

108.5.4 Unlawful continuances. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subjection to the penalties as prescribed by law.

Section 108.7.3 Connection after order to disconnect is hereby amended as follows:

The second paragraph in this section is hereby deleted.

Section 109 Means of Appeal including sections 109.1 through 109.7 and all subsections therein is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

SECTION 109

APPEAL

109.1 Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the Board of Appeals as provided in Section 113 Board of Appeals, Sections 113.1 through 113.5 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 110.3 Temporary utilities is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

110.3 Temporary utilities. The code official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to utility sources of energy, fuel or power before the installation has been fully completed and a final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements for temporary lighting, heat or power in NFPA 70 National Electric Code 2011 Edition as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

(2) CHAPTER 2, "Definitions" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 201.1 Scope is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meaning shown in this chapter regardless of whether the words are italicized, capitalized, or otherwise designated in the text as being a defined term.

Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Energy Conservation Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Fire Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, International Property Maintenance Code, or International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in those codes.

Section 202 General Definitions is hereby amended as follows:

The definition of CODE OFFICIAL in Section 202 General Definitions is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

CODE OFFICIAL. The Building Official as defined in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 202 is amended to add the following definitions:

CONFLICT: A situation in which it is impossible to comply with provisions applicable to the same subject; a conflict does not exist when different provisions address the same subject and can be complied with without violating either provision.

EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lots.

GOVERNING AUTHORITY. The Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.

PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way including any structures thereon.

STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

(3) CHAPTER 4, FIXTURES, FAUCETS AND FIXTURE FITTINGS is hereby amended as follows:

Table 403.1 Minimum Number of Required Plumbing Facilities footnotes "f" and "g" are hereby amended to read as follows:

"f" Drinking fountains are not required for an occupant load of 25 or fewer, except for mercantile use groups which do not require drinking fountains for an occupant load of 50 or fewer.

"g" For business and mercantile occupancies with an occupant load of 50 or fewer, service sinks shall not be required.

Section 403.2 Separate Facilities, Exception 2, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

2. Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant spaces with a total occupant load, including both employees and customers, of 25 or fewer.

(D) Adoption of International Fuel Gas Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as the International Fuel Gas Code 2012 Edition as published by the International Code Council and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein.

(1) Adoption of Amendment 1 of International Fuel Gas Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as Amendment 1 to International Fuel Gas Code 2012 Edition and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein amending the International Fuel Gas Code as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear. 

AMENDMENT 1 TO INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE 2012 EDITION

The International Fuel Gas Code 2012 Edition, as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) CHAPTER 1, "SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 101.1 Title is hereby amended as follows:

Insert the words "City of Goodyear" as the name of jurisdiction.

Section 102.8 Referenced codes and standards is hereby amended as follows:

The exception is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 102.8.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

102.8.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and standards referenced in this code or between the provision of this code and any state, local and/or federal laws, rules, and regulations, including by way of example, the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies as adopted and amended by the governing authority and technical codes as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the most restrictive requirements apply.

Exceptions:

1. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of equipment or appliances as approved by the City of Goodyear, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.

2. Where there is a provision contained in another technical code as adopted and amended by the governing authority that is not addressed in this code then the provision of the technical code shall apply.

Section 102.8.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 103.1 General is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency. The Department of Building Safety is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official or in the alternative the code official.

Section 106.1 Where required is hereby amended as follows:

The following sentence is hereby added to the end of this section: Permits are non- transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require a new permit.

Section 106.3 Application for permit is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall submit a written application, all required supporting documentation and all applicable fees in accordance with the applicable requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority and as supplemented herein. If the applicable permit application requires the disclosure of occupancy classifications, the application shall indicate the proposed occupancy classifications for all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any not covered by the building or structure.

Section 106.3.1 Construction documents is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.3.1 Construction documents. Construction documents shall be submitted in accordance with the applicable requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority and in accordance with the requirements set forth in Sections 107.2.1 through 107.2.5 and all subsections therein and in Section 107.3.4 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, as applicable and as otherwise supplemented herein. In the event of a conflict the more restrictive provisions shall apply. All Construction documents, computations and specifications are to be prepared and designed by a registered design professional. Construction documents for buildings more than two stories in height shall indicate where penetrations will be made for pipes, fittings, and components and shall indicate the materials, and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire-resistance rating and fireblocking. Where special conditions exist, the code official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

Exception. The building official shall have the authority to waive the submission of construction documents, calculations or other data if the nature of the work applied for is such that the reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to determine compliance with this code and the authority to waive the requirement that construction documents, calculations and or other data be prepared and designed by a registered design professional if compliance with the requirements of this code can be determined by the building official.

Section 106.3.2 Time limitation of application is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.3.2 Time limitation of application. In the event a permit has not been issued or an application for a permit has not been denied, an application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, except that the Building Official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated before any extension is granted.

Section 106.5 Permit issuance is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.5 Permit issuance. The code official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto in accordance with the requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority as supplemented herein. If the application and/or supporting documentation does not conform to the requirements of applicable laws, the code official shall reject such application in writing stating the reasons therefor. If the code official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto and all applicable fees have been paid, the code official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.

Section 106.5.3 Expiration is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.5.3 Expiration. Every permit issued shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days after its issuance or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work is commenced. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a permittee holding an unexpired permit shall have the right to apply in writing to extend the expiration deadlines set forth herein. The code official is authorized to grant, in writing, one extension of time for a period of not more than 180 days provided that the permittee has demonstrated in writing that no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for the permitted work and that justifiable cause exists for the failure to commence the work within 180 days or for the suspension or abandonment of the work after it was commenced. The fee for the extension shall be the cost of reviewing the application at a rate of $100.00 per hour with a minimum charge of one hour. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, a new full permit fee shall be paid based on the current fee schedule adopted by the City.

Section 106.5.4 Extensions is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 106.6 Fees is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.6 Fees. A permit shall not be issued and shall not be valid until all fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until all additional fees, if any, have been paid. All permit fees and plan review views shall be paid at the time of application supplemental. If the fees paid at the time of application are based on estimates, final fee adjustments will be made and any additional fees owed shall be made prior to the issuance of the applicable permits.

Section 106.6.1 Work commencing before permit issuance is hereby added as follows:

106.6.1 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work, activity, or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an additional fee equal to 100% of the amount of the permit fee(s) required for the permit(s) necessary for the work performed, which will result in double the amount of the adopted permit fees being paid when work is commenced before the appropriate permits have been obtained. The payment of such fee shall not exempt an applicant from complying with the provisions of either this code or other applicable requirements nor does it exempt an applicant from any other penalties prescribed by law.

Section 106.6.2 Fee Schedule is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.6.2 Fee Schedule. The fees for permits for work shall be paid in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority, including the fees set forth in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 106.6.3 Fee refunds is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.6.3 Fee refunds. The code official shall be permitted to authorize the refunding of fees as follows:

1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or collected.

2. Not more than 65 percent (65%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.

3. Not more than 65 percent (65%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

The code official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 90 days after the date of fee payment.

Section 108.1 Unlawful acts is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

108.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for:

1. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any of the provision of this code; or to cause or allow same to be done;

2. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, or demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment in violation of approved construction plans or any direction of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code or to cause or allow same to be done;

3. Any person to occupy or use any building, structure, premises, system, or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any provisions of this code or any direction of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, or to cause or allow same to be done;

4. Any Owner to fail to take actions necessary to correct conditions in any building, structure, or equipment regulated by this code that is in violation of any provisions to bring such building, structure or equipment in compliance with the provisions of this code;

5. Any person to violate or fail to comply with notices and orders issued pursuant to the enforcement of this code, including by way of example, but not limitation, provisions of notices of violations, notices of unsafe conditions, and stop work orders.

Section 108.2 Notice of violation is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

108.2 Notice of violation. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, the building official may provide a written warning by attaching the warning in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Such warnings shall include at least the following, a description of the real estate sufficient for identification, description of the violation(s) and why the notice is being issued and the corrective actions that need to be taken. Whenever the building official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred and the building official wants to prosecute such violation, notice of the violation or order shall be given to the person(s) responsible for the violation in the manner prescribed in Sections 108.2.1 and 108.2.2 below.

Section 108.2.1 Form of notice is hereby added as follows:

108.2.1 Form of notice. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section 108.2 shall be in accordance with all of the following:

1. Be in writing.

2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.

3. Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.

4. Correction orders shall be included in the notice which shall provide a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required or to take other such actions needed for compliance with the provisions of this code.

5. Include information on the right to appeal the notice of violation.

6. Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with the provisions of Section 108.3 Prosecution of violation.

Section 108.2.2 Method of service is hereby added as follows:

108.2.2 Method of service. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section 108.2 shall be deemed to be served if a copy of the notice or order is:

1. Delivered personally; or

2. Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the last known address; or

3. If the notice or order is returned showing that the notice or order was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice or order.

4. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested to the last known address.

If more than one person owns a building or structure that is the subject of a notice or order service to just one of the owners satisfies the requirement of providing the owner notice.

Service of a notice or order in the foregoing manner upon an owner’s agent, or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.

Section 108.2.3 Unauthorized Tampering is hereby added as follows:

108.2.3 Unauthorized Tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the building official shall not be mutilated, destroyed, tampered with, or removed without authorization from the building official.

Section 108.2.4 Transfer of ownership is hereby added as follows:

Section 108.2.4 Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building or structure who has received a notice of violation or order or upon whom a notice of violation or order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such building or structure to another until the provisions of the notice of violation or order have been complied with or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any notice of violation or order issued by the building official and shall furnish to the building official a signed and notarized statement that the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such notice of violation or order and fully accepting responsibility without condition for making the correction of repairs required by such notice of violation or order.

Section 108.3 Prosecution of violation is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

108.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections 108.2.1 and 108.2.2 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Such violations shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with the code official is authorized to request legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity (or both) to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provision of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.

Section 108.4 Violation penalties is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof; erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code; or who fails to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections 108.2.1 and 108.2.2 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Violations shall be deemed a strict liability offense. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

Section 108.5 Stop work orders is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

108.5 Stop work orders. Whenever the code official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or danger or unsafe, the code official is authorized to issue a stop work order.

Section 108.5.1 Stop work order notices is hereby added as follows:

108.5.1 Stop work order notices. Stop work orders shall be in writing and shall comply with the requirements of section 108.2.1 as supplemented herein. The notice shall include a description of the work that is being performed in a manner that is contrary to the provision of this code, dangerous and/or unsafe and a description of the required repairs, improvements, or actions needed to remove a violation or unsafe condition. Such notice shall require the person served to immediately declare to the code official his or her acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order.

Section 108.5.2 Method of service is hereby added as follows:

108.5.2 Method of service. The notice shall be served on the owner, the owner’s agent or the person doing the work. Service of such notice shall be made in accordance with the requirements of section 108.2.2.

Section 108.5.3 Imminent danger is hereby added as follows:

108.5.3 Imminent danger. Where an imminent danger exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping work.

Section 108.5.4 Unlawful continuances is hereby added as follows:

108.5.4 Unlawful continuances. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subjection to the penalties as prescribed by law.

Section 108.7.3 Connection after order to disconnect is hereby amended as follows:

The second paragraph is this section is deleted.

Section 109 Means of Appeal, including sections 109.1 through 109.7 and all subsections therein, is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

SECTION 109

APPEAL

109.1 Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the board of appeals as provided in Section 113 Board of Appeals, Sections 113.1 through 113.5 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 110.3 Temporary utilities is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

110.3 Temporary utilities. The code official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements for temporary lighting heat or power in NFPA 70 National Electric Code 2011 Edition as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

(2) CHAPTER 2, "Definitions" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 201.1 Scope is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meaning shown in this chapter regardless of whether the words are italicized, capitalized, or otherwise designated in the text as being a defined term.

Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Energy Conservation Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Fire Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, International Property Maintenance Code, or International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in those codes.

Section 202 General Definitions is hereby amended as follows:

The definition of CODE OFFICIAL in Section 202 General Definitions is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

CODE OFFICIAL. The Building Official as defined in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 202 is amended to add the following definitions:

CONFLICT: A situation in which it is impossible to comply with provisions applicable to the same subject; a conflict does not exist when different provisions address the same subject and can be complied with without violating either provision.

EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lots.

GOVERNING AUTHORITY. The Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.

PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way including any structures thereon.

STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

(E) Adoption of International Mechanical Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as the International Mechanical Code 2012 Edition as published by the International Code Council and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein.

(1) Adoption of Amendment 1 to International Mechanical Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as Amendment 1 to International Mechanical Code 2012 Edition and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein amending the International Mechanical Code as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

AMENDMENT 1 TO INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE 2012 EDITION

The International Mechanical Code 2012 Edition, as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear is hereby amended as follows:

(1) CHAPTER 1, "SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 101.1 Title is hereby amended as follows:

Insert the words "City of Goodyear" as the name of jurisdiction.

Section 102.8 Referenced codes and standards is hereby amended as follows:

The exception is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 102.8.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

102.8.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and standards referenced in this code or between the provision of this code and any state, local and/or federal laws, rules, and regulations, including by way of example, the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies as adopted and amended by the governing authority and technical codes as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the most restrictive requirements apply.

Exceptions:

1. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of equipment or appliances as approved by the City of Goodyear, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.

2. Where there is a provision contained in another technical code as adopted and amended by the governing authority that is not addressed in this code then the provision of the technical code shall apply.

Section 102.8.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 103.1 General is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency. The Department of Building Safety is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official or in the alternative the code official.

Section 106.1 When required is hereby amended as follows:

The following sentence is hereby added to the end of this section: Permits are non- transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require a new permit.

Section 106.3 Application for permit is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall submit a written application, all required supporting documentation and all applicable fees in accordance with the applicable requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority and as supplemented herein. If the applicable permit application requires the disclosure of occupancy classifications, the application shall indicate the proposed occupancy classifications for all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any not covered by the building or structure.

Section 106.3.1 Construction documents is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.3.1 Construction documents. Construction documents shall be submitted in accordance with the applicable requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority and in accordance with the requirements set forth in Sections 107.2.1 through 107.2.5 and all subsections therein and in Section 107.3.4 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, as applicable and as otherwise supplemented herein. In the event of a conflict the more restrictive provisions shall apply. All Construction documents, computations and specifications are to be prepared and designed by a registered design professional. Construction documents for buildings more than two stories in height shall indicate where penetrations will be made for pipes, fittings, and components and shall indicate the materials, and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire- resistance rating and fireblocking. Where special conditions exist, the code official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

Exception: The building official shall have the authority to waive the submission of construction documents, calculations or other data if the nature of the work applied for is such that the reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to determine compliance with this code and the authority to waive the requirement that construction documents, calculations and or other data be prepared and designed by a registered design professional if compliance with the requirements of this code can be determined by the building official.

Section 106.3.3 Time limitation of application is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.3.3 Time limitation of application. In the event a permit has not been issued or an application for a permit has not been denied, an application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, except that the Building Official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated before any extension is granted.

Section 106.4 Permit issuance is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.4 Permit issuance. The code official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto in accordance with the requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority as supplemented herein. If the application and/or supporting documentation does not conform to the requirements of applicable laws, the code official shall reject such application in writing stating the reasons therefor. If the code official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto and all applicable fees have been paid, the code official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.

Section 106.4.3 Expiration is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.4.3 Expiration. Every permit issued shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days after its issuance or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work is commenced. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a permittee holding an unexpired permit shall have the right to apply in writing to extend the expiration deadlines set forth herein. The code official is authorized to grant, in writing, one extension of time for a period of not more than 180 days provided that the permittee has demonstrated in writing that no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for the permitted work and that justifiable cause exists for the failure to commence the work within 180 days or for the suspension or abandonment of the work after it was commenced. The fee for the extension shall be the cost of reviewing the application at a rate of $100.00 per hour with a minimum charge of one hour. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, a new full permit fee shall be paid based on the current fee schedule adopted by the City.

Section 106.4.4 Extensions is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 106.5 Fees is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.5 Fees. A permit shall not be issued and shall not be valid until all fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until all additional fees, if any, have been paid. All permit fees and plan review views shall be paid at the time of application supplemental. If the fees paid at the time of application are based on estimates, final fee adjustments will be made and any additional fees owed shall be made prior to the issuance of the applicable permits.

Section 106.5.1 Work commencing before permit issuance is hereby added as follows:

106.5.1 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work, activity, or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an additional fee equal to 100% of the amount of the permit fee(s) required for the permit(s) necessary for the work performed, which will result in double the amount of the adopted permit fees being paid when work is commenced before the appropriate permits have been obtained. The payment of such fee shall not exempt an applicant from complying with the provisions of either this code or other applicable requirements nor does it exempt an applicant from any other penalties prescribed by law.

Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.5.2 Fee Schedule. The fees for permits for all mechanical work shall be paid in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority, including the fees set forth in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 106.5.3 Fee refunds is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.5.3 Fee Refunds. The code official shall be permitted to authorize the refunding of fees as follows:

1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or collected.

2. Not more than 65 percent (65%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.

3. Not more than 65 percent (65%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

The code official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 90 days after the date of fee payment.

Section 108.1 Unlawful acts is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

108.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for:

1. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any of the provision of this code; or to cause or allow same to be done;

2. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, or demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment in violation of approved construction plans or any direction of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code or to cause or allow same to be done;

3. Any person to occupy or use any building, structure, premises, system, or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any provisions of this code or any direction of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, or to cause or allow same to be done;

4. Any Owner to fail to take actions necessary to correct conditions in any building, structure, or equipment regulated by this code that is in violation of any provisions to bring such building, structure or equipment in compliance with the provisions of this code;

5. Any person to violate or fail to comply with notices and orders issued pursuant to the enforcement of this code, including by way of example, but not limitation, provisions of notices of violations, notices of unsafe conditions, and stop work orders.

Section 108.2 Notice of violation is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

108.2 Notice of violation. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, the building official may provide a written warning by attaching the warning in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Such warnings shall include at least the following, a description of the real estate sufficient for identification, description of the violation(s) and why the notice is being issued and the corrective actions that need to be taken. Whenever the building official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred and the building official wants to prosecute such violation, notice of the violation or order shall be given to the person(s) responsible for the violation in the manner prescribed in Sections 108.2.1 and 108.2.2 below.

Section 108.2.1 Form of notice is hereby added as follows:

108.2.1 Form of notice. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section 108.2 shall be in accordance with all of the following:

1. Be in writing.

2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.

3. Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.

4. Correction orders shall be included in the notice which shall provide a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required or to take other such actions needed for compliance with the provisions of this code.

5. Include information on the right to appeal the notice of violation.

6. Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with the provisions of Section 108.3 Prosecution of violation.

Section 108.2.2 Method of service is hereby added as follows:

108.2.2 Method of service. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section 108.2 shall be deemed to be served if a copy of the notice or order is:

1. Delivered personally; or

2. Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the last known address; or

3. If the notice or order is returned showing that the notice or order was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice or order.

4. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested to the last known address.

If more than one person owns a building or structure that is the subject of a notice or order service to just one of the owners satisfies the requirement of providing the owner notice.

Service of a notice or order in the foregoing manner upon an owner’s agent, or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.

Section 108.2.3 Unauthorized Tampering is hereby added as follows:

108.2.3 Unauthorized Tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the building official shall not be mutilated, destroyed, tampered with, or removed without authorization from the building official.

Section 108.2.4 Transfer of ownership is hereby added as follows:

Section 108.2.4 Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building or structure who has received a notice of violation or order or upon whom a notice of violation or order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such building or structure to another until the provisions of the notice of violation or order have been complied with or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any notice of violation or order issued by the building official and shall furnish to the building official a signed and notarized statement that the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such notice of violation or order and fully accepting responsibility without condition for making the correction of repairs required by such notice of violation or order.

Section 108.3 Prosecution of violation is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

108.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections 108.2.1 and 108.2.2 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Such violations shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with the code official is authorized to request legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity (or both) to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provision of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.

Section 108.4 Violation penalties is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof; erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code; or who fails to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections 108.2.1 and 108.2.2 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Violations shall be deemed a strict liability offense. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

Section 108.5 Stop work orders is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

108.5 Stop work orders. Whenever the code official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or danger or unsafe, the code official is authorized to issue a stop work order.

Section 108.5.1 Stop work order notices is hereby added as follows:

108.5.1 Stop work order notices. Stop work orders shall be in writing and shall comply with the requirements of section 108.2.1 as supplemented herein. The notice shall include a description of the work that is being performed in a manner that is contrary to the provision of this code, dangerous and/or unsafe and a description of the required repairs, improvements, or actions needed to remove a violation or unsafe condition. Such notice shall require the person served to immediately declare to the code official his or her acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order.

Section 108.5.2 Method of service is hereby added as follows:

108.5.2 Method of service. The notice shall be served on the owner, the owner’s agent or the person doing the work. Service of such notice shall be made in accordance with the requirements of section 108.2.2.

Section 108.5.3 Imminent danger is hereby added as follows:

108.5.3 Imminent danger. Where an imminent danger exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping work.

Section 108.5.4 Unlawful continuances is hereby added as follows:

108.5.4 Unlawful continuances. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subjection to the penalties as prescribed by law.

Section 109 Means of Appeal, including subsections 109.1 through 109.7 and all subsections therein, is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

SECTION 109

APPEAL

109.1 Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the board of appeals as provided in Section 113 Board of Appeals, Sections 113.1 through 113.5 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 110.3 Temporary utilities is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

110.3 Temporary utilities. The code official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements for temporary lighting heat or power in NFPA 70 National Electric Code 2011 Edition as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

(2) CHAPTER 2, "Definitions" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 201.1 Scope is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meaning shown in this chapter regardless of whether the words are italicized, capitalized, or otherwise designated in the text as being a defined term.

Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Energy Conservation Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Fire Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, International Property Maintenance Code, or International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in those codes.

Section 202 Definitions is hereby amended as follows:

The definition of CODE OFFICIAL in Section 202 Definitions is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

CODE OFFICIAL. The Building Official as defined in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 202 is amended to add the following definitions:

CONFLICT: A situation in which it is impossible to comply with provisions applicable to the same subject; a conflict does not exist when different provisions address the same subject and can be complied with without violating either provision.

EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lots.

GOVERNING AUTHORITY. The Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.

STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

(F) Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as the International Property Maintenance Code 2012 Edition as published by the International Code Council, and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein.

(1) Adoption of Amendment 1 to International Property Maintenance Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as Amendment 1 to International Property Maintenance Code 2012 Edition and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein amending the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

AMENDMENT 1 TO INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 2012 EDITION

The International Property Maintenance Code 2012 Edition as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear is hereby amended as follows:

(1) CHAPTER 1, "SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 101.1 Title is hereby amended as follows:

Insert the words "City of Goodyear" as the name of jurisdiction.

Section 102.7 Referenced codes and standards is hereby amended as follows:

The exception is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 102.7.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

102.7.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and standards referenced in this code or between the provision of this code and any state, local and/or federal laws, rules, and regulations, including by way of example, the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies as adopted and amended by the governing authority and technical codes as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the most restrictive requirements apply.

Exceptions:

1. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of equipment or appliances as approved by the City of Goodyear, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.

2. Where there is a provision contained in another technical code as adopted and amended by the governing authority that is not addressed in this code then the provision of the technical code shall apply.

Section 102.7.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 103.1 General is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency. The Department of Building Safety is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official or in the alternative the code official.

Section 103.5 Fees is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be paid in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority, including the fees set forth in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 106.1 Unlawful acts is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for:

1. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any of the provision of this code; or to cause or allow same to be done;

2. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, or demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment in violation of approved construction plans or any direction of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code or to cause or allow same to be done;

3. Any person to occupy or use any building, structure, premises, system, or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any provisions of this code or any direction of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, or to cause or allow same to be done;

4. Any Owner to fail to take actions necessary to correct conditions in any building, structure, or equipment regulated by this code that is in violation of any provisions to bring such building, structure or equipment in compliance with the provisions of this code;

5. Any person to violate or fail to comply with notices and orders issued pursuant to the enforcement of this code, including by way of example, but not limitation, provisions of notices of violations, notices of unsafe conditions, and stop work orders.

Section 106.3 Prosecution of violation is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections 107.2 and 107.3 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Such violations shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with the code official is authorized to request legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity (or both) to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provision of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.

Section 106.4 Penalties is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

106.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof; erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code; or who fails to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections 107.2 and 107.3 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Violations shall be deed a strict liability offense. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

Section 107.1 Notice to persons responsible is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

107.1 Notice of violation. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, the building official may provide a written warning by attaching the warning in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Such warnings shall include at least the following, a description of the real estate sufficient for identification, description of the violation(s) and why the notice is being issued and the corrective actions that need to be taken. Whenever the building official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred and the building official wants to prosecute such violation, notice of the violation or order shall be given to the person(s) responsible for the violation in the manner prescribed in Sections 107.2 and 107.3 below.

Section 107.2 Form is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

107.2 Form of notice. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section 106.2 shall be in accordance with all of the following:

1. Be in writing.

2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.

3. Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.

4. Correction orders shall be included in the notice which shall provide a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required or to take other such actions needed for compliance with the provisions of this code.

5. Include information on the right to appeal the notice of violation.

6. Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with the provisions of Section 106.3 Prosecution of violation.

Section 107.3 Method of service is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

107.3 Method of service. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section 106.2 shall be deemed to be served if a copy of the notice or order is:

1. Delivered personally; or

2. Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the last known address; or

3. If the notice or order is returned showing that the notice or order was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice or order.

4. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested to the last known address.

If more than one person owns a building or structure that is the subject of a notice or order service to just one of the owners satisfies the requirement of providing the owner notice.

Service of a notice or order in the foregoing manner upon an owner’s agent, or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.

Section 108.1 General is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

108.1 General. When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, the code official shall have the authority to condemn the structure pursuant to the provisions of this code.

Section 111 Means of Appeal, including sections 111.1 through 111.8 and all subsections therein, is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

SECTION 111

MEANS OF APPEAL

111.1 Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the board of appeals as provided in Section 113 Board of Appeals, Sections 113.1 through 113.5 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 112.3 Emergencies is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

112.3 Imminent danger. Where an imminent danger exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.

Section 112.4 Failure to comply is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law.

(2) CHAPTER 2, "Definitions" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 201.1 Scope is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meaning shown in this chapter regardless of whether the words are italicized, capitalized, or otherwise designated in the text as being a defined term.

Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Energy Conservation Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Fire Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, International Property Maintenance Code, or International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in those codes.

Section 202 General Definitions is hereby amended as follows:

The definition of CODE OFFICIAL in Section 202 General Definitions is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

CODE OFFICIAL. The Building Official as defined in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 202 is amended to add the following definitions:

CONFLICT: A situation in which it is impossible to comply with provisions applicable to the same subject; a conflict does not exist when different provisions address the same subject and can be complied with without violating either provision.

GOVERNING AUTHORITY. The Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

(G) Adoption of NFPA 70 National Electric Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as the NFPA 70 National Electric Code 2011 Edition, including ANNEXES A-I as published by the National Fire Protection Association International Code Council, and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein.

(1) Adoption of Amendment 1 to NFPA 70 National Electric Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as Amendment 1 to NFPA 70 National Electric Code 2011 Edition and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein amending NFPA 70 National Electric Code 2011 Edition, as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

AMENDMENT 1 TO NFPA 70 NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE 2011 EDITION

The NFPA 70 National Electric Code 2011 Edition, as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) ARTICLE 90, "INTRODUCTION" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 90.1.1 Incorporation of International Building Code Administrative Provisions is hereby added as follows:

90.1.1 Incorporation of International Building Code Administrative Provisions. The provisions of this code supplement the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, and the following administrative provisions of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority are incorporated herein by this reference as if fully set forth herein:

Section 103 Department of Building Safety, including sections 103.1 through 103.3 and all subsections therein.

Section 104 Duties and Power of Building Official, including sections 104.1 through 104.11 and all subsections therein.

Section 105 Permits, including sections 105.1 through 105.7 and all subsections therein.

Section 107 Submittal Documents, including sections 107.1 through 107.5 and all subsections therein.

Section 109 Fees, including sections 109.1 through 109.6, and all subsections therein.

Section 110 Inspections, including sections 110.1 through 110.6 and all subsections therein.

Section 114 Violations, including sections 114.1 through 114.6 and all subsections therein.

Section 115 Stop Work Order, including sections 115.1 through 115.4 and all subsections therein.

Section 116 Unsafe Structures and Equipment, including section 116.1 through 116.5, including all subsections therein.

Section 90.1.2 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

90.1.2 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and standards referenced in this code or between the provision of this code and any state, local and/or federal laws, rules, and regulations, including by way of example, the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies as adopted and amended by the governing authority and technical codes as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the most restrictive requirements apply.

Exceptions:

1. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of equipment or appliances as approved by the City of Goodyear, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.

2. Where there is a provision contained in another technical code as adopted and amended by the governing authority that is not addressed in this code then the provision of the technical code shall apply.

Section 90.1.3 Appeals is hereby added as follows:

90.1.3 Appeals. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official to the board of appeals as provided in Section 113 Board of Appeals, Sections 113.1 through 113.5 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

90.2 (B) Not Covered is hereby amended to include item (6) to the list of installations not covered amended as follows:

(6) buildings and structures regulated by the International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

(2) ARTICLE 100, "Definitions" is hereby amended as follows:

Section titled Scope is hereby amended as follows:

The following is hereby added to the end of the section titled Scope.

Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meaning shown in this chapter regardless of whether the words are italicized, capitalized, or otherwise designated in the text as being a defined term.

Article 100, Part I general is hereby amended to add the following definitions:

BUILDING OFFICIAL. The individual charged with the administration and enforcement of this code and all other technical codes, including the construction related provisions of the International Fire Code, governing the construction, installation, alteration, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected to or attached to such structures as adopted and amended by the governing authority, or that individual’s duly authorized representative(s). The technical codes referred to herein include by way of example, but not limitation, the International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, the International Plumbing Code, the International Fuel Gas Code, the International Mechanical Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, the NFPA 70 National Electric Code, the International Energy Conservation Code, the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, the ICC A117.1 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, the NFPA 99 Standard for Health Care Facilities, and the 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

CONFLICT: A situation in which it is impossible to comply with provisions applicable to the same subject; a conflict does not exist when different provisions address the same subject and can be complied with without violating either provision.

EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lots.

GOVERNING AUTHORITY: The Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building, structure, or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.

OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.

PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way including any structures thereon.

STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

(H) Adoption of International Energy Conservation Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as the International Energy Conservation Code 2012 Edition as published by the International Code Council, and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein.

(1) Adoption of Amendment 1 of International Energy Conservation Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as Amendment 1 to International Energy Conservation Code 2012 Edition and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein amending the International Energy Conservation Code as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear. 

AMENDMENT 1 TO INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 2012 EDITION

The International Energy Conservation Code 2012 Edition, as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) CHAPTER 1, "SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION" is hereby amended as follows:

Section C101.1 Title is hereby amended as follows:

Insert the words "City of Goodyear" as the name of jurisdiction.

Section C101.2 Scope is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

C101.2 Scope. This code applies to buildings and structures regulated by the International Residential Code For One and Two-Family Dwellings as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section C101.4.6 is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section C101.5 Compliance is hereby amended as follows:

The following sentence is deleted from this section: Commercial buildings shall meet the provisions of IECC—Commercial Provisions.

Section C103.1 General is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

C103.1 Construction documents. Construction documents shall be submitted in accordance with the applicable requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority and in accordance with the requirements set forth in Sections 107.2.1 through 107.2.5 and all subsections therein and in Section 107.3.4 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, as applicable and as otherwise supplemented herein. In the event of a conflict the more restrictive provisions shall apply. All Construction documents, computations and specifications are to be prepared and designed by a registered design professional. Construction documents for buildings more than two stories in height shall indicate where penetrations will be made for pipes, fittings, and components and shall indicate the materials, and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire-resistance rating and fireblocking. Where special conditions exist, the code official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

Exception: The building official shall have the authority to waive the submission of construction documents, calculations or other data if the nature of the work applied for is such that the reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to determine compliance with this code and the authority to waive the requirement that construction documents, calculations and or other data be prepared and designed by a registered design professional if compliance with the requirements of this code can be determined by the building official.

Section C103.3 Examination of documents is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

C103.3 Examination of documents. The code official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto, including all required construction documents, in accordance with the requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority as supplemented herein and shall ascertain whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws and ordinances. If the application and/or supporting documentation does not conform to the requirements of applicable laws, the code official shall reject such application in writing stating the reasons therefor. If the code official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto and all applicable fees have been paid, the code official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.

Section C103.2 Information on construction documents is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section C105 VALIDITY is hereby renamed VALIDITY AND VIOLATIONS.

Section C105.2 Unlawful acts is hereby added as follows:

C105.2 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for:

1. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any of the provision of this code; or to cause or allow same to be done;

2. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, or demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment in violation of approved construction plans or any direction of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code or to cause or allow same to be done;

3. Any person to occupy or use any building, structure, premises, system, or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any provisions of this code or any direction of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, or to cause or allow same to be done;

4. Any Owner to fail to take actions necessary to correct conditions in any building, structure, or equipment regulated by this code that is in violation of any provisions to bring such building, structure or equipment in compliance with the provisions of this code;

5. Any person to violate or fail to comply with notices and orders issued pursuant to the enforcement of this code, including by way of example, but not limitation, provisions of notices of violations, notices of unsafe conditions, and stop work orders.

Section C105.3 Notice of violation is hereby added as follows:

C105.3 Notice of violation. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, the building official may provide a written warning by attaching the warning in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Such warnings shall include at least the following, a description of the real estate sufficient for identification, description of the violation(s) and why the notice is being issued and the corrective actions that need to be taken. Whenever the building official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred and the building official wants to prosecute such violation, notice of the violation or order shall be given to the person(s) responsible for the violation in the manner prescribed in Sections C105.3.1 and C105.3.2 below.

Section C105.3.1 Form of notice is hereby added as follows:

C105.3.1 Form of notice. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section 108.2 shall be in accordance with all of the following:

1. Be in writing.

2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.

3. Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.

4. Correction orders shall be included in the notice which shall provide a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required or to take other such actions needed for compliance with the provisions of this code.

5. Include information on the right to appeal the notice of violation.

6. Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with the provisions of Section 108.3 Prosecution of violation.

Section C105.3.2 Method of service is hereby added as follows:

C105.3.2 Method of service. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section C105.3 shall be deemed to be served if a copy of the notice or order is:

1. Delivered personally; or

2. Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the last known address; or

3. If the notice or order is returned showing that the notice or order was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice or order.

4. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested to the last known address.

If more than one person owns a building or structure that is the subject of a notice or order service to just one of the owners satisfies the requirement of providing the owner notice.

Service of a notice or order in the foregoing manner upon an owner’s agent, or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.

Section C105.3.3 Unauthorized Tampering is hereby added as follows:

C105.3.3 Unauthorized Tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the building official shall not be mutilated, destroyed, tampered with, or removed without authorization from the building official.

Section C105.3.4 Transfer of ownership is hereby added as follows:

Section 105.3.4 Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building or structure who has received a notice of violation or order or upon whom a notice of violation or order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such building or structure to another until the provisions of the notice of violation or order have been complied with or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any notice of violation or order issued by the building official and shall furnish to the building official a signed and notarized statement that the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such notice of violation or order and fully accepting responsibility without condition for making the correction of repairs required by such notice of violation or order.

Section C105.4 Prosecution of violation is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

C105.4 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections C105.3.1 and C105.3.2 shall be deemed guilty of a civil infraction and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Such violations shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with the code official is authorized to request legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity (or both) to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provision of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.

Section C105.5 Violation penalties is hereby added as follows:

C105.5 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof; erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code; or who fails to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections C105.3.1 and C105.3.2 shall be deemed guilty of a civil infraction and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Violations shall be deemed a strict liability offense. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

Section C106.1.1 Conflicts is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

C106.1.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and standards referenced in this code or between the provision of this code and any state, local and/or federal laws, rules, and regulations, including by way of example, the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies as adopted and amended by the governing authority and technical codes as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the most restrictive requirements apply.

Exceptions:

1. Where there is a conflict between the administrative requirements in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority and the administrative requirements in this code, the administrative requirements in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, shall apply.

2. Where there is an administrative provision contained in this code that is not addressed in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, then the administrative provision of this code shall apply.

3. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of equipment or appliances as approved by the City of Goodyear, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.

Section C106.1.2 "Provisions in referenced codes and standards" is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section C107.1 Fees is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

C107.1 Fees. A permit shall not be issued and shall not be valid until all fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until all additional fees, if any, have been paid. All permit fees and plan review views shall be paid at the time of application supplemental. If the fees paid at the time of application are based on estimates, final fee adjustments will be made and any additional fees owed shall be made prior to the issuance of the applicable permits. Permits are non-transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require a new permit.

Section C107.2 Schedule of permit fees is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

C107.2 Schedule of permit fees. The fees for permits for work shall be paid in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority, including the fees set forth in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section C107.3 Work commencing before permit issuance is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

C107.3 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work, activity, or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an additional fee equal to 100% of the amount of the permit fee(s) required for the permit(s) necessary for the work performed, which will result in double the amount of the adopted permit fees being paid when work is commenced before the appropriate permits have been obtained. The payment of such fee shall not exempt an applicant from complying with the provisions of either this code or other applicable requirements nor does it exempt an applicant from any other penalties prescribed by law.

Section C107.5 Refunds is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

C107.5 Refunds. The code official shall be permitted to authorize the refunding of fees as follows:

1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or collected.

2. Not more than 65 percent (65%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.

3. Not more than 65 percent (65%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

The code official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 90 days after the date of fee payment.

Section C108.1 Authority is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

C108.1 Stop work orders. Whenever the code official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or danger or unsafe, the code official is authorized to issue a stop work order.

Section C108.2 Issuance is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

C108.2 Stop work order notices. Stop work orders shall be in writing and shall comply with the requirements of section C105.3.1 as supplemented herein. The notice shall include a description of the work that is being performed in a manner that is contrary to the provision of this code, dangerous and/or unsafe and a description of the required repairs, improvements, or actions needed to remove a violation or unsafe condition. Such notice shall require the person served to immediately declare to the code official his or her acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order.

Section C108.2.1 Method of service is hereby added as follows:

C108.2.1 Method of service. The notice shall be served on the owner, the owner’s agent or the person doing the work. Service of such notice shall be made in accordance with the requirements of section C105.3.2.

Section C108.3 Emergencies is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

C108.3 Imminent danger. Where an imminent danger exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping work.

Section C108.4 Failure to comply is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

C108.4 Unlawful continuances. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subjection to the penalties as prescribed by law.

Section C109 BOARD of APPEALS, including sections C109.1 through C109.3 and all subsections therein is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

SECTION C109

APPEAL

C109.1 Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the Board of Appeals as provided in Section 113 Board of Appeals, Sections 113.1 through 113.5 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

(2) CHAPTER 2, "Definitions" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 201.1 Scope is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meaning shown in this chapter regardless of whether the words are italicized, capitalized, or otherwise designated in the text as being a defined term.

Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Energy Conservation Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Fire Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, International Property Maintenance Code, or International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in those codes.

Section 202 General Definitions is hereby amended as follows:

The definition of CODE OFFICIAL in Section 202 General Definitions is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

CODE OFFICIAL. The Building Official as defined in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 202 is amended to add the following definitions:

CONFLICT: A situation in which it is impossible to comply with provisions applicable to the same subject; a conflict does not exist when different provisions address the same subject and can be complied with without violating either provision.

EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lots.

GOVERNING AUTHORITY. The Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.

PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way including any structures thereon.

STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

(I) Adoption of International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code 2012 Edition as published by the International Code Council and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein.

(1) Adoption of Amendment 1 to International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as Amendment 1 to International Swimming Pool and Spa 2012 Edition declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697, is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein amending the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

AMENDMENT 1 TO INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE 2012 EDITION

The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code 2012 Edition, as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) CHAPTER 1, "SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 101.1 Title is hereby amended as follows:

Insert the words "City of Goodyear" as the name of jurisdiction.

Section 102.7.2 is hereby added:

102.7.2 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and standards referenced in this code or between the provision of this code and any state, local and/or federal laws, rules, and regulations, including by way of example, the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies as adopted and amended by the governing authority and technical codes as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the most restrictive requirements apply.

Exceptions:

1. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of equipment or appliances as approved by the City of Goodyear, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.

2. Where there is a provision contained in another technical code as adopted and amended by the governing authority that is not addressed in this code then the provision of the technical code shall apply.

Section 103.1 General is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency. The Department of Building Safety is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official or in the alternative code official.

Section 105.1 When required is hereby amended as follows:

The following sentence is hereby added to the end of this section: Permits are non- transferable and any change in occupancy, operation, tenancy or ownership shall require a new permit.

Section 105.2 Application for permit is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.2 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall submit a written application, all required supporting documentation and all applicable fees in accordance with the applicable requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority and as supplemented herein. If the applicable permit application requires the disclosure of occupancy classifications, the application shall indicate the proposed occupancy classifications for all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any not covered by the building or structure.

Section 105.3. Construction documents is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.3 Construction documents. Construction documents shall be submitted in accordance with the applicable requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority and in accordance with the requirements set forth in Sections 107.2.1 through 107.2.5 and all subsections therein and in Section 107.3.4 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, as applicable and as otherwise supplemented herein. In the event of a conflict the more restrictive provisions shall apply. All Construction documents, computations and specifications are to be prepared and designed by a registered design professional. Construction documents for buildings more than two stories in height shall indicate where penetrations will be made for pipes, fittings, and components and shall indicate the materials, and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire-resistance rating and fireblocking. Where special conditions exist, the code official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

Exception: The building official shall have the authority to waive the submission of construction documents, calculations or other data if the nature of the work applied for is such that the reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to determine compliance with this code and the authority to waive the requirement that construction documents, calculations and or other data be prepared and designed by a registered design professional if compliance with the requirements of this code can be determined by the building official.

Section 105.4 Time limitation of application is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.4 Time limitation of application. In the event a permit has not been issued or an application for a permit has not been denied, an application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, except that the Building Official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceed 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated before any extension is granted.

Section 105.5 Permit issuance is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.5 Permit issuance. The code official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto in accordance with the requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended by the governing authority as supplemented herein. If the application and/or supporting documentation does not conform to the requirements of applicable laws, the code official shall reject such application in writing stating the reasons therefor. If the code official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto and all applicable fees have been paid, the code official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.

Section 105.5.3 Expiration is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.5.3 Expiration. Every permit issued shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days after its issuance or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work is commenced. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a permittee holding an unexpired permit shall have the right to apply in writing to extend the expiration deadlines set forth herein. The code official is authorized to grant, in writing, one extension of time for a period of not more than 180 days provided that the permittee has demonstrated in writing that no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for the permitted work and that justifiable cause exists for the failure to commence the work within 180 days or for the suspension or abandonment of the work after it was commenced. The fee for the extension shall be the cost of reviewing the application at a rate of $100.00 per hour with a minimum charge of one hour. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, a new full permit fee shall be paid based on the current fee schedule adopted by the City.

Section 105.5.4 Extensions is hereby deleted in its entirety.

Section 105.6 Fees is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.6 Fees. A permit shall not be issued and shall not be valid until all fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until all additional fees, if any, have been paid. All permit fees and plan review views shall be paid at the time of application supplemental. If the fees paid at the time of application are based on estimates, final fee adjustments will be made and any additional fees owed shall be made prior to the issuance of the applicable permits.

Section 105.6.1 Work commencing before permit issuance is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.6.1 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work, activity, or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an additional fee equal to 100% of the amount of the permit fee(s) required for the permit(s) necessary for the work performed, which will result in double the amount of the adopted permit fees being paid when work is commenced before the appropriate permits have been obtained. The payment of such fee shall not exempt an applicant from complying with the provisions of either this code or other applicable requirements nor does it exempt an applicant from any other penalties prescribed by law.

Section 105.6.2 Fee Schedule is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.6.2 Fee Schedule. The fees for permits for all plumbing work shall be paid in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority, including the fees set forth in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 105.6.3 Fee refunds is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.6.3 Fee refunds. The code official shall be permitted to authorize the refunding of fees as follows:

1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or collected.

2. Not more than 65 percent (65%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.

3. Not more than 65 percent (65%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

The code official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 90 days after the date of fee payment.

Section 107.1 Unlawful acts is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

107.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for:

1. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any of the provision of this code; or to cause or allow same to be done;

2. Any person to erect, construct, install, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, or demolish any building, structure, premises, system or equipment in violation of approved construction plans or any direction of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code or to cause or allow same to be done;

3. Any person to occupy or use any building, structure, premises, system, or equipment regulated by this code in violation of any provisions of this code or any direction of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, or to cause or allow same to be done;

4. Any Owner to fail to take actions necessary to correct conditions in any building, structure, or equipment regulated by this code that is in violation of any provisions to bring such building, structure or equipment in compliance with the provisions of this code;

5. Any person to violate or fail to comply with notices and orders issued pursuant to the enforcement of this code, including by way of example, but not limitation, provisions of notices of violations, notices of unsafe conditions, and stop work orders.

Section 107.2 Notice of violation is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

107.2 Notice of violation. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, the code official may provide a written warning by attaching the warning in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Such warnings shall include at least the following, a description of the real estate sufficient for identification, description of the violation(s) and why the notice is being issued and the corrective actions that need to be taken. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred and the building official wants to prosecute such violation, notice of the violation or order shall be given to the person(s) responsible for the violation in the manner prescribed in Sections 107.2.1 and 107.2.2 below.

Section 107.2.1 Form of notice is hereby added as follows:

107.2.1 Form of notice. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section 107.2 shall be in accordance with all of the following:

1. Be in writing.

2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.

3. Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.

4. Correction orders shall be included in the notice which shall provide a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required or to take other such actions needed for compliance with the provisions of this code.

5. Include information on the right to appeal the notice of violation.

6. Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with the provisions of Section 108.3 Prosecution of violation.

Section 107.2.2 Method of service is hereby added as follows:

107.2.2 Method of service. A notice of violation or order prescribed in Section 107.2 shall be deemed to be served if a copy of the notice or order is:

1. Delivered personally; or

2. Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the last known address; or

3. If the notice or order is returned showing that the notice or order was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice or order.

4. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested to the last known address.

If more than one person owns a building or structure that is the subject of a notice or order service to just one of the owners satisfies the requirement of providing the owner notice.

Service of a notice or order in the foregoing manner upon an owner’s agent, or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.

Section 107.2.3 Unauthorized Tampering is hereby added as follows:

107.2.3 Unauthorized Tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the building official shall not be mutilated, destroyed, tampered with, or removed without authorization from the building official.

Section 107.2.4 Transfer of ownership is hereby added as follows:

Section 107.2.4 Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building or structure who has received a notice of violation or order or upon whom a notice of violation or order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such building or structure to another until the provisions of the notice of violation or order have been complied with or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any notice of violation or order issued by the building official and shall furnish to the building official a signed and notarized statement that the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such notice of violation or order and fully accepting responsibility without condition for making the correction of repairs required by such notice of violation or order.

Section 107.3 Prosecution of violation is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

107.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections 107.2.1 and 107.2.2 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Such violations shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with the code official is authorized to request legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity (or both) to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provision of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.

Section 107.4 Violation penalties is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

107.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof; erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code; or who fails to comply with a notice of violation or order prepared and served in accordance with Sections 107.2.1 and 107.2.2 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed by law. Violations shall be deed a strict liability offense. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

Section 107.5 Stop work orders is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

107.5 Stop work orders. Whenever the code official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or danger or unsafe, the code official is authorized to issue a stop work order.

Section 107.5.1 Stop work order notices is hereby added as follows:

107.5.1 Stop work order notices. Stop work orders shall be in writing and shall comply with the requirements of section 107.2.1 as supplemented herein. The notice shall include a description of the work that is being performed in a manner that is contrary to the provision of this code, dangerous and/or unsafe and a description of the required repairs, improvements, or actions needed to remove a violation or unsafe condition. Such notice shall require the person served to immediately declare to the code official his or her acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order.

Section 107.5.2 Method of service is hereby added as follows:

107.5.2 Method of service. The notice shall be served on the owner, the owner’s agent or the person doing the work. Service of such notice shall be made in accordance with the requirements of section 107.2.2.

Section 107.5.3 Imminent danger is hereby added as follows:

107.5.3 Imminent danger. Where an imminent danger exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping work.

Section 107.5.4 Unlawful continuances is hereby added as follows:

107.5.4 Unlawful continuances. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subjection to the penalties as prescribed by law.

Section 107.7.3 Connection after order to disconnect is hereby amended as follows:

The second paragraph in this section is deleted.

Section 108 Means of Appeal including sections 108.1 through 108.7 and all subsections therein is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

SECTION 108

APPEAL

108.1 Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the Board of Appeals as provided in Section 113 Board of Appeals, Sections 113.1 through 113.5 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

(2) CHAPTER 2, "Definitions" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 201.1 Scope is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meaning shown in this chapter regardless of whether the words are italicized, capitalized, or otherwise designated in the text as being a defined term.

Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the International Energy Conservation Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Fire Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, International Property Maintenance Code, or International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in those codes.

Section 202 General Definitions is hereby amended as follows:

The definition of CODE OFFICIAL in Section 202 General Definitions is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

CODE OFFICIAL. The Building Official as defined in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

The definition of OWNER in Section 202 General Definitions is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

Section 202 is amended to add the following definitions:

CONFLICT: A situation in which it is impossible to comply with provisions applicable to the same subject; a conflict does not exist when different provisions address the same subject and can be complied with without violating either provision.

EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lots.

GOVERNING AUTHORITY. The Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.

PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way including any structures thereon.

STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

(J) Adoption of ICC A117.1 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as the ICC A117.1 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities Code, 2009 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, and adopted as a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein.

(1) Adoption of Amendment 1 to ICC A117.1 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as Amendment 1 to ICC A117.1 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities 2009 Edition and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697, is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein amending the ICC A117.1 Accessible and Usable Facilities 2009 Edition as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

AMENDMENT 1 TO ICC A117.1 ACCESSIBLE AND USABLE BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES 2009 EDITION

The ICC A117.1 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities 2009 Edition, as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear, is hereby amended as follows:

Section 101.1 Incorporation of International Building Code Administrative Provisions is hereby added as follows:

101.1 Incorporation of International Building Code Administrative Provisions. The provisions of this code supplement the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, and the following administrative provisions of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority are incorporated herein by this reference as if fully set forth herein:

Section 103 Department of Building Safety, including sections 103.1 through 103.3 and all subsections therein.

Section 104 Duties and Power of Building Official, including sections 104.1 through 104.11 and all subsections therein.

Section 105 Permits, including sections 105.1 through 105.7 and all subsections therein.

Section 107 Submittal Documents, including sections 107.1 through 107.5 and all subsections therein.

Section 109 Fees, including sections 109.1 through 109.6, and all subsections therein.

Section 110 Inspections, including sections 110.1 through 110.6 and all subsections therein.

Section 114 Violations, including sections 114.1 through 114.6 and all subsections therein.

Section 115 Stop Work Order, including sections 115.1 through 115.4 and all subsections therein.

Section 116 Unsafe Structures and Equipment, including section 116.1 through 116.5, including all subsections therein.

Section 105.3 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

105.3 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and standards referenced in this code or between the provision of this code and any state, local and/or federal laws, rules, and regulations, including by way of example, the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies as adopted and amended by the governing authority and technical codes as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the most restrictive requirements apply.

Exceptions:

1. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of equipment or appliances as approved by the City of Goodyear, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.

2. Where there is a provision contained in another technical code as adopted and amended by the governing authority that is not addressed in this code then the provision of the technical code shall apply.

Section 105.4 Appeals is hereby added as follows:

105.4 Appeals. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official to the board of appeals as provided in Section 113 Board of Appeals, Sections 113.1 through 113.5 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Section 106.1 General is hereby amended as follows:

The following is hereby added to the end of the section titled General:

Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meaning shown in this chapter regardless of whether the words are italicized, capitalized, or otherwise designated in the text as being a defined term.

Section 106.5 Defined Terms is hereby amended to add the following definitions:

BUILDING OFFICIAL. The individual charged with the administration and enforcement of this code and all other technical codes, including the construction related provisions of the International Fire Code, governing the construction, installation, alteration, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected to or attached to such structures as adopted and amended by the governing authority, or that individual’s duly authorized representative(s). The technical codes referred to herein include by way of example, but not limitation, the International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, the International Plumbing Code, the International Fuel Gas Code, the International Mechanical Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, the NFPA 70 National Electric Code, the International Energy Conservation Code, the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, the ICC A117.1 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, the NFPA 99 Standard for Health Care Facilities, and the 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

CONFLICT: A situation in which it is impossible to comply with provisions applicable to the same subject; a conflict does not exist when different provisions address the same subject and can be complied with without violating either provision.

EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lots.

GOVERNING AUTHORITY: The Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building, structure, or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.

OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.

PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way including any structures thereon.

STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

(K) Adoption of NFPA 99 Standard for Health Care Facilities Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as the NFPA 99 Standard for Health Care Facilities Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association and adopted as a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein.

(1) Adoption of Amendment 1 to NFPA 99 Standard for Health Care Facilities Code. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as Amendment 1 to NFPA 99 Standard for Health Care Facilities Code 2012 Edition and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein amending the NFPA 99 Standard for Health Care Facilities Code 2012 Edition as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear. 

AMENDMENT 1 TO NFPA 99 STANDARD FOR HEALTH CARE FACILITIES CODE 2012 EDITION

The NFPA 99 Standard for Health Care Facilities Code 2012 Edition, as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear, is hereby amended as follows:

(1) CHAPTER 1, "Administration" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 1.6.3 Incorporation of International Building Code Administrative Provisions is hereby added as follows:

1.6.3 Incorporation of International Building Code Administrative Provisions. The provisions of this code supplement the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, and the following administrative provisions of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority are incorporated herein by this reference as if fully set forth herein:

Section 103 Department of Building Safety, including sections 103.1 through 103.3 and all subsections therein.

Section 104 Duties and Power of Building Official, including sections 104.1 through 104.11 and all subsections therein.

Section 105 Permits, including sections 105.1 through 105.7 and all subsections therein.

Section 107 Submittal Documents, including sections 107.1 through 107.5 and all subsections therein.

Section 109 Fees, including sections 109.1 through 109.6, and all subsections therein.

Section 110 Inspections, including sections 110.1 through 110.6 and all subsections therein.

Section 114 Violations, including sections 114.1 through 114.6 and all subsections therein.

Section 115 Stop Work Order, including sections 115.1 through 115.4 and all subsections therein.

Section 116 Unsafe Structures and Equipment, including section 116.1 through 116.5, including all subsections therein.

Section 1.6.4 Appeals is hereby added as follows:

1.6.4 Appeals. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official to the board of appeals as provided in Section 113 Board of Appeals, Sections 113.1 through 113.5 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

(2) CHAPTER 2, "Referenced Publications" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 2.1.2 is hereby added as follows:

2.1.2 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and standards referenced in this code or between the provision of this code and any state, local and/or federal laws, rules, and regulations, including by way of example, the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies as adopted and amended by the governing authority and technical codes as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the most restrictive requirements apply.

Exceptions:

1. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of equipment or appliances as approved by the City of Goodyear, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.

2. Where there is a provision contained in another technical code as adopted and amended by the governing authority that is not addressed in this code then the provision of the technical code shall apply.

(3) CHAPTER 3, "Definitions" is hereby amended as follows:

Section 3.1 General is hereby amended as follows:

The following is hereby added to the end of the section titled General.

Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meaning shown in this chapter regardless of whether the words are italicized, capitalized, or otherwise designated in the text as being a defined term.

Section 3.2.2 Authority having Jurisdiction (AHJ) is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

3.2.2 Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ). The Building Official as defined in the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

Chapter 3 Definitions is hereby amended to add the following definitions:

CONFLICT: A situation in which it is impossible to comply with provisions applicable to the same subject; a conflict does not exist when different provisions address the same subject and can be complied with without violating either provision.

EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lots.

GOVERNING AUTHORITY: The Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building, structure, or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.

OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.

PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way including any structures thereon.

STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

(L) Adoption of 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as the 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design, as published by the Department of Justice and adopted as a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697, is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein.

(1) Adoption of Amendment 1 to 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as Amendment 1 to 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design and declared a public record by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear by Resolution 15-1697, is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully and completely set forth herein amending the 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

AMENDMENT 1 TO 2010 ADA STANDARDS FOR ACCESSIBLE DESIGN

The 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design, as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear, is hereby amended as follows:

The following Chapter Titled General Administrative Provisions is hereby added as follows:

Chapter 1

GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

101. Purpose. This General Administrative Chapter 1 contains administrative provisions applicable to the enforcement of the Title II regulations at 28 CFR 35.151 (2010 Standards for State and Local Government Facilities); the Title III regulations at 28 CFR part 36, subpart (D) (2010 Standards for Public Accommodations and Commercial Facilities); and the 2004 ADAAG regulations applicable to both Title II and Title III Facilities at 36 CFR part 1191, appendices B and D.

101.1 Incorporation of International Building Code Administrative Provisions. The provisions of this code supplement the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority, and the following administrative provisions of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority are incorporated herein by this reference as if fully set forth herein:

Section 103 Department of Building Safety, including sections 103.1 through 103.3 and all subsections therein.

Section 104 Duties and Power of Building Official, including sections 104.1 through 104.11 and all subsections therein.

Section 105 Permits, including sections 105.1 through 105.7 and all subsections therein.

Section 107 Submittal Documents, including sections 107.1 through 107.5 and all subsections therein.

Section 109 Fees, including sections 109.1 through 109.6, and all subsections therein.

Section 110 Inspections, including sections 110.1 through 110.6 and all subsections therein.

Section 114 Violations, including sections 114.1 through 114.6 and all subsections therein.

Section 115 Stop Work Order, including sections 115.1 through 115.4 and all subsections therein.

Section 116 Unsafe Structures and Equipment, including section 116.1 through 116.5, including all subsections therein.

102 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and standards referenced in this code or between the provision of this code and any state, local and/or federal laws, rules, and regulations, including by way of example, the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies as adopted and amended by the governing authority and technical codes as adopted and amended by the governing authority, the most restrictive requirements apply unless otherwise provided by law or as otherwise expressly provided herein.

Exceptions:

1. Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of equipment or appliances as approved by the City of Goodyear, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.

2. Where there is a provision contained in another technical code as adopted and amended by the governing authority that is not addressed in this code then the provision of the technical code shall apply.

103 Appeals. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official to the board of appeals as provided in Section 113 Board of Appeals, Sections 113.1 through 113.5 and all subsections therein of the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

104 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for purposes of this Section General Administrative Provisions, have the meanings set forth herein. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this Section General Administrative Provisions, have the meaning shown in this chapter regardless of whether the words are italicized, capitalized, or otherwise designated in the text as being a defined term.

104.2 Definitions.

BUILDING OFFICIAL. The individual charged with the administration and enforcement of this code and all other technical codes, including the construction related provisions of the International Fire Code, governing the construction, installation, alteration, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected to or attached to such structures as adopted and amended by the governing authority, or that individual’s duly authorized representative(s). The technical codes referred to herein include by way of example, but not limitation, the International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, the International Plumbing Code, the International Fuel Gas Code, the International Mechanical Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, the NFPA 70 National Electric Code, the International Energy Conservation Code, the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, the ICC A117.1 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, the NFPA 99 Standard for Health Care Facilities, and the 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design as adopted and amended by the governing authority.

CONFLICT: A situation in which it is impossible to comply with provisions applicable to the same subject; a conflict does not exist when different provisions address the same subject and can be complied with without violating either provision.

EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above said lots.

GOVERNING AUTHORITY: The Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear.

IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building, structure, or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.

OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.

PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way including any structures thereon.

STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

(M) Adoption of Sound Transmission Control Near Luke Air Force Base. Effective July 1, 2015, that certain document known as "Sections 1215 through 1229 of Appendix Chapter 12 of the Uniform Building Code and Exhibits and Appendix Thereto Providing for Sound Transmission Control Near Luke Air Base, 1996, as published by Maricopa Association of Governments" and declared a public record by Resolution 15-1697 is hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereto as if fully and completely set forth herein.

SOUND TRANSMISSION CONTROL

Adopted by MAG Building Codes Committee on April 17, 1996

Sound Transmission Control near Luke Air Force Base

SECTION 1215. DEFINITIONS

In this ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires:

"ASTM (American Society for Testing and Materials)" means an organization which develops and publishes recommended practices and standards for a broad range of testing and material properties issues.

"A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL" means a quantity, in decibels, read from a standard sound level meter which discriminates against the lower frequencies to which the ear is less sensitive. The A-weighted scale attempts to approximate the auditory sensitivity of the human ear.

"DAY-NIGHT AVERAGE SOUND LEVEL (DNL)" means the A-weighted equivalent continuous sound exposure for a 24 hour period with a 10 dB adjustment added to sound levels occurring during nighttime hours (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.).

"INTERIOR NOISE LEVEL" means the sound level of noise in any habitable room with windows and doors closed.

"NOISE CONTOURS" mean lines which connect points subject to equal noise levels expressed in terms of average daily noise over a 24-hour period.

"R-VALUE" means insulation properties of an assembly. Insulation properties are further defined as the ability to reduce the factor of heat transmission or loss.

"SOUND TRANSMISSION CLASS (STC)" means a single-number rating for describing sound transmission loss of a wall, roof, floor, window, door, partition or other individual building components or assemblies.

SECTION 1217. APPLICATION TO NEW BUILDINGS

The criteria of this ordinance establish the minimum requirements for acoustic design of the exterior envelope of buildings and for through-the-wall ventilation (HVAC) units and their parts. These requirements shall apply to all new buildings and alterations for first occupancy after October 1, 1996 that are located on property on which the average sound level is sixty-five decibels or greater. This noise level is defined by the noise contours for Luke Air Force Base prepared as a part of the 1988 Maricopa Association of Governments Westside Joint Land Use Study (see Exhibit 1). The criteria of this ordinance do not apply to ancillary buildings used in agricultural land use.

SECTION 1219. APPLICATION TO EXISTING BUILDINGS

A. Additions may be made to existing buildings without making the entire building comply with all the requirements of this ordinance for new construction.

B. If the gross floor area of a building is expanded by less than fifty per cent, the requirements of this section apply only to the area of expansion. If the gross floor area of a non-residential building is expanded by fifty percent or more, the requirements of this section apply to the entire building.

C. Any change in occupancy or use of a building shall not be permitted unless the building or portion of the building complies with this ordinance.

SECTION 1221. PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS

The plans and specifications shall show in sufficient detail all pertinent data and features of the building and the equipment and systems, as herein governed, including, but not limited to: exterior envelope component materials; STC ratings of applicable component assemblies; R-values of applicable insulation materials; size and type of apparatus and equipment; equipment and system controls and other pertinent data to indicate conformance with the requirements herein.

SECTION 1223. ALTERNATE MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION

A. The provisions of this ordinance are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this ordinance, provided any alternative has been approved and its use authorized by the building official.

B. The building official may approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the provisions of this ordinance and that the material or method of construction is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this ordinance in noise level reduction.

C. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted by a licensed architect or engineer to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding the use of alternative materials and methods. The details of any action granting approval of an alternate shall be recorded and entered in the files of the county, city or town.

SECTION 1225. BUILDING REQUIREMENTS FOR A NOISE LEVEL REDUCTION OF 25 dB

Compliance with Section 1231 through Section 1239 in Appendix A shall be deemed to meet requirements for a minimum noise level reduction (NLR) of 25 decibels. This noise level reduction is required within the 65-70 DNL noise contours as depicted in Exhibit 1.

SECTION 1227. BUILDING REQUIREMENTS FOR A NOISE LEVEL REDUCTION OF 30 dB

Compliance with Section 1241 through Section 1249 in Appendix A shall be deemed to meet requirements for a minimum noise level reduction (NLR) of 30 decibels. This noise level reduction is required within the 70-75 DNL noise contours as depicted in Exhibit 1.

SECTION 1229. BUILDING REQUIREMENTS FOR A NOISE LEVEL REDUCTION OF 35 dB

Compliance with Section 1251 through Section 1259 in Appendix A shall be deemed to meet requirements for a minimum noise level reduction (NLR) of 35 decibels. This noise level reduction is required within the 75-80 DNL noise contours as depicted in Exhibit 1.

APPENDIX A

SOUND ATTENUATION STANDARDS

Adopted by MAG Building Codes Committee on April 17, 1996

	 	25db Reduction (Required Within 65-70 DLN Noise Contours in Exhibit 1).	30db Reduction (Required within 70-75 DNL Noise Contour in Exhibit 1).	35db Reduction (Required within 75-80 DNL Noise Contour in Exhibit 1).

	General	Section 1231 a. Brick veneer, masonry blocks, or stucco exterior walls shall be constructed airtight. All joints shall be grouted or caulked airtight.	Section 1241 a. Brick veneer, masonry blocks, or stucco exterior walls shall be constructed airtight. All joints shall be grouted or caulked airtight.	Section 1251 a. Brick veneer, masonry blocks, or stucco exterior walls shall be constructed airtight. All joints shall be grouted or caulked airtight.

	 	b. At the penetration of exterior walls by pipes, ducts, or conduits, the space between the wall and pipes, ducts, or conduits shall be caulked or filled with mortar.	b. At the penetration of exterior walls by pipes, ducts, or conduits, the space between the wall and pipes, ducts, or conduits shall be caulked or filled with mortar	b. At the penetration of exterior walls by pipes, ducts, or conduits, the space between the wall and pipes, ducts, or conduits shall be caulked or filled with mortar.

	 	c. Window and/or through-the-wall ventilation units (HVAC) shall not be used.	c. Window and/or through-the-wall ventilation (HVAC) units shall not be used.	c. Window and/or through-the-wall ventilation units shall not be used.

	 	d. Through-the wall/door mail boxes shall not be used.	d. Through-the wall/door mail boxes shall not be used.	d. Through-the wall/door mail boxes shall not be used.

	 	e. All sleeping spaces shall be provided with a sound-absorbing ceiling system and carpeted floors.	e. All sleeping spaces shall be provided with a sound-absorbing ceiling system and a carpeted floor.	e. All sleeping spaces shall be provided with a sound-absorbing ceiling system and a carpeted floor.

	 	 	f. Operational vented fireplaces shall not be used.	f. Operational vented fireplaces shall not be used.

	 	 	 	g. No glass or plastic skylight shall be used.

	Exterior Walls	Section 1233 a. Exterior walls, other than as described in this section, shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC 39;	Section 1243 a. Exterior walls, other than as described in this section, shall have laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC 44;	Section 1253 a. Exterior walls, other than as described in this section shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC 49;

	 	b. Masonry walls having a weight of at least 25 pounds per square foot do not require a furred (stud) interior wall. At least one surface of concrete block walls shall be plastered or painted with heavy "bridging" paint.	b. Masonry walls having a weight of at least 40 pounds per square foot do not require a furred (stud) interior wall. At least one surface of concrete block walls shall be plastered or painted with heavy "bridging" paint.	b. Masonry walls having a weight of at least 75 pounds per square foot do not require a furred (stud) interior wall. At least one surface of concrete block walls shall be plastered or painted with heavy "bridging" paint.

	 	c. Stud walls shall be at least 4 inches in nominal depth and shall be finished on the outside with solid sheathing under an approved exterior wall finish: siding-on-sheathing, stucco or brick veneer.	c. Stud walls shall be at least 4 inches in nominal depth and shall be finished on the outside with solid sheathing under an approved exterior wall finish: siding on sheathing, stucco or brick veneer.	c. Stud walls shall be at least 4 inches in nominal depth and shall be finished on the outside with solid sheathing under an approved exterior wall finish: siding-on-sheathing, stucco, or brick veneer.

	 	1. Interior surface of the exterior walls shall be of gypsum board or plaster at least 1/2 inch thick, installed on the studs.	1. Interior surface of the exterior walls shall be of gypsum board or plaster at least 1/2 inch thick, installed on the studs. The gypsum board or plaster may be fastened rigidly to the studs if the exterior is brick veneer or stucco. If the exterior is siding-on-sheathing, the interior gypsum board or plaster must be fastened resiliently to the studs.	1. Interior surface of the exterior walls shall be of gypsum board or plaster at least 5/8 inch thick installed on the studs. The gypsum board or plaster may be fastened rigidly to the studs if the exterior is brick veneer or stucco. If the exterior is siding on sheathing, the interior gypsum board or plaster must be fastened resiliently to the studs or double thickness must be used.

	 	2. Continuous composition board, plywood or gypsum board sheathing at least 1/2 inch thick shall cover the exterior side of the wall studs behind wood or metal siding. Asphaltic or wood shake shingles are acceptable in lieu of siding.	2. Continuous composition board, plywood, or gypsum board sheathing at least 3/4 inch thick shall cover the exterior side of the wall studs behind wood, or metal siding. The sheathing and facing shall weigh at least 4 pounds per square foot	2. Continuous composition board, plywood, or gypsum board sheathing at least 1 inch thick shall cover the exterior side of the wall studs. The sheathing and facing shall weigh at least 4 pounds per square foot.

	 	3. Sheathing panels shall be butted tightly and covered on the exterior with overlapping building paper. The top and bottom edges of the sheathing shall be sealed.	3. Sheathing panels shall be butted tightly and covered on the exterior with overlapping building paper. The top and bottom edges of the sheathing shall be sealed.	3. Sheathing panels shall be butted tightly and covered on the exterior with overlapping building paper. The top and bottom edges of the sheathing shall be sealed.

	 	4. Insulation material at least R-11 shall be installed continuously throughout the cavity space behind the exterior sheathing and between wall studs. Insulation shall be glass fiber or mineral wool.	4. Insulation material at least R-15 shall be installed continuously throughout the cavity space behind the exterior sheathing and between wall studs. Insulation shall be glass fiber or mineral wool.	4. Insulation material at least R-19 shall be installed continuously throughout the cavity space behind the exterior sheathing and between wall studs. Insulation shall be glass fiber or mineral wool.

	Exterior Windows	Section 1234 a. Windows other than as described in this section shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-28;	Section 1244 a. Windows other than as described in this section shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-33;	Section 1254 a. Windows other than as described in this section shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-38;

	 	b. Glass shall be at least 3/16 inch thick, double glazed.	b. Windows shall be double glazed with panes at least 3/16 inch thick. Panes of glass shall be separated by a minimum 1/2 inch airspace.	b. Glass of double glazed windows shall be at least 3/16 inch thick. Panes of glass shall be separated by a minimum 1/2 inch airspace and shall not be equal in thickness.

	 	c. All operable windows shall be weatherstripped and airtight when closed so as to conform to an air infiltration test not to exceed 0.5 cubic foot per minute per foot of crack length in accordance with ASTM E-283-65-T.	c. Double-glazed windows shall employ fixed sash or efficiently weatherstripped, operable sash. The sash shall be rigid and weatherstripped with material that is compressed airtight when the window is closed so as to conform to an infiltration test not to exceed 0.5 cubic foot per minute per foot of crack length in accordance with ASTM E-283-65-T.	c. Double-glazed windows shall employ fixed sash or efficiently weatherstripped, operable sash. The sash shall be rigid and weatherstripped with material that is compressed airtight when the window is closed so as to conform to an infiltration test not to exceed 0.5 cubic foot per minute per foot of crack length in accordance with ASTM E-283-65-T.

	 	d. Glass of fixed sash windows shall be sealed in an airtight manner with a nonhardening sealant or a soft elastomer gasket or glazing tape.	d. Glass of fixed sash windows shall be sealed in an airtight manner with a nonhardening sealant or a soft elastomer gasket or gasket tape.	d. Glass of windows shall be sealed in an airtight manner with nonhardening sealant or a soft elastomer gasket or glazing tape.

	 	e. The perimeter of window frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior wall construction with a sealant conforming to one of the following Federal specifications: TT-S-00227, TT-S-00230 or TT-S-00153.	e. The perimeter of window frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior wall construction with a sealant conforming to one of the following Federal specifications: TT-S-0027, TT-S-00230 or TT-S-00153.	e. The perimeter of window frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior wall construction with a sealant conforming to one of the following Federal specifications: TT-S-00227, TT-S-00230 or TT-S-00153.

	 	f. The total area of glass in both windows and doors in sleeping spaces shall not exceed 20% of the floor area.	f. The total area of glass of both windows and exterior doors in sleeping spaces shall not exceed 20% of the floor area.	f. The total area of glass of both windows and exterior doors in sleeping spaces shall not exceed 20% of the floor area.

	Exterior Doors	Section 1235 a. Doors other than as described in this section shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-28.	Section 1245 a. Doors other than as described in this section shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-33;	Section 1255 a. Doors other than as described in this section shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC 38;

	 	b. All exterior side-hinged doors shall be solid-core wood or insulated hollow metal at least 1-3/4 inches thick and shall be fully weatherstripped.	b. Double door construction is required for all door openings to the exterior. Openings fitted with side-hinged doors shall have one solid core wood or insulated hollow metal door at least 1-3/4 inches thick separated by an airspace of at least 4 inches from another door, which can be a storm door. Both doors shall be tightly fitted and weatherstripped.	b. Double door construction is required for all door openings to the exterior. The doors shall be side-hinged and shall be solid core wood or insulated hollow metal door at least 1-3/4 inches thick, separated by a vestibule or enclosed porch at least 3 feet in length. Both doors shall be tightly fitted and weatherstripped.

	 	c. Exterior sliding doors shall be weatherstripped with an efficient airtight gasket system with performance as specified in Section 1234 (c). The glass in the sliding doors shall be at least 3/16 inch thick.	c. The glass of double glazed sliding doors shall be separated by a minimum 1/2 inch airspace. Each sliding frame shall be provided with an efficiently airtight weatherstripping material as specified in Section 1244 (c).	c. The glass of double glazed sliding doors shall be separated by a minimum 1/2 inch airspace. Each sliding frame shall be provided with an efficiently airtight weatherstripping material as specified in Section 1254 (c).

	 	d. Glass in doors shall be sealed in an airtight nonhardening sealant or in a soft elastomer gasket or glazing tape.	d. Glass in all doors shall be at least 3/16 inch thick. Glass in double sliding doors shall not be equal in thickness.	d. Glass of all doors shall be at least 3/16 inch thick. Glass in double sliding doors shall not be equal in thickness.

	 	e. The perimeter of door frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior wall construction (framing) as described in Section 1234 (e).	e. The perimeter of door frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior wall construction (framing) as indicated in Section 1244 (e).	e. The perimeter of door frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior wall construction (framing) as indicated in Section 1254 (e).

	 	 	f. Glass in doors shall be sealed in an airtight nonhardening sealant or in a soft elastomer gasket or glazing tape.	f. Glass in doors shall be sealed in an airtight nonhardening sealant or in a soft elastomer gasket or glazing tape.

	Roofs	Section 1236 a. Combined roof and ceiling construction other than described in this section and Section 1237 shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-39;	Section 1246 a. Combined roof and ceiling construction other than described in this section and Section 1247 shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-44;	Section 1256 a. Combined roof and ceiling construction other than described in this section and Section 1257 shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-49;

	 	b. With an attic or rafter space at least 6 inches deep, and with a ceiling below, the roof shall consist of 1/2 inch composition board, plywood or gypsum board sheathing topped by roofing as required.	b. With an attic or rafter space at least 6 inches deep, and with a ceiling below, the roof shall consist of 3/4 inch closely butted composition board, plywood or gypsum board sheathing topped by roofing as required.	b. With an attic or rafter space at least 6 inches deep, and with a ceiling below, the roof shall consist of 1 inch composition board, plywood or gypsum board sheathing topped by roofing as required.

	 	c. Open beam roof construction shall follow the energy insulation standard method for batt insulation.	c. Open beam roof construction shall follow the energy insulation standard method for batt insulation, except use 1 inch plywood decking with shakes or other suitable roofing material.	c. Open beam roof construction shall follow the energy insulation standard method for batt insulation, except use 1inch plywood decking with concrete or clay tiles as roofing material.

	 	d. If the underside of the roof is exposed, or if the attic or rafter spacing is less than 6 inches, the roof construction shall have a surface weight of at least 6 pounds per square foot. Rafters, joists, or other framing may not be included in the surface weight calculation	d. If the underside of the roof is exposed, or if the attic or rafter spacing is less than 6 inches, the roof construction shall have a surface weight of at least 9 pounds per square foot. Rafters, joists or other framing may not be included in the surface weight calculations.	d. If the underside of the roof is exposed, or if the attic or rafter spacing is less than 6 inches, the roof construction shall have a surface weight of 9 pounds per square foot. Rafters, joists or other framing may not be included in the surface weight calculation.

	 	e. Window or dome skylights shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-28.	e. Window or dome skylights shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC-33.	 

	Ceiling	Section 1237 a. Gypsum board or plaster ceilings at least 1/2 inch thick shall be provided where required by Section 1236 (b). Ceilings shall be substantially airtight with a minimum of penetrations.	Section 1247 a. Gypsum board or plaster ceilings at least 5/8 inch thick shall be provided where required by Section 1246 (b), above. Ceilings shall be substantially airtight with a minimum of penetrations.	Section 1257 a. Gypsum board or plaster ceilings at least 5/8 inch thick shall be provided where required by Section 1256, above. Ceilings shall be substantially airtight with a minimum of penetrations. The ceiling panels shall be mounted on resilient clips or channels.

	 	b. Glass fiber or mineral wool insulation at least R-19 shall be provided above the ceiling between joists.	b. Glass fiber or mineral wool insulation at least R -25 shall be provided above the ceiling between joists.	b. Glass fiber or mineral wool insulation at least R-30 shall be provided above the ceiling between joists.

	Floors	Section 1238 Openings to any crawl spaces below the floor of the lowest occupied rooms shall not exceed 2% of the floor area of the occupied rooms.	Section 1248 The floor of the lowest occupied rooms shall be slab on fill, below grade, or over a fully enclosed basement or crawl space. All door and window openings in the fully enclosed basement shall be tightly fitted. Crawl space ventilation shall comply with section 1238.	Section 1258 a. The floor of the lowest occupied rooms shall be slab on fill or below grade.

	Ventilation	Section 1239 a. A ventilation system shall be installed that will provide the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements for various uses in occupied rooms without the need to open any windows, doors or other openings to the exterior. The inlet and discharge openings shall be fitted with sheet metal transfer ducts of at least 20 gauge steel, which shall be lined with 1 inch thick coated glass fiber, and shall be at least 5 feet long with one 90 degree bend.	Section 1249 a. A mechanical ventilation system shall be installed that will provide the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements for various uses in occupied rooms without the need to open any windows, doors or other openings to the exterior. The inlet and discharge openings shall be fitted with sheet metal transfer ducts of at least 20 gauge steel, which shall be lined with 1 inch thick coated glass fiber, and shall be at least 5 feet long with one 90 degree bend.	Section 1259 a. A mechanical ventilation system shall be installed that will provide the minimum air circulation and fresh air supply requirements for various uses in occupied rooms without the need to open any windows, doors or other openings to the exterior. The inlet and discharge openings shall be fitted with sheet metal transfer ducts of at least 20 gauge steel, which shall be lined with 1 inch thick coated glass fiber, and shall be at least 10 feet long with one 90 degree bend.

	 	b. Gravity vent openings in attics shall not exceed code minimum in number and size, as practical.	b. Gravity vent openings in attics shall not exceed code minimum in number and size, as practical. The openings shall be fitted with transfer ducts at least 3 feet in length containing internal 1 inch thick coated fiberglass sound-absorbing duct lining. Each duct shall have a lined 90 degree bend in the duct such that there is no direct line-of-sight from the exterior through the duct into the attic.	b. Gravity vent openings in attics shall be as close to code minimum in number and size, as practical. The openings shall be fitted with transfer ducts at least 6 feet in length containing internal 1 inch thick coated fiberglass sound-absorbing duct lining. Each duct shall have a lined 90 degree bend in the duct such that there is no direct line-of-sight from the exterior through the duct into the attic.

	 	c. If a fan is used for forced ventilation, the attic inlet and discharge openings shall be fitted with sheet metal transfer ducts of at least 20 gauge steel, which shall be lined with coated glass fiber 1 inch thick, and shall be at least 5 ft long with one 90 degree bend.	c. If a fan is used for forced ventilation, the attic inlet and discharge openings shall be fitted with sheet metal transfer ducts of at least 20 gauge steel, which shall be lined with coated glass fiber 1 inch thick, and shall be at least 5 ft long with one 90 degree bend.	c. If a fan is used for forced ventilation, the attic inlet and discharge openings shall be fitted with sheet metal transfer ducts of at least 20 gauge steel, which shall be lined with 1 inch thick coated glass fiber, and shall be at least 10 ft long with one 90 degree bend.

	 	d. All other vent ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors, shall contain at least a 5-foot length of internal sound-absorbing duct lining. Each duct shall be provided with a bend in the duct such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct from the venting cross-section to the room- opening cross-section. Duct lining shall be coated glass fiber duct liner at least 1 inch thick approved and suitable for the intended use.	d. All other vent ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors, shall contain at least a 10-foot length of internal sound-absorbing duct lining. Each duct shall be provided with a lined 90 degree bend in the duct such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct from the venting cross-section to the room opening cross-section. Duct lining shall be coated glass fiber duct liner at least 1 inch thick approved and suitable for intended use.	d. All other vent ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors, shall contain at least a 10-foot length of internal sound-absorbing duct lining. Each duct shall be provided with a lined 90 degree bend in the duct such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct from the venting cross-section to the room-opening cross-section. Duct lining shall be coated glass fiber duct liner at least 1 inch thick approved and suitable for intended use.

	 	e. Domestic range exhaust ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors shall contain a baffle plate across the exterior termination which allows proper ventilation. The dimensions of the baffle plate should extend at least one diameter beyond the line of sight into the vent duct. The baffle plate shall be of the same material and thickness as the vent duct material.	e. Domestic range exhaust ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors shall contain a self-closing baffle plate across the exterior termination which allows proper ventilation. Each duct shall be provided with a bend in the duct such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct from the venting cross-section to the room-opening cross-section. The dimensions of the baffle plate should extend at least one diameter beyond the line of sight into the vent duct. The baffle plate shall be made of the same material and thickness as the vent duct material.	e. Domestic range exhaust ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors shall contain a self- closing baffle plate across the exterior termination which allows proper ventilation. The dimensions of the baffle plate should extend at least one diameter beyond the line of sight into the vent duct. The baffle plate shall be of the same material and thickness as the vent duct material. The duct shall be offset such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct.

	 	f. Fireplaces shall be provided with well fitted dampers as required for the type of fuel being used and tightly fitted glass doors.	f. Building heating units with flues or combustion air vents shall be located in a closet or room closed off from the occupied space by doors.	f. Building heating units with flues or combination air vents shall be located in a closet or room closed off from the occupied space by doors.

	 	 	g. Doors between occupied space and mechanical equipment areas shall be solid core wood or 20 gauge insulated steel hollow metal at least l-3/4 inch thick and shall be fully weather stripped.	g. Doors between occupied space and mechanical equipment areas shall be solid core wood or 20 gauge insulated hollow metal at least 1-3/4 inch thick and shall be fully weather stripped.

(Prior Code, § 9-1-1) (Am. Ord. 99-637, passed 1-11-1999; Am. Ord. 2001-774, passed 11-26-2001; Am. Ord. 04-887, passed 3-8-2004; Am. Ord. 04-911, passed 9-13-2004; Am. Ord. 07-1071, passed 5-14-2007; Am. Ord. 07-1086, passed 9-25-2007; Am. Ord. 09-1171, passed 3-23-09; Am. Ord. 15-1319, passed 5-18-2015)


9-1-2 CONFORMANCE TO ZONING ORDINANCE.

Whenever a building permit is issued and a building inspection performed, such building must conform to the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the City of Goodyear in addition to the provisions of this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 9-1-2)


9-1-3 PENALTIES.

(A) Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association, whether principal, owner, agent, tenant or otherwise found guilty of violating any of the provisions of Article 9-1 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not less than $50 and not greater than $2,500 for an individual or not less than $400 and not greater than $20,000 for an Enterprise, or imprisonment not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. The term ENTERPRISE as used in this subsection shall mean any corporation, partnership, association, labor union, or other entity or any group of associated persons although not a legal entity.

(B) Notwithstanding the provisions in subsection (A) of this section providing for the enforcement of violations of provisions of Article 9-1 as misdemeanors, violation of any provisions of Article 9-1 are declared to be civil code violations that may be adjudicated and enforced by the city court pursuant to Chapter 18 of the Goodyear City Code, as an additional enforcement alternative to other remedies provided in this section. Use of this civil code enforcement alternative is not mandatory and shall be at the discretion of the city official undertaking enforcement action on an alleged violation of any provision of Article 9-1.

(C) Upon a finding of responsible to a civil violation of any provision of Article 9-1, the court shall impose a civil sanction not less than $50 and not greater than $2,500 for an individual and not less than $400 and not greater than $20,000 for an Enterprise. The term ENTERPRISE as used in this subsection shall mean any corporation, partnership, association, labor union, or other entity or any group of associated persons although not a legal entity. 

(Ord. 15-1319, passed 5-18-2015) 


9-1-4 EACH DAY A SEPARATE VIOLATION.

(A) Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 

(Ord. 15-1319, passed 5-18-2015)


9-1-5 VIOLATIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE.

(A) Violations of the provisions of Article 9-1 are in addition to any other violation of applicable Goodyear ordinance or code provision and in no way limits the penalties, actions, or abatement procedures which may be taken by the City of Goodyear for any violation of the provisions of Article 9-1 which is also a violation of any other ordinance or code provision of the City of Goodyear, or statutes of the State of Arizona. 

(Ord. 15-1319, passed 5-18-2015)


9-1-6 INJUNCTIONS.

(A) If any building or structure is constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of the provisions of Article 9-1, the City, or any property owner or tenant in such building or structure, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings:

(1) To prevent the unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use;

(2) To prevent the occupancy of the building structure or land;

(3) To prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the premises; or

(4) To restrain, correct or abate the violation.

(B) When any such action is instituted by a property owner or tenant, notice of such action shall be served upon the City at the time suit is begun, by serving a copy of the complaint on the City Clerk.

(C) In any such action or proceeding, the court with jurisdiction thereof has the power and in its discretion may issue a restraining order, or a preliminary injunction, as well as a permanent injunction, upon such terms and under such conditions as will do justice and enforce the purpose of Article 9-1.

(Ord. 15-1319, passed 5-18-2015) 




ARTICLE 9-2 Fireplace Restrictions

Section

9-2-1    Purpose

9-2-2    Definitions

9-2-3    Installation restrictions

9-2-4    Fireplace or woodstove alterations prohibited

9-2-5    Permits required


9-2-1 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this article is to regulate the construction and installation of fireplaces, woodstoves or other solid-fuel burning devices to reduce the amount of air pollution caused by particulate matter and carbon monoxide.

(Prior Code, § 9-2-1) (Ord. 98-619, passed 8-24-1998)


9-2-2 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

FIREPLACE. A built in-place masonry hearth and fire chamber or a factory-built appliance, designed to burn solid fuel or to accommodate gas or electric log insert or similar device, and which is intended for occasional recreational or aesthetic use, not for cooking, heating or industrial processes.

SOLID FUEL. Includes, but is not limited to, wood, coal or other nongaseous or nonliquid fuels, including those fuels defined by the Maricopa County Air Pollution Control Officer as inappropriate fuel to burn in residential woodburning devices.

WOODSTOVE. A solid-fuel burning heating appliance, including a pellet stove, which is either freestanding or designed to be inserted into a fireplace.

(Prior Code, § 9-2-2) (Ord. 98-619, passed 8-24-1998)


9-2-3 INSTALLATION RESTRICTIONS.

(A) On or after December 31, 1998, no person, firm or corporation shall construct or install a fireplace or a woodstove, and the Building Official shall not approve or issue a permit to construct or install a fireplace or a woodstove, unless the fireplace or woodstove complies with one of the following:

(1) A fireplace which has a permanently installed non-removable gas or electric log insert;

(2) A fireplace, woodstove or other solid-fuel burning appliance which has been certified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency as conforming to 40 C.F.R. 60, subpart AAA as in effect on July 1, 1990.

(3) A fireplace, woodstove or other solid-fuel burning appliance which has been tested, approved and listed by a nationally recognized testing agency to meet performance standards equivalent to those adopted by 40 C.F.R. 60, subpart AAA as in effect on July 1, 1990.

(4) A fireplace, woodstove or other solid-fuel burning appliance which has been determined by the Maricopa County Air Pollution Control Officer to meet performance standards equivalent to those adopted by 40 C.F.R. 60, subpart AAA as in effect on July 1, 1990.

(5) A fireplace which has a permanently installed woodstove insert which complies with subsections (2), (3) or (4) of this section.

(B) The following installations are not intended to be regulated by this article and are not prohibited by this article:

(1) Furnaces, boilers, incinerators, kilns and other similar space heating or industrial process equipment;

(2) Cookstoves, barbecue grills and similar appliances designed primarily for cooking;

(3) Firepits, barbecue grills and other outdoor fireplaces.

(Prior Code, § 9-2-3) (Ord. 98-619, passed 8-24-1998)


9-2-4 FIREPLACE OR WOODSTOVE ALTERATIONS PROHIBITED.

(A) On or after December 31, 1998, no person, firm or corporation shall alter or remove a gas or electric log insert or a woodstove insert from a fireplace for purposes of converting the fireplace to directly burn wood or other solid fuel.

(B) On or after December 31, 1998, no person, firm or corporation shall alter a fireplace, woodstove or other solid-fuel burning appliances in any manner that would void its certification or operational compliance with the provisions of this article.

(Prior Code, § 9-2-4) (Ord. 98-619, passed 8-24-1998)


9-2-5 PERMITS REQUIRED.

In addition to the provisions and restrictions of this article, construction, installation or alteration of all fireplaces, woodstoves and other gas, electric or solid-fuel burning appliances and equipment shall be done in compliance with the provisions of the City of Goodyear Building Code, as amended from time to time, and shall be subject to the permits and inspections required by the Building Code.

(Prior Code, § 9-2-5) (Ord. 98-619, passed 8-24-1998)


ARTICLE 9-3 Reserved

(Article repealed by Ord. 96-545, passed 2-13-1996)


ARTICLE 9-4 RESERVED

(Article repealed by Ord. 96-545, passed 2-13-1996)


ARTICLE 9-5 Penalties

Section

9-5-1    Penalties


9-5-1 PENALTIES.

(A) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this code or standards hereby adopted or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city court or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $2,500. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; when not otherwise specified, each ten consecutive days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.

(B) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions, enforcement by injunction or by civil code enforcement pursuant to Chapter 18 of the Goodyear City Code.

(Prior Code, Art. 9-5) (Am. Ord. 99-637, passed 1-11-1999; Am. Ord. 2001-774, passed 11-26-2001; Am. Ord. 02-835, passed 1-6-2003; Am. Ord. 04-887, passed 3-8-2004)


ARTICLE 9-6 MAG Standard Specifications and Uniform Details for Public Works Construction

Section

9-6-1    MAG standard specifications and uniform details for public works construction


9-6-1 MAG STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND UNIFORM DETAILS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION.

Those certain specifications entitled MAG Standard Specifications and Uniform Details for Public Works Construction, sponsored and distributed by the Maricopa Association of Governments (MAG) are adopted by the City of Goodyear and made part of this chapter the same as though said specifications were specifically set forth in full herein; at least three copies of said specifications shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and kept available for public use and inspection.

(Prior Code, Art. 9-6)


ARTICLE 9-7 Building Official

Section

9-7-1    Building Official


9-7-1 BUILDING OFFICIAL.

The Building Official and Administrative Authority, as such may be referenced in any section of this chapter for all matters pertaining to any building, plumbing, electrical or any other inspections, shall be vested in the office of the City Manager or such other person the Manager may appoint subject to Council approval.

(Prior Code, Art. 9-7)


ARTICLE 9-8 Development Fees

Section

9-8-1    Title

9-8-2    Purpose and intent

9-8-3    Definitions

9-8-4    Authority

9-8-5    Adoption or modification of development fees; land use assumptions and infrastructure improvements plans

9-8-6    Service areas

9-8-7    Development fees

9-8-8    Application of new and increased fees

9-8-9    Calculation and collection of development fees

9-8-10    Credits

9-8-11    Development fee funds and uses of development fees

9-8-12    Refunds

9-8-13    Reports

9-8-14    General provisions

9-8-15    Appeals

9-8-16    Conflict

Prior legislation: Ords. 95-530, 98-599, 98-600, 98-625, 98-626, 98-627, 98-629, 98-630, 01-775, 02-805, 02-806, 02-807, 02-808, 02-809, 02-810, 02-811, 02-813, 02-814, 02-815, 02-816, 02-817, 02-818, 02-819, 03-881, 06-1037, 06-1038, 06-1039, 06-1040, 06-1041, 06-1042, 06-1043, 06-1044, 06-1045, 06-1046, 06-1047, 06-1048, 06-1049, 06-1050, 06-1051, 06-1052, 06-985, 06-986, 06-987, 06-988, 06-989, 06-990, 06-991, 06-992, 06-993, 06-994, 08-1104, 08-1123, 08-1124, 08-1125, 08-1126, 08-1127, 08-1128, 08-1129, 08-1130, 08-1131, 08-1132, 08-1133, 08-1134, 08-1135, 09-1160, 09-1161, 09-1162, 09-1163, 09-1164, 09-1165, 09-1166, 09-1167, 09-1168, 09-1169, 09-1170, 11-1250 and 14-1293.


9-8-1 TITLE.

This article shall be known as the Development Fee Ordinance of the City of Goodyear and may be cited as such.

(Ord. 19-1416, passed 1-14-2019)


9-8-2 PURPOSE AND INTENT.

The purposes and intent of this article are:

(A) To establish uniform procedures for the imposition, calculation, collection, expenditure and administration of development fees imposed on new development that are consistent with the requirements of Arizona Revised Statutes ("A.R.S.") § 9-463.05 and all other applicable legal requirements; and

(B) To implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Goodyear General Plan by requiring new development to pay its proportionate share of the costs of public facilities that are associated with providing Necessary Public Services to new development.

(Ord. 19-1416, passed 1-14-2019)


9-8-3 DEFINITIONS.

The words or phrases used herein shall have the meaning prescribed in the current Goodyear City Code, except as otherwise indicated herein.

ADVISORY COMMITTEE: The committee established pursuant to Section 9-8-5(E).

APPLICANT: Any person who applies to the City for a Building Permit.

ARTICLE: Article 9-8 of Chapter 9 of the Goodyear City Code.

BUILDING PERMIT: Any permit issued that authorizes vertical construction, increases square footage, authorizes changes to land use, or provides for the addition of a residential or non-residential point of demand to a water or wastewater system. 

CAPITAL FACILITY: A Necessary Public Service or Facility Expansion that is provided and that is included in an adopted Infrastructure Improvements Plan and for which a development fee is assessed.

CATEGORY OF DEVELOPMENT: A specific type of development against which a development fee is calculated and assessed within a Service Area. The City assesses development fees against the following Categories of Development: Residential Single Unit; Residential 2+ Units; Commercial; Industrial; Institutional; and Office and Other Services.

CATEGORY OF NECESSARY PUBLIC SERVICES: A specific type of Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions for which a development fee is calculated and assessed within a Service Area.

CITY: The City of Goodyear, Arizona.

COMMERCIAL: Retail development involving the sale of goods or services to the public for use or consumption. By way of example, but not limited to, shopping centers, stores, supermarkets, pharmacies, hair salons, restaurants, bars, nightclubs, automobile dealerships, movie theaters, amusement arcades, and bowling alleys.

CREDIT: A reduction in an assessed development fee resulting from costs of eligible Capital Facilities provided by a Developer pursuant to Section 9-8-10.

CREDIT AGREEMENT: A written agreement between the City and a Developer in which Credits are allocated as provided in Section 9-8-10.

DEVELOPER: The individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other legal entity that provides a Capital Facility that is included in an adopted Infrastructure Improvements Plan and for which a development fee is assessed.

DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: A written agreement adopted by the Governing Body in accordance with the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-500.05.

DEVELOPMENT FEE: A fee adopted pursuant to this article and A.R.S. § 9-463.05.

DEVELOPMENT UNITS: Standardized unit of measurement that allocates Service Units among various Categories of Development.

DWELLING UNIT: A separate building or structure designed as a single dwelling unit for occupancy by one family for non-transient living and sleeping purposes and/or a separate unit within a building or structure consisting of multiple separate units that do not share dining or cooking facilities, each of which is intended for occupancy by one family for non-transient living and sleeping purposes. By way of example, each separate unit such as an apartment unit, a residential home, a townhome, a duplex unit, triplex unit, condominium unit, mobile home or mobile home space, travel trailer, or travel trailer space shall be considered a dwelling unit.

FACILITY EXPANSION: The expansion of the capacity of an existing capital facility that serves the same function as an otherwise new Necessary Public Service in order that the existing facility may serve new development. Facility expansion does not include the repair or maintenance, modernization or expansion of an existing facility to better serve existing development.

FEE REPORT: A written report prepared in accordance with this article and A.R.S. § 9-463.05, which among other things describes the methodology that was used for calculating development fees.

FINANCE DIRECTOR: Director of the City of Goodyear Finance Department or authorized designee.

GOVERNING BODY: The Mayor and City Council of the City of Goodyear, Maricopa County, Arizona.

GROSS FLOOR AREA ("GFA"): The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building or structure and all other areas with the property used to deliver the goods or services that are integral or ancillary to the delivery of goods or services provided by a business, such as restaurant and bar patios, car wash drying areas.

INDUSTRIAL: Establishments primarily engaged in the production, fabrication, assembly, processing, storage, or transportation of goods, utilities and communications. By way of example, Industrial includes manufacturing facilities; storage facilities, distribution warehouses, trucking companies, utility substations, power generation facilities, and telecommunication facilities.

INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS PLAN ("IIP"): A written plan that meets the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05 and this article that identifies each Necessary Public Service or Facility Expansion that is proposed to be the subject of a development fee, and which may be the City’s capital improvements plans.

INSTITUTIONAL: Places of religious worship; schools; universities; government buildings or facilities; fire stations; prisons; and group quarters that are ancillary to uses such as University dormitories.

LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS: A document or series of documents that meet the requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05 and this article that provides projections of land uses, densities, intensities and population for a Service Area over a period of at least 10 years pursuant to the City’s general plan.

NECESSARY PUBLIC SERVICES: Shall have the meaning prescribed in A.R.S. § 9-463.05(T)(7).

NORTH GOODYEAR: Includes the land within the boundaries of the City that is located North of the Gila River.

OFFICE AND OTHER SERVICES: Establishments providing: executive, management, administrative, professional or business services; personal services; healthcare services; transitory lodging; and non-transitory living facilities that share dining and cooking facilities. By way of example, Office and Other Services includes banks; business offices; hair salons; nail salons; boarding kennels; veterinarian clinics; urgent care facilities; hospitals; dialysis facilities; hotels; motels; time shares; assisted living facilities; and nursing homes.

QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL: A professional engineer, surveyor, financial analyst or planner providing services within the scope of the person’s license, education, or experience.

RESIDENTIAL – SINGLE UNIT: A single structure or building on an individual lot of record designed as a single unit for occupancy by one family for non-transient living and sleeping purposes. It includes detached residential units (both site-built and manufactured). It also includes single-family attached (i.e., townhouses) that share a common sidewall.

RESIDENTIAL 2+ UNITS: Multiple Dwelling Units, including detached and attached residential units, on an individual lot of record with each Dwelling Unit designed for occupancy by one family for non-transient living and sleeping purposes. It includes, by way of example, apartments, condominiums, duplexes.

SERVICE AREA: Any specified area within the boundaries of the City (1) within which development will be served by Necessary Public Services or Facility Expansions; and (2) within which either (a) a substantial nexus exists between the Necessary Public Services or Facility Expansions and the development being served or (b) in the case of a park facility larger than 30 acres, a direct benefit exists between the park facilities and the development to be served, each as prescribed in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan. Some or all of the Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions providing service to a Service Area may be physically located outside of that Service Area provided that the required Substantial Nexus or Direct Benefit is demonstrated to exist. The City has a number of different Service Areas depending upon the nature of the Necessary Public Services or Facility Expansions being provided.

SERVICE UNIT: A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated pursuant to generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a particular category of Necessary Public Services or Facility Expansions.

SOUTH GOODYEAR: Includes the land within the boundaries of the City that is located between the Gila River and Pecos Road.

(Ord. 19-1416, passed 1-14-2019)


9-8-4 AUTHORITY.

(A) Subject to the requirements of this article and A.R.S. § 9-463.05, the City may assess and collect development fees for costs of Necessary Public Services and Facility Expansions to support development, which costs may include the costs of: utility relocation; infrastructure; improvements; real property interests; engineering and architectural services; and financing; and for costs of professional services required for the preparation of all of the reports, plans, schedules required under this article and A.R.S. § 9-463.05 for the adoption of development fees.

(B) Development fees may be collected if any of the following occurs:

(1) The collection is made to pay for a Necessary Public Service or Facility Expansion that is identified in an Infrastructure Improvements Plan and the City plans to complete construction and to have the service available within the time period established in the Infrastructure Improvement Plan, but in no event longer than the time periods provided in A.R.S. § 9-463.05(H)(3); or

(2) The City reserves in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan adopted pursuant to the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05 or otherwise agrees to reserve capacity to serve future development; or 

(3) The City requires or agrees to allow the owner of a development to construct or finance the Necessary Public Service or Facility Expansion and any of the following apply:

(a) The costs incurred or money advanced are credited against or reimbursed from the development fees otherwise due from a development; or

(b) The municipality reimburses the owner for those costs from the development fees paid from all developments that will use those Necessary Public Services or Facility Expansions; or

(c) For those costs incurred the municipality allows the owner to assign the credits or reimbursement rights from a development to other developments for the same category of Necessary Public Services in the same Service Area.

(C) Unless expressly prohibited by federal or state law, adopted development fees shall be assessed against all new residential and non-residential development within a Service Area except that the City may distinguish between different categories of residential and non-residential development in assessing the cost of providing Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions to serve new development and in determining the amount of the development fee applicable to the Category of Development.

(D) Development fees assessed under this article shall comply with requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including the following:

(1) Development fees shall be calculated based on the costs of Necessary Public Services and Facilities Expansions identified in Infrastructure Improvement Plans adopted pursuant to the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05 and this article.

(a) The determination of the costs for Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions made necessary by new development shall be based on the same level of service provided to existing development in the Service Area.

(b) Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included in the costs for Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions only if the monies collected are used for the payment of the principal and interest on the portion of the bonds, notes or other obligations issued to finance construction of Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions identified in Infrastructure Improvements Plans.

(2) Development fees shall result in a beneficial use to new development.

(3) Development fees shall not exceed a proportionate share of the cost of Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions, based on Development Units, needed to provide services to new development.

(Ord. 19-1416, passed 1-14-2019)


9-8-5 ADOPTION OR MODIFICATION OF DEVELOPMENT FEES; LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS PLANS.

(A) The City shall comply with the requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05 for the adoption or modification of development fees assessed pursuant to this article, including the notice and public hearing requirements.

(1) Prior to the adoption or modification of development fees, the City shall adopt or update Land Use Assumptions and shall adopt or amend Infrastructure Improvements Plan for the Service Area that the new or modified development fees will be assessed.

(2) In calculating and imposing a development fee applicable to land in a Community Facilities District established under A.R.S. Title 48, Ch. 4, Art. 6, the City shall take into account all public infrastructure provided by the district and capital costs paid by the district for necessary public services and facilities and shall not assess a portion of the development fee otherwise calculated to be due based on the infrastructure or costs.

(B) The City shall comply with the requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05 for the adoption or update of Land Use Assumptions including notice and public hearing requirements.

(1) An ordinance, order, or resolution approving Land Use Assumptions cannot be adopted as an emergency measure.

(C) The City shall comply with the requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05 for the adoption or amendment of Infrastructure Improvement Plans, including notice and public hearing requirements.

(1) Infrastructure Improvement Plans shall be developed by Qualified Professionals using generally accepted engineering and planning practices.

(2) Infrastructure Improvement Plans shall include all of the information required in A.R.S. § 9-463.05 for each Necessary Public Service and Facility Expansion that is to be the subject of the development fee.

(3) The City may reserve capacity generated by a Necessary Public Service or Facility Expansion in an IIP or by Development Agreement.

(4) Infrastructure Improvement Plans adopted pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05 and this article may be amended without public hearing if the amendment meets the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05 for amending Infrastructure Improvements Plans without a public hearing. Such amendments shall comply with the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05 for amending Infrastructure Improvement Plans without a public hearing.

(5) An ordinance, order, or resolution approving Infrastructure Improvement Plans cannot be adopted as an emergency measure.

(D) Land Use Assumptions and Infrastructure Improvements Plans shall be updated at least every five years. The five year period begins on the date the Infrastructure Improvement Plans are adopted.

(1) If as of the date of the required review, the City Council determines that no changes to Land Use Assumptions, Infrastructure Improvements Plans or development fees are needed, the City may, as an alternative to undertaking an update, publish a public notice of its determinations on the City’s website. Such notice shall comply with the requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05.

(2) If a request is made for an update to Land Use Assumptions, Infrastructure Improvements Plans or development fees within the time frame specified in the notice provided pursuant to subsection (D)(1) of this section, the City Council shall determine whether to accept or reject the request; and if accepted, the requested update shall be processed pursuant to the requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05.

(E) At the request of the City Manager, the City Council may establish an Advisory Committee to act in an advisory capacity in the adoption or modification of development fees, Land Use Assumptions or Infrastructure Improvement Plans. The establishment, composition and responsibilities of such Advisory Committee shall comply with the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05.

(F) If the City requires as a condition of development approval the construction of an improvement of, contributions to, or dedication of any facilities that were not included in a previously adopted Infrastructure Improvements Plan and the new facilities will substitute for or otherwise reduce the need for similar other facilities in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan for which development is being assessed, the Infrastructure Improvements Plan shall be amended to include the facilities and to eliminate or modify the existing facilities and a credit shall be provided toward the payment of the development fee for the construction, improvement, contribution or dedication of the new facilities. The credits shall be issued consistent with the terms of this article.

(G) No ordinance, order or resolution approving a new or modified development fee shall be adopted as an emergency measure.

(H) A development fee assessed pursuant to this article shall not be effective until 75 days after its form adoption by the Council of the City of Goodyear.

(Ord. 19-1416, passed 1-14-2019)


9-8-6 SERVICE AREAS.

(A) The provisions of this article relating to the collection of development fees shall apply to all new development within the corporate limits of the City and within the established Service Areas as those may be amended from time to time.

(B) The following Service Areas for the assessment and collection of development fees are hereby established:

(1) Police: There is one Service Area for Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions for police services. It includes all of the land in North Goodyear and South Goodyear.

(2) Fire: There are two Service Areas for Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions for fire services. One includes all of the land in North Goodyear. The other includes all of the land in South Goodyear.

(3) Streets: There are two Service Areas for Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions for street services. One includes all of the land in North Goodyear. The other includes all of the land in South Goodyear.

(4) Parks and Recreation: There are two Service Areas for Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions for parks and recreation services. One includes all of the land in North Goodyear. The other includes all of the land in South Goodyear.

(5) Water: There are two Service Areas for Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions for water services. One includes all of the land in North Goodyear for which water services are provided by the City. The other includes the portion of South Goodyear that is located with the Master Planned Development known as Estrella, formerly known as Estrella Mountain Ranch and the property legally described in Exhibit G of that certain agreement known as the Northern Solution Water Facilities Agreement, recorded on March 2, 2012, in the Official Records of the Maricopa County Recorder at instrument number 20120179581.

(6) Wastewater: There are two Service Areas for Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions for Wastewater services. One includes all of the land in North Goodyear for which wastewater services are provided by the City. The other includes the portion of South Goodyear that is located within the Master Planned Development known as Estrella, formerly known as Estrella Mountain Ranch and the property legally described in Exhibit G of that certain agreement known as the Northern Solution Water Facilities Agreement, recorded on March 2, 2012, in the Official Records of the Maricopa County Recorder at instrument number 20120179581.

(C) The Owner of property located in South Goodyear that is not within the South Service Area for purposes of water and wastewater service shall be responsible for constructing, acquiring, or paying for the costs of constructing or acquiring resources and infrastructure improvements the City deems necessary for the City to provide applicable utility services to this area. The resources and infrastructure improvements required shall be consistent with applicable master utility plans and with the City’s needs for operational consistency and efficiencies. Should the resources and infrastructure improvements required hereunder exceed the needs of a specific development, the City may, pursuant to an approved development agreement, endeavor to: provide for the recovery of a portion of the costs of the resources and infrastructure improvements to the extent the capacity exceeds the needs of the development; or develop a mechanism that provides a temporary service solution and allows the Owner to make an in lieu contribution towards the costs of the future construction or acquisition of the needed resource and infrastructure improvements.

(D) Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the Owner of property located south of Pecos Road, which is outside all of the City’s adopted Service Areas for all City services, shall be responsible for constructing, acquiring, or paying for the costs of constructing or acquiring resource and infrastructure improvements the City deems necessary for the City to provide applicable utility services, streets, police, fire, and parks and recreation services to this area, and shall, if required as a condition of rezoning or development agreement, provide for the costs or a portion of the operational costs of such services until such time as there is sufficient development to cover the costs of providing such services. The resources and infrastructure improvements required shall be consistent with applicable master utility plans and with the City’s needs for operational consistency and efficiencies. Should the resource and infrastructure improvements required hereunder exceed the needs of a specific development, the City may, pursuant to an approved development agreement, endeavor to provide for the recovery of a portion of the costs of the resources and infrastructure improvements to the extent the capacity exceeds the needs of the development; or develop a mechanism that provides a temporary service solution and allows the Owner to make an in lieu contribution towards the costs of the future construction or acquisition of the needed resources and infrastructure improvements.

(Ord. 19-1416, passed 1-14-2019)


9-8-7 DEVELOPMENT FEES.

The development fees set forth below are hereby adopted for the following Categories of Necessary Public Services or Facility Expansions in the following Service Areas and, except as otherwise provided in Section 9-8-8, shall be charged for new development within the City:

(A) Police Development Fees. 

	 	 	Police Development Fees per Development Unit

	Category of Development	Development Unit	Service Area North Goodyear and South Goodyear

	Residential Single Unit	Per Dwelling Unit	$820

	Residential 2+ Units	Per Dwelling Unit	$616

	Industrial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$333

	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$429

	Institutional	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$859

	Office and Other Services	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$751

(B)    Fire Development Fees.

	 	 	Fire Development Fees per Development Unit

	Category of Development	Development Unit	Service Area North Goodyear	Service Area South Goodyear

	Residential Single Unit	Per Dwelling Unit	$911 	$971 

	Residential 2+ Units	Per Dwelling Unit	$682 	$728 

	Industrial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$362 	$408 

	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$467 	$526 

	Institutional	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$934 	$1,052 

	Office and Other Services	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$816 	$919 

(C)    Streets Development Fees.

	 	 	Streets Development Fees per Development Unit

	Category of Development	Development Unit	Service Area North Goodyear	Service Area South Goodyear

	Residential Single Unit	Per Dwelling Unit	$2,669	$3,330

	Residential 2+ Units	Per Dwelling Unit	$2,069	$2,582

	Industrial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$303	$378

	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$3,621	$4,517

	Institutional	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$2,247	$2,803

	Office and Other Services	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$1,698	$2,119

(D)    Parks and Recreation Development Fees.

	 	 	Parks and Recreation Development Fees per Development Unit

	Category of Development	Development Unit	Service Area North Goodyear	Service Area South Goodyear

	Residential Single Unit	Per Dwelling Unit	$1,375	$2,255

	Residential 2+ Units	Per Dwelling Unit	$1,030	$1,690

	Industrial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$23	$110

	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$29	$142

	Institutional	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$57	$284

	Office and Other Services	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$50	$247

(E)    Water Development Fees.

Water Development Fees – Per Development Unit (Meter)*  

	Meter Size (inches)	Service Area North Goodyear	Service Area South Goodyear

	0.75 displacement	$7,553	$7,843

	1 displacement	$12,613	$13,097

	1.5 displacement	$25,151	$26,117

	2 compound	$40,257	$41,803

	3 compound	$80,590	$83,684

	4 compound	$125,908	$130,742

	6 compound	$251,741	$261,407

	8 compound	$402,801	$418,267

*Water Development Fees are calculated by meter size using the American Water Works Association (AWWA) equivalent ratios.

(F) Wastewater Development Fees.

Wastewater Development Fees – Per Development Unit (Water Meter)*  

	Meter Size (inches)	Service Area Areas within North Goodyear  served by the City	Service Area South Goodyear as modified above

	0.75 displacement	$2,818	$2,538

	1 displacement	$4,706	$4,238

	1.5 displacement	$9,383	$8,451

	2 compound	$15,019	$13,527

	3 compound	$30,068	$27,080

	4 compound	$46,976	$42,308

	6 compound	$93,923	$84,591

	8 compound	$150,283	$135,351

*Water Development Fees are calculated by meter size using the American Water Works Association (AWWA) equivalent ratios.

(Ord. 19-1416, passed 1-14-2019)


9-8-8 APPLICATION OF NEW AND INCREASED FEES.

(A) New development within the City of Goodyear shall be temporarily exempt from increases in development fees that result from the adoption of new or modified development fees as follows:

(1) Non-Residential and Residential 2+ Units. For 24 months after the date of the approval of a site plan for non-residential development, including Commercial, Industrial, Office and Other Service and Institutional, and/or Residential 2+ development, or if no site plan is required, from the date of the approval of a final subdivision plat for such development, new development fees adopted during the 24-month period and the increased portion of a development fee modified during the 24-month period shall not be assessed against such development that occurs pursuant to the approved site plan or final subdivision plat. The 24-month period shall not be extended by a renewal or amendment of the site plan or the final subdivision plat that was the subject of the approval.

(2) Residential – Single Unit. For 24 months after the date the first building permit is issued for a residential Dwelling Unit pursuant to an approved subdivision plat, new development fees adopted during the 24-month period and the increased portion of a development fee modified during the 24-month period shall not be assessed against the residential development that occurs pursuant to the approved final subdivision plat. The 24-month period shall not be extended by a renewal or amendment of the first building permit or the final subdivision plat that was the subject of the approval.

(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if after the approval of a site plan or subdivision plat that triggers the 24-month exemption is changed and the change results in an increase in the number of Development Units, the City may assess the new and/or modified development fees against the additional Development Units.

(4) Prior Payment. New development fees adopted  and the increased portion of a development fee modified shall not be assessed if development fees have been paid pursuant to a building permit that has not expired, been terminated or otherwise closed out, unless there has been a change in a prior development approval that results in an increase in the number of Development Units either by an increase in the size or utility requirements or by a change in occupancy in which case, the City may assess the new and/or modified development fees against the additional Development Units.

(B) During the 24-month exemption period described in subsection (A) of this section, the development fees set forth below for each Category of Development shall apply unless the newly adopted fee for a Category of Development is lower, in which case the lower fee would apply.

CENTRAL GOODYEAR: Includes the land within the boundaries of the City between I-10 and the Gila River.

NORTH GOODYEAR: Includes the land within the boundaries of the City that is located north of the I-10.

SOUTH GOODYEAR: Includes the land within the boundaries of the City that is located between the Gila River and Pecos Road.

The development fees set forth apply for the following Categories of Necessary Public Services or Facility Expansions in the following Service Areas and shall be charged for new development within the City:

Police Development Fees. There is one Service Area for Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions for police services. It includes all of the land in North Goodyear, Central Goodyear and South Goodyear. Police Development Fees for this Service Area as follows:

	 	 	Police Development Fees per Development Unit

	Category of Development	Development Unit	Service Area North Goodyear, Central Goodyear and South Goodyear

	Residential Single Unit	Per Dwelling Unit	$379

	Residential 2+ Units	Per Dwelling Unit	$294

	Industrial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$30

	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$238

	Institutional	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$86

	Office and Other Services	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$93

Fire Development Fees. There are two Service Areas for Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions for fire services. One includes all of the land in North Goodyear and Central Goodyear and the other includes all of the land in South Goodyear. Fire Development Fees for the two Service Areas are as follows:

	 	 	Fire Development Fees per Development Unit

	Category of Development	Development Unit	Service Area North Goodyear and Central Goodyear	Service Area South Goodyear

	Residential Single Unit	Per Dwelling Unit	$399	$719

	Residential 2+ Units	Per Dwelling Unit	$310	$559

	Industrial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$34	$349

	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$110	$1,103

	Institutional	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$48	$482

	Office and Other Services	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$163	$1,635

Streets Development Fees. There are three Service Areas for Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions for street services. One includes all of the land in North Goodyear, the second includes all of the land in Central Goodyear and the third includes all of the land in South Goodyear. Street Development Fees for the three Service Areas are as follows:

	 	 	Streets Development Fees per Development Unit

	Category of Development	Development Unit	Service Area North Goodyear	Service Area Central Goodyear	Service Area South Goodyear

	Residential Single Unit	Per Dwelling Unit	$1,402	$1,743	$1,179

	Residential 2+ Units	Per Dwelling Unit	$979	$1,217	$823

	Industrial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$247	$307	$215

	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$1,769	$2,198	$1,486

	Institutional	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$707	$878	$596

	Office and Other Services	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$766	$951	$643

Parks and Recreation Development Fees. There are two Service Areas for Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions for Parks and Recreation services. One includes all of the land in North Goodyear and Central Goodyear and the other includes all of the land in South Goodyear. Parks and Recreation Development Fees for the two Service Areas are as follows:

	 	 	Parks and Recreation Development Fees per Development Unit

	Category of Development	Development Unit	Service Area North Goodyear and Central Goodyear	Service Area South Goodyear

	Residential Single Unit	Per Dwelling Unit	$922	$1,065

	Residential 2+ Units	Per Dwelling Unit	$717	$990

	Industrial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$32	$36

	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$101	$116

	Institutional	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$44	$50

	Office and Other Services	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of Gross Floor Area	$150	$173

Water Development Fees. There are two Service Areas for Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions for Water services. One includes all of the land in Central Goodyear and those areas within North Goodyear for which water services are provided by the City. The other includes the portion of South Goodyear that is located within the Master Planned Development known as Estrella, formerly known as Estrella Mountain Ranch and the property legally described in Exhibit G of that certain agreement known as the Northern Solution Water Facilities Agreement, recorded on March 2, 2012, in the Official Records of the Maricopa County Recorder at instrument number 20120179581. Water Development Fees for the two Service Areas are as follows:

Water Development Fees – Per Development Unit (Meter)  

	Meter Size (inches)	Service Area Central Goodyear and areas within North Goodyear served by the City	Service Area South Goodyear as modified above

	0.75 displacement	$6,368	$7,769

	1 displacement	$10,633	$12,971

	1.5 displacement	$21,198	$25,861

	2 compound	$33,928	$41,391

	3 compound	$67,916	$82,855

	4 compound	$106,105	$129,445

Wastewater Development Fees. There are two Service Areas for Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions for Wastewater services. One includes all of the land in Central Goodyear and those areas within North Goodyear for which wastewater services are provided by the City. The other includes the portion of South Goodyear that is located within the Master Planned Development known as Estrella, formerly known as Estrella Mountain Ranch and the property legally described in Exhibit G of that certain agreement known as the Northern Solution Water Facilities Agreement, recorded on March 2, 2012, in the Official Records of the Maricopa County Recorder at instrument number 20120179581. Wastewater Development Fees for the two Service Areas are as follows:

Wastewater Development Fees – Per Development Unit (Water Meter)  

	Meter Size (inches)	Service Area Central Goodyear and areas within North Goodyear served by the City	Service Area South Goodyear as modified above

	0.75 displacement	$4,210	$1,541

	1 displacement	$7,029	$2,572

	1.5 displacement	$14,013	$5,125

	2 compound	$22,427	$8,202

	3 compound	$44,892	$16,416

	4 compound	$70,134	$25,646

This subsection (B) shall expire on March 31, 2021.

(Ord. 19-1416, passed 1-14-2019)


9-8-9 CALCULATION AND COLLECTION OF DEVELOPMENT FEES.

(A) Non-Binding Estimate. An Applicant may request a non-binding estimate of development fees for a particular new development at any time. Such estimates are non-binding and actual Development Fees shall be calculated, adjusted and collected as otherwise provided in this article.

(B) Development Fee Schedule. Upon request, an applicant shall be provided a written statement of the development fee schedule applicable to the development as of the date of the request.

(C) Timing of Payment. Except as otherwise provided in this article, Development Fees shall be paid at the time a Building Permit is issued and shall be calculated based on the fees in effect at the time the Building Permit is issued and pursuant to Section 9-8-8.

(D) Adjustments. Development fees shall be adjusted and additional fees collected under the following circumstances.

(1) If at any time during the construction of the building or structure or following the completion of a building or structure, City staff, or its agents, determines that the information upon which development fees were originally calculated is not consistent with the actual construction, the development fees shall be recalculated to reflect the actual Development Units regardless of whether an amended application is submitted. Any additional development fees owed pursuant to the recalculation shall be paid prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.

(2) If City staff, or its agents, learns that an entire structure or a portion of the structure will be occupied by an occupancy that is inconsistent with the Category of Development upon which development fees were originally calculated, the development fees shall be recalculated to reflect the appropriate Category of Development at the time of occupancy. Any additional development fees owed shall be paid upon discovery of City staff of the change in occupancy, but no later than upon an application for a Building Permit or certificate of occupancy related to the occupancy. By way of example, if development fees on a building were calculated based on the assumption that an entire structure with 50,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area would be occupied as a professional office, but a certificate of occupancy was sought for a portion of the building consisting of 25,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area for occupancy as a retail establishment, additional development fees would be owed based on the difference between the development fees owed for the building of which 25,000 square feet of GFA is used for Commercial and 25,000 square feet of GFA is used for Office and Other Services and the development fees owed for the building of which 50,000 square feet of GFA is used for Office and Other Services.

(3) Except as otherwise provided in a development agreement approved by the Governing Body, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all development fees have been paid, including additional development fees resulting from adjustments made pursuant to this subsection (D).

(E) Calculations. Except in cases of special fee determinations, which are discussed in subsection (F) of this section, Development Fees shall be calculated by multiplying the adopted development fee for the applicable Category of Development for the applicable Service Area by the number of Development Units. Except as otherwise provided in Section 9-8-8, development fees shall be calculated using the development fees in effect at the time the fees are being collected. The following are examples of how Development Fees shall be calculated under various scenarios:

(1) For new buildings or structures development fees shall be calculated by multiplying the adopted development fee for the applicable Category of Development for the applicable Service Area by the number of Development Units. For example the development fees for a Commercial Development in North Goodyear consisting of 21,465 square feet of Gross Floor Area ("GFA") with one two-inch water meter would be calculated as follows:

	Dev Fee	Category of Development	Development Unit	Development Fee Per Development Unit for Applicable Service Area	Number of Development Units	Fee Owed

	Police	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA	$429	21.46 (21,465 ÷ 1,000)	$9,206 (21.46 X $429)

	Fire	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA	$467	21.46 (21,465 ÷ 1,000)	$10,022 (21.46 X $467)

	Streets	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA	$3,621	21.46 (21,465 ÷ 1,000)	$77,707 (21.46 X $3,621)

	Parks	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA	$29	21.46 (21,465 ÷ 1,000)	$622 (21.46 X $29)

	Water	Commercial	Meter Size – 2"	$40,257	1	$40,257 (1 X $40,257)

	Wastewater	Commercial	Meter Size – 2"	$15,019	1	$15,019 (1 X $15,019)

(2) For a new building or structure in which multiple Categories of Development are to be located, development fees shall be calculated by multiplying the adopted development fees for the applicable Service Area by the number of Development Units for each Category of Development that will be located within the building or structure as set forth above and then adding the fees for all of the Categories of Development together. For example, the Streets development fee for a building located in South Goodyear that will include 30,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area ("GFA") that will be occupied by commercial businesses, 10,000 square feet of GFA that will be occupied as professional offices, and 50 dwelling units would be calculated as follows:

	Dev Fee	Category of Development	Development Unit	Development Fee Per Development Unit for Applicable Service Area	Number of Development Units	Fee Owed

	Streets	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA	$4,517	30 (30,000 ÷ 1,000)	$135,510 (30 X $4,517)

	Streets	Office	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA	$2,119	10 (10,000 ÷ 1,000)	$21,190 (10 X $2,119)

	Streets	Residential 2+ Units	Per Dwelling Unit	$2,582	50	$129,100 (50 X $2,582)

	TOTAL – STREET	 	 	 	 	$285,800

(3) For modifications to existing structures that increase the square footage of structure, development fees shall be calculated based on multiplying the adopted development fee for the applicable Category of Development for the applicable Service Area by the number of additional Development Units resulting from the expansion. For example if an existing commercial facility in North Goodyear is being expanded to add another 10,353 square feet of Gross Floor Area with no change in water meters, the additional development fees for the additional area would be calculated as follows:

	Dev Fee	Category of Development	Development Unit	Development Fee Per Development Unit for Applicable Service Area	Number of Development Units	Fee Owed

	Police	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA	$429	10.35 (10,353 ÷ 1,000)	$4,440 (10.35 X $429)

	Fire	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA	$467	10.35 (10,353 ÷ 1,000)	$4,833 (10.35 X $467)

	Streets	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA	$3,621	10.35 (10,353 ÷ 1,000)	$37,477 (10.35 X $3,621)

	Parks	Commercial	Per 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA	$29	10.35 (10,353 ÷ 1,000)	$300 (10.35 X $29)

(4) For modifications to existing structures that result in the addition of new utility meters, utility development fees shall be calculated based on multiplying the adopted development fee for the applicable Category of Development for the applicable Service Area by the new Development Units being added. The development fee calculations shall be based on the development fees in effect at the time of the modification. For example if an existing commercial facility in South Goodyear had a one-inch water meter and because of modifications to the facilities needed to accommodate additional service demands, two new one-inch water meters were being installed, the additional water development fee would be calculated as follows:

	Dev Fee	Category of Development	Development Unit	Development Fee Per Development Unit for Applicable Service Area	Number of Development Units	Fee Owed**

	Water	Commercial	Meter Size – 1"	$13,097	2	$26,194 (2 X $13,097)

**    If the additional water meters to be installed would result in water being discharged to the City’s wastewater system, additional wastewater development fees would also be due and calculated in a manner similar to the water meter calculation above.

(5) For modifications to existing structures that result in a change in the size of utility meters, the additional development fees owed as a result of this change shall be calculated based on multiplying the adopted development fee for the applicable Category of Development for the applicable Service Area by the current Development Unit resulting from the modification and then subtracting the development fees calculated based on multiplying the adopted development fee for the applicable Category of Development for the Applicable Service Area by the prior Development Unit. The development fee calculations shall be based on the development fees in effect at the time of the modification. For example if an existing commercial facility in North Goodyear had a one-inch water meter for which the development fee is being modified to replace the one-inch water meter with a two-inch meter, the additional water development fee would be calculated as follows:

	Dev Fee	Category of Development	Development Unit	Development Fee Per Development Unit for Applicable Service Area	Number of Development Units	Fee Owed

	Water	Commercial	Meter Size – 2"	$40,257	1	$40,257 (1 X $40,257)

	Water	Commercial	Meter Size – 1"	$12,613	1	$12,613 (1 X $12,613)

	Additional Fees**	 	 	 	 	$27,644 ($40,257 – $12,613)

**    If the additional water meters to be installed would result in water being discharged to the City’s wastewater system, additional wastewater development fees would also be due and calculated in a manner similar to the water meter calculation above.

(F) Special Fee Determination. In situations in which a development is of a type that does not closely fit within a particular Category of Development, or in which a development has unique characteristics such that the actual burdens and costs associated with providing Necessary Public Services to that development will differ substantially from that associated with other developments in a specified Category of Development, the City may allow or may require the Applicant to provide the Finance Director with an alternative development fee analysis. Based on a projection of the actual burdens and costs that will be associated with the development, the alternative development fee analysis may propose a unique fee for the development based on appropriate Service Units and applicable cost per Service Unit or may propose that the development be covered under the development fee schedule governing a different and more analogous Category of Development. The Finance Director shall review the alternative development fee analysis and shall make a determination as to the development fee to be charged. Such decision shall be appealable pursuant to Section 9-8-15. The Finance Director may require the Applicant to pay an administrative fee to cover the actual costs of reviewing the special fee determination application, including the costs of any Qualified Professionals.

(Ord. 19-1416, passed 1-14-2019)


9-8-10 CREDITS.

(A) Credits. Subject to the provisions of this section, credits shall be provided to the Developer towards the payment of Development Fees for an eligible Capital Facility required by the City and provided by the Developer.

(1) Credits shall only be issued pursuant to a Credit Agreement that meets the requirements of subsection (E) of this section.

(a) No credits shall be provided unless an application for a Credit Agreement is submitted to the City by the Developer within one year of the date the Capital Facility for which credits are otherwise eligible is accepted by the City Engineer or authorized designee.

(b) It is the responsibility of the Developer to request allocation of development fee credits through an application for a Credit Agreement. If development fee is paid before a Credit Agreement has been executed, no credits may be applied retroactively for that development fee and no reimbursements shall be made for the amount of the credit that would have been provided had a Credit Agreement been in effect when the development fee was paid.

(c) It is the responsibility of the entity to whom credits are allocated pursuant to a Credit Agreement or any amendment thereto, to notify City staff at the time an application for a building permit is submitted that a credit should be applied towards the payment of a development fee pursuant to an executed Credit Agreement or an executed amendment thereto. If the notification required hereunder is not made prior to the payment of the development fee, no credits may be applied retroactively for that development fee and no reimbursements shall be made for the amount of the credit that would have been provided had the notification been made prior to the payment of the development fee.

(d) Upon execution of a Credit Agreement by the Developer and the City Manager credits shall be deemed allocated to the Developer Property identified in the Credit Agreement.

(2) No credits shall be issued until the eligible Capital Facility for which the credits are being issued has been accepted by the City Engineer or authorized designee or until adequate financial security to insure the completion of the eligible Capital Facility has been provided in accordance with all of the terms of an executed Credit Agreement.

(B) Credit Ineligibility. Credits shall not be provided for a Capital Facility provided by a Developer under the following circumstances:

(1) No credits shall be provided for a Capital Facility that was provided by a Developer unless the Capital Facility is included in an adopted Infrastructure Improvements Plan and Fee Report as a Necessary Public Service or Facility Expansion for which a Development Fee is assessed.

(2) Credits shall not be provided for any Capital Facility provided by a Developer if the cost of such Capital Facility will be repaid to the Developer by the City through another agreement or mechanism, other than a Credit Agreement discussed in subsection (E) of this section. To the extent that the Developer will be paid or reimbursed by the City for any Capital Facility from any funding source including an agreement to reimburse the developer from future development fees, the amount of credits claimed by the Developer shall be reduced by the amounts to be paid or reimbursed by the City.

(C) Amount of Credits. The amount of the credits provided pursuant to this section shall be limited to the actual costs the Developer incurred in providing the eligible Capital Facility or to the costs of the Capital Facility included in the adopted Infrastructure Improvements Plan ("IIP") and for which the development fee is assessed, whichever is less. In no event shall the amount of any credit exceed the actual costs the Developer incurred in providing the eligible Capital Facility. By way of example, if a Developer incurs a cost of $1,000,000 for the construction of a Capital Facility that is included in an adopted IIP that reflects the cost of the Capital Facility as being $800,000 the amount of the credit will be limited to the $800,000, the cost of the Capital Facility reflected in the IIP. Conversely, if a Developer incurs a cost of $1,000,000 for the construction of a Capital Facility that is included in an adopted IIP that reflects the cost of the Capital Facility as being $1,000,040, the amount of the credit will be limited to $1,000,000, the actual costs Developer incurred in constructing the Capital Facility.

(1) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if development fees that are adopted are less than the fees reflected in the IIP and/or Fee Report as needed to pay for all of the Necessary Public Services and/or Facility Expansions included in the IIP (full fees), the amount of the credits provided pursuant to this section shall be reduced by the City proportionately.

(D) Application of Credits. The application of credits towards development fees is subject to the following:

(1) Credits may only be applied towards the development fee for the applicable Category of Necessary Public Services that included the Capital Facility for which the credit is being provided. By way of example, if a Developer expands a wastewater facility to provide wastewater services to new development in the portion of South Goodyear identified as a Service Area for Wastewater Development Fees, credits for the cost of the Facility Expansion may only be applied against Wastewater Development Fees in the South Goodyear wastewater Service Area.

(2) Credits may only be applied to development located within the same Service Area for which the Development Fee being credited is collected. By way of example, if a Developer is entitled to a credit for the costs of constructing a Capital Facility that is identified in an Infrastructure Improvements Plan as being necessary to provide water services to North Goodyear and it is included in the Water Development Fee for the Service Area North Goodyear, the credits provided may only be applied toward Water Development Fees for the Service Area North Goodyear.

(3) Credits shall be applied only to that portion of the applicable development fee attributable to the Capital Facility for which the credits are provided. By way of example, if a Developer constructs a Capital Facility that is included in an adopted IIP for which a wastewater development fee is assessed, and the costs of the Capital Facility in the IIP represents 10% of the total costs of all Capital Facilities included in the IIP the amount of the credit that can be applied towards a wastewater development fee will be 10% of the applicable wastewater development fee. Thus if the wastewater development fee for a building in the North Goodyear Service Area was $15,019 (calculated based on one two-inch meter) the amount of the credit that could be applied towards the wastewater development fee is $1,502.

	Dev Fee	Category of Development	Development Unit	Development Fee Per Development Unit for Applicable Service Area	Credit Portion (Percent of Cost in IIP)	Wastewater Credit

	Wastewater	Commercial	Meter Size – 2"	$15,109	10%	$1,502 ($15,019 X 10%)

(E) Credit Agreement. No credits shall be applied toward development fees unless the Developer and the City have entered into a Credit Agreement in a form provided by the City and which shall, at a minimum, include the following:

(1) The total amount of credits resulting from the provision of an eligible Capital Facility.

(2) A list of all of the Capital Facilities and costs of each Capital Facility included in the adopted Infrastructure Improvements Plan ("IIP") for which a development fee is assessed.

(3) The credit amount to be applied towards development fees for each Development Unit within the new property for which credits shall be applied, which credit shall be calculated pursuant to subsection (D)(3) of this section.

(4) If applicable, terms providing for the recalculation of the credit amount in the event that the Credit Agreement was executed before the Capital Facility was completed.

(5) Provisions for recalculating the credit amount in the event the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and/or development fees are modified following the execution of the Credit Agreement.

(6) A legal description and map property depicting the property for which credits shall be applied. This property shall be the property, the development of which resulted in the developer providing the Capital Facility for which the credits are being provided (the "Credit Eligible Property"). It may also include additional property if the additional property is part of a unified plan of development that includes the Credit Eligible Property. This property shall collectively be referred to as the "Developer Property."

(7) The term of a Credit Agreement shall not exceed 10 years. Credits not applied prior to the expiration of the Credit Agreement shall expire.

(F) Multiple Entities. If multiple entities jointly provide an eligible Capital Facility, all entities must enter into a Single Credit agreement and any request for the allocation or reallocation of credits shall be made in writing and executed by all of the entities that provided the eligible Capital Facility.

(G) Reallocation of Credits. Credits provided under an executed Credit Agreement may be reallocated only by an amendment to the Credit Agreement executed by the City and Developer. An amendment to the Credit Agreement for the reallocation of credits is subject to the following:

(1) The Developer that executed the Credit Agreement being amended and the entity that controls the property to which credits are to be allocated shall both be signatories to a written request seeking the reallocation.

(2) The amount of the credits reallocated shall not exceed the total amount of credits resulting from the provision of an eligible Capital Facility, as reflected in the Credit Agreement less the amount of credits that have already been applied towards development fees owed for development within the property identified in the Credit Agreement, as of the date of the amendment and less the amount of credits reallocated to other property prior to the date of the amendment.

(a) By way of example, the amount of credits that would be available for reallocation assuming the following facts ((i) the Developer constructed an eligible Capital Facility and entered into a Credit Agreement that provided $1,000,000 in total available credits; (ii) the Developer previously reallocated $500,000 of the available credits to another property; and (iii) as of the effective date of the proposed amendment, $200,000 of credits had been applied towards development fees for development within the property identified in the Credit Agreement (the "Developer Property")) would be $300,000 calculated as follows ($1,000,000 - $500,000 - $200,000 = $300,000).

(3) A reallocation of credits shall not be made to any property that is subject to a Development Agreement or any other agreement or reimbursement mechanism that involves the category of development fees to which the reallocated credits would apply.

(4) The amendment for a reallocation of credits shall be on a form provided by the City, but shall include, at a minimum, the following:

(a) A legal description and map property depicting the new property for which credits shall be applied.

(b) The total amount of credits to be allocated to the new property and a provision pursuant to which Developer assigns to the entity who with the Developer requested the reallocation all legal rights and obligations related to the reallocated credits, subject to the terms of the Credit Agreement to the entity.

(c) The credit amount to be applied towards development fees for each Development Unit within the new property for which credits shall be applied, which shall be calculated pursuant to subsection (D)(3) of this section and provisions for recalculating the credit amount in the event the IIP and development fees are modified following the execution of the Credit Agreement.

(d) Modifications as needed to reflect the impact the reallocation shall have on credits available to serve the Developer Property.

(H) In lieu of a Credit Agreement provided herein and provided the improvements were publicly bid, Developer and the City may enter into a Reimbursement Agreement in a form provided by the City and which shall, at a minimum, include the following:

(1) The total amount of reimbursement resulting from the provision of an eligible Capital Facility.

(2) A list of all of the Capital Facilities and costs of each Capital Facility included in the adopted Infrastructure Improvements Plan ("IIP") for which a development fee is assessed.

(3) The reimbursement amount to be paid from development fees collected for each Development Unit, which reimbursement amount shall be calculated in the same manner as the calculation of credit amounts pursuant to subsection (D)(3) of this section.

(4) Provisions for recalculating the reimbursement amount in the event the Infrastructure Improvements Plan and/or development fees are modified following the execution of the Reimbursement Agreement.

(5) The term of a Reimbursement Agreement shall not exceed 10 years.

(I) City Manager’s Authority. The City Manager or authorized designee is authorized to establish procedures and submittal requirements for the issuance of Credit Agreements, amendments to Credit Agreements, requirements for the application of credits towards development fees, Reimbursement Agreements and amendments to Reimbursement Agreements. The procedures and submittal requirements shall, at a minimum, comply with the requirements set forth in this article. The City Manager, or in the absence of the City Manager, the person who has been authorized by the City Manager to act on his behalf during his absence shall be authorized to enter into Credit Agreements and amendments to Credit Agreements.

(Ord. 19-1416, passed 1-14-2019)


9-8-11 DEVELOPMENT FEE FUNDS AND USES OF DEVELOPMENT FEES.

(A) Development Fee Funds. Development Fees collected pursuant to this article shall be placed in separate interest bearing funds for each category of Necessary Public Facilities or Facilities Expansions for which development fees are assessed (police, fire, streets, parks and recreation, water and wastewater) within each Service Area in which the development fees are assessed.

(B) Use of Development Fees. The use of Development Fees collected pursuant to this article is subject to the following:

(1) Development fees and any interest thereon may only be spent to provide or to provide reimbursements for costs of Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions that are: (i) included in an adopted Infrastructure Improvements Plan for which the development fees were assessed; (ii) that are for the same Category of Necessary Public Services for which the fee was collected; and (iii) serve the same Service Area for which the fees were collected.

(a) By way of example, street development fees collected for development occurring in the North Goodyear Service Area may be spent only on Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions included in an IIP for the North Goodyear Service Area.

(2) Development fees may not be used for any of the following:

(a) The costs of constructing, acquiring, expanding, or for the reimbursement of costs incurred in constructing, acquiring, or expanding infrastructure improvements that are not included in an adopted IIP.

(b) The repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new Necessary Public Services or Facility Expansions.

(c) Upgrading, updating, expanding, correcting or replacing existing Necessary Public Services to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards.

(d) Upgrading, updating, expanding, correcting or replacing existing Necessary Public Services to provide a higher level of service to existing development.

(e) Administrative, maintenance or operating costs of the City.

(3) Any development fees collected before January 1, 2012, remaining in a development fee fund shall be used towards the same Category of Necessary Public Services for which the development fee was collected.

(a) If development fees were collected for a facility that is not a Necessary Public Service as defined in this article, the fees shall be used for the purposes for which they were collected on or before January 1, 2020.

(b) If the development fees have not been spent by January 1, 2020, they shall be distributed equally among the Necessary Public Services included in an adopted IIP for the same Category of Necessary Public Services for which the fees were collected.

(C) Carry-Over. Notwithstanding the requirements of this article, the City may continue to assess and use development fees for a facility for which development fees could not otherwise be assessed pursuant to this article under the following conditions:

(1) Development fees were pledged to repay debt service obligations related to the construction of the facility prior to June 1, 2011; and

(2) After August 1, 2014, any development fees collected under this subsection (C) are used solely for the payment of principal and interest on the portion of the bonds, notes or other debt service obligations that were issued before June 1, 2011, to finance the construction of the facility.

(Ord. 19-1416, passed 1-14-2019)


9-8-12 REFUNDS.

(A) A refund (or partial refund) will be paid to any current owner of property within the City who submits a written request to the City and demonstrates that:

(1) The owner of the subject real property or its predecessor in interest paid a development fee on or after August 1, 2014, and one of the following conditions exists:

(a) Existing facilities have capacity to provide services to the property for which the development fee was collected but the available capacity has been reserved or pledged in connection with the construction or financing of the facilities and no service is provided; or

(b) After collecting the fee to construct a Capital Facility the City fails to complete construction of the Capital Facility within the time period identified in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, as it may be amended, but no later than the time periods specified in A.R.S. § 9-463.05(H)(3), and the corresponding service is otherwise unavailable to the subject real property from that Capital Facility or any other infrastructure.

(c) Any part of the development fee collected for Water or Wastewater facilities has not been spent within 15 years of the date the fee was collected.

(d) Any part of the development fee collected for Police, Fire, Streets, or Parks and Recreation facilities has not been spent within 10 years of the date the fee was collected.

(e) The development fee was calculated and collected for the construction cost to provide all or a portion of a specific Capital Facility serving the subject real property and the actual construction costs for the Capital Facility are less than the construction costs projected in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan by a factor of 10% or more. In such event, the current owner of the subject real property shall, upon request as set forth in this subsection (A), be entitled to a refund for the difference between the amounts of the development fee charged for and attributable to such construction cost and the amount the development fee would have been calculated to be if the actual construction cost had been included in the Fee Report. The refund contemplated by this subsection (A)(1)(e) shall relate only to the costs specific to the construction of the applicable Capital Facility and shall not include any related design, administrative, or other costs not directly incurred for construction of the Capital Facility that are included in the development fee as permitted by A.R.S. § 9-463.05.

(B) Earned Interest. A refund of all or part of a Development Fee shall include any interest actually earned by the City on the refunded portion of the Development Fee from the date of collection to the date of refund. All refunds shall be made to the record owner of the property at the time the refund is paid.

(C) Refund to Government. If a Development Fee was paid by a governmental entity any refund provided shall be paid to the governmental entity, regardless of who may own the property for which the development fee was paid.

(D) The right to a refund as provided in this section may not be assigned or pursued by any entity other than the property owner.

(Ord. 19-1416, passed 1-14-2019)


9-8-13 REPORTS.

(A) Annual Report. The City shall submit an annual report that complies with the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05(N) that account for the collection and use of development fees for each Service Area. A copy of the annual report shall be provided to the Goodyear City Clerk within 90 days of the end of the fiscal year, and a copy shall be posted on the City’s website and copies of the annual report shall be made available to the public upon request.

(B) Biennial Audit. If an Advisory Committee is not formed, the City shall, in addition to the Annual Report described in subsection (A) of this section, provide for a certified audit of the City’s Land Use Assumptions, Infrastructure Improvements Plan and development fees every two years ("Biennial Audit"). The biennial audit shall comply with the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05(G)(2). The City shall post the findings of the audit on the City’s website and shall conduct a public hearing on the audit within 60 days of the release of the audit to the public.

(Ord. 19-1416, passed 1-14-2019)


9-8-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS.

(A) Application. The provisions of this article relating to the collection of development fees shall apply to all new development within the corporate limits of the City and within the established Service Areas as those may be amended from time to time.

(B) Term. This article and the procedures established herein shall remain in effect unless and until repealed, amended or modified by the Mayor and City Council in accordance with applicable state law and the City code, ordinances and resolutions.

(C) Reservation. The City may reserve in an Infrastructure Improvement Plan adopted pursuant to the requirements of this article and A.R.S. § 9-463.05 or by other means reserve capacity to serve future development.

(D) Beneficial Use. Any development for which a development fee has been paid is entitled to the use and benefit of the service for which the fee was imposed and is entitled to receive immediate service from any existing facility with available capacity to serve the new Service Units if the available capacity has not been reserved or pledged in connection with the construction or financing of the facility.

(E) Development fees shall not be imposed under the following circumstances:

(1) No wastewater development fee shall be charged in connection with the installation of a water meter that is to be used solely for outdoor irrigation purposes and has no connection to the wastewater system.

(2) Development fees for water and wastewater shall not be imposed on development within a Service Area if the utility service for which the fee is being imposed is provided by a private utility company pursuant to its Certificate of Convenience and Necessity.

(F) Reduction or Elimination of Fees. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, including the terms of any development fee schedules provided pursuant to Section 9-8-9(B), if, after the date of the Final Approval, the City reduces development fees, the reduced fee shall apply to all developments.

(G) The payment of development fees shall not entitle the applicant to a building permit unless all other applicable land use, zoning, planning, platting, subdivision or other related requirements, standards and conditions of development have been met. Such other requirements, standards and conditions are independent of the requirement for payment of a development fee.

(H) Nothing in this article shall affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density/intensity of development, design and improvement standards or other applicable standards or requirements related to the development, which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation.

(I) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to limit the City’s authority and ability to enter into development agreements pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-500.05, including development agreements that contain provisions regarding the construction of Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions, reimbursement for Necessary Public Services or Facilities Expansions provided by a Developer, or development fee credits.

(J) Nothing in this article obligates the City to enter into any development agreement or any other agreement related to the development of property within the City.

(K) If the City agrees to waive any applicable development fees in a Development Agreement, the City shall reimburse the appropriate development fee fund for the amount of development fees waived. If an Advisory Committee has been established, notice of the waiver shall be provided to the Advisory Committee within 30 days of the date of the Development Agreement.

(L) Any action to collect development fees shall be commenced within two years after the obligation to pay the fee accrues.

(Ord. 19-1416, passed 1-14-2019)


9-8-15 APPEALS.

(A) A development fee determination or a credit determination by City staff may be appealed in accordance with the following procedures:

(1) An appeal shall be limited to disputes regarding the calculation of development fees owed for a specific development; the availability and calculation of any credits that should be applied towards development fees if a Developer provides or finances a Capital Facility; and the availability and calculation of any refunds authorized pursuant to this article.

(2) The burden of proof shall be on the party lodging the appeal to demonstrate that the decision of City staff is erroneous.

(3) An appeal shall be brought only by a person with standing, which is limited to the following:

(a) With respect to appeals regarding the calculation of development fees owed for a specific development only the party who is to pay the development fee shall have standing.

(b) With respect to appeals regarding the availability and calculation of any credits that should be applied towards development fees, only the Developer who provided or financed the Capital Facility for which the credits would be provided shall have standing.

(c) With respect to appeals regarding the availability and calculation of any refunds authorized pursuant to this article, only the owner of real property for which a development fee was paid after July 31, 2014, shall have standing.

(4) The appeal shall be initiated in writing and on a form provided by the City, which shall be submitted to the Finance Director.

(5) The Finance Director shall act upon the appeal within 30 calendar days of the Finance Director’s receipt of the appeal, and the party lodging the appeal shall be notified of the Finance Director’s decision in writing.

(6) The party who lodged the appeal may further appeal the decision of the Finance Director to the City Manager or authorized designee who shall be in a more senior position than the Finance Director. The appeal to the City Manager or authorized designee shall be in writing setting forth the reasons why the party appealing believes the decision of the Finance Director is in error and it shall be submitted to the City Manager within 14 calendar days of the date of the Finance Director’s decision.

(7) The City Manager or authorized designee shall act upon the appeal with 14 calendar days of the receipt for the appeal and the party lodging the appeal shall be notified of the City Manager’s or authorized designee’s decisions in writing.

(8) The decision of the City Manager or authorized designee regarding the appeal shall be final.

(B) Building permits and Certificates of Occupancy may be issued during the pendency of an appeal if the party seeking the permit or certificate of occupancy (1) pays the full development fee calculated by the City at the time the appeal is filed or (2) pays the development fee believed to be owed by the Applicant and provides the City with financial assurances in the form acceptable to the Finance Director or authorized designee equal to the difference between the amount the City claims is owed and the amount paid. Upon final disposition of an appeal, the fee shall be adjusted in accordance with the decision rendered, and additional monies collected or a refund paid as warranted. If the appeal is denied by the City of Goodyear Manager or authorized designee, and the Applicant has provided the City with financial assurances as set forth in this subsection (B), the additional monies owed shall be paid to the City within 10 days of the City of Goodyear Manager or designee’s final decision on the appeal. If the Applicant fails to deliver the additional monies owed the City may draw upon such financial assurance instrument(s) as necessary to recover the full amount of the development fees due.

(Ord. 19-1416, passed 1-14-2019)


9-8-16 CONFLICT.

(A) To the extent of any conflict between other City ordinances and this article, this article shall be deemed to be controlling; provided, however, that this article is not intended to amend or repeal any existing City ordinance, resolution or regulation.

(B) Defined terms in any previously adopted fee schedule shall be interpreted according to the Ordinance in effect at the time of its adoption.

(Ord. 19-1416, passed 1-14-2019)




ARTICLE 9-9 Utility Poles and Wires

Section

9-9-1    Definitions

9-9-2    Permit for erection; exceptions

9-9-3    Procedure for obtaining permit; denial and appeal

9-9-4    Standards for issuance of permits


9-9-1 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

DISTRIBUTION FEEDER. That portion of the distribution system feeding from a distribution substation to a specific load area having a capacity of over 3,000 KVA.

EXISTING UTILITY POLES AND WIRES. Such poles and wires and other facilities as are in place and in operation as of April 22, 1974, and including repairs, replacements, relocations on the same alignment, additions, enlargements, betterments, changes or improvements hereinafter made to maintain or increase service capabilities of existing utility poles, wires, service drops and other facilities, but it does not include extensions made to existing distribution lines.

TRANSMISSION LINE. An electric line used for the bulk transmission of electricity between generating or receiving points and major substations or delivery points having a rating of over 12,000 volts.

UTILITY POLES AND WIRES. Poles and structures, wires, cables, transformers and all other facilities used in or as a part of the distribution or transmission of telephone, telegraph, radio or television communications.

(Prior Code, § 9-9-1)


9-9-2 PERMIT FOR ERECTION; EXCEPTIONS.

After April 22, 1974, no new utility poles and wires shall be erected in the city above the surface of the ground unless a permit is first secured therefor from the City Manager or his or her designee, except that the following construction may be installed without such a permit:

(A) Temporary service facilities, such as facilities to furnish emergency service during an outage, facilities to provide service to construction sites or other service of a limited duration, such as to a fair, carnival, outdoor exhibit or other function where the facilities will be installed for a temporary period only;

(B) Pad-mounted transformers or pull boxes, service terminals, pedestal-type telephone terminals, telephone splice closures or similar on-the-ground facilities normally used with and as a part of an underground electric distribution, telephone, telegraph or television system or on-the-ground facilities attached to existing overhead facilities which are used for the purpose of connecting an underground system with the existing facilities;

(C) Transmission lines and distribution feeder lines, together with related switch yards, substations and related equipment. Service drops from existing overhead lines to new single family residential customers, except when underground service is required by the city’s subdivision regulations.

(Prior Code, § 9-9-2)


9-9-3 PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING PERMIT; DENIAL AND APPEAL.

Any person seeking a special permit for erection of any new utility poles and wires within the city boundaries and above the surface of the ground shall first make application therefor to the City Manager or his or her designee which application shall be approved or denied. In the event the permit is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision of the City Manager or his or her designee by presenting his or her objections in writing to the Council with a copy to the City Manager or his or her designee within ten days of the City Manager’s or his or her designee’s denial. The City Manager or his or her designee may grant the permit within five days or shall submit the appeal together with a written report of his or her recommendations to the Council within 20 days of the date of receipt of the appeal. The Council may hear arguments and shall decide the matter.

(Prior Code, § 9-9-3)


9-9-4 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.

A special permit for erection of new utility poles and wires may be granted only in the event the applicant makes an affirmative showing that the public’s general health, safety and welfare and that of adjacent property owners will not be impaired, endangered or jeopardized by the proposed erection. In deciding such matter, the following factors shall be considered:

(A) The location and height of such poles and wires and their relation to present or potential future roads;

(B) The crossing of such lines over much traveled highways or streets, the proximity of such lines to schools, churches or other places where people congregate;

(C) The probability of extensive flying in the area where such poles and wires are proposed to be located and the proximity to existing or proposed airfields;

(D) Fire or other accident hazards from the presence of such poles and wires and the effect, if any, of same upon the effectiveness of fire fighting equipment;

(E) The aesthetics involved;

(F) The future conditions that may be reasonably anticipated in the area in view of a normal course of development;

(G) The practicality and feasibility of underground installations of such facilities with due regard for the comparative costs between underground and overground installations, but a mere showing that an underground installation shall cost more than an overground installation shall not in itself necessarily require issuance of a permit.

(Prior Code, § 9-9-4)


ARTICLE 9-10 Mailbox Exception; Obstruction of Rights-of-Way and the Like

Section

9-10-1    Mailbox exception; obstruction of rights-of-way and the like


9-10-1 MAILBOX EXCEPTION; OBSTRUCTION OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND THE LIKE.

(A) It is unlawful for any person to fix in place an awning, balcony, bridge, curb, sidewalk, faucet, fence, hydrant, pipe or sign on, over, under or across any public street or alley right-of-way, park or public place without having first obtained permission to do so from the proper city official; provided however, that mailboxes may be placed in the street right-of-way, except that no portion thereof shall extend into or over any sidewalk, curb or improved street surface.

(B) All mailboxes shall be mounted on wrought iron poles or two-inch pipe. The pole will be 36 inches above grade.

(C) The following sizes of mailboxes as authorized by the Postal Department are authorized to be installed in the city. All mailboxes shall be black or a light pastel shade to blend in with the area.

(1) 19 inch length - 6.5 inch width - 8.5 inch height.

(2) 21 inch length - 8.8 inch width - 10.5 inch height.

(3) 23.5 inch length - 11.5 inch width - 13.5 inch height.

(D) Prior to the installation of any mailbox on a dedicated roadway, each resident shall sign an agreement holding the city completely harmless in all respects for any and all losses of any kind or description that may result from the mailboxes being placed on the city right-of-way.

(Prior Code, Art. 9-10) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


ARTICLE 9-11 Reserved

(Article repealed by Ord. 05-975, passed 12-12-2005)


ARTICLE 9-12 Low Flow Fixtures and Devices

Section

9-12-1    Purpose

9-12-2    Certification

9-12-3    Specific low flow fixtures and devices required

9-12-4    Flow restriction device required for water-cooled refrigerating systems

9-12-5    Installation rebate

9-12-6    Violation; penalties


9-12-1 PURPOSE.

This article establishes maximum rates of water flow or discharge for plumbing fixtures and devices in order to promote water conservation.

(Prior Code, § 9-12-1) (Ord. 90-295, passed 2-27-1990; Am. Ord. 90-298, passed 5-22-1990)


9-12-2 CERTIFICATION.

The plumbing fixtures and devices required to be installed pursuant to this article shall be certified by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and comply with all applicable American-National Standards Institute standards.

(Prior Code, § 9-12-2) (Ord. 90-295, passed 2-27-1990; Am. Ord. 90-298, passed 5-22-1990)


9-12-3 SPECIFIC LOW FLOW FIXTURES AND DEVICES REQUIRED.

The plumbing fixtures and devices required to be installed, unless otherwise indicated herein, in every new building or addition to an existing building for which a building permit has been issued after the effective date of this article, and when a replacement fixture or device is required in any building:

(A) Faucets (general). All lavatory, kitchen and bar sink faucets shall be designed, manufactured, installed or equipped with a flow control device aerator which will not allow a water flow rate in excess of 2.75 gallons per minute;

(B) Faucets (public restrooms). In addition to the general requirements set forth in subsection (A) of this section, lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type;

(C) Showerheads. Showerheads, except where provided for safety reasons, shall be designed, manufactured and installed with a flow limitation device which will not allow a water flow rate in excess of 2.75 gallons per minute. The flow limitation device must be a permanent and integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of 2.75 gallons per minute;

(D) Urinals. Urinals shall be designed, manufactured and installed so the maximum flush will not exceed 1.6 gallons of water. Adjustable type flushometer valves may be used, provided they are adjusted so the maximum flush will not exceed 1.6 gallons of water;

(E) Water closets. Water closets shall be designed, manufactured and installed so the maximum flush will not exceed 1.6 gallons of water.

(Prior Code, § 9-12-3) (Ord. 90-295, passed 2-27-1990; Am. Ord. 90-298, passed 5-22-1990)


9-12-4 FLOW RESTRICTION DEVICE REQUIRED FOR WATER-COOLED REFRIGERATING SYSTEMS.

(A) This section shall apply to water-cooled refrigeration systems using water, entirely or in part, as a means of condensing a refrigerant.

(B) Water-cooled refrigerating systems, except as otherwise provided in this section, shall be equipped with one of the following devices:

(1) Cooling tower;

(2) An evaporative condenser; or

(3) An acceptable water circulating device.

(C) The provisions of subsection (B) of this section shall not apply to systems with an aggregate total of two tons or less or a rating of two horsepowers or less and located or installed at one street address. Multiple dwelling unit structures are considered as one street address. However, such systems shall be equipped with water regulation valves adjusted to use a minimum amount of water.

(Prior Code, § 9-12-4) (Ord. 90-295, passed 2-27-1990; Am. Ord. 90-298, passed 5-22-1990)


9-12-5 INSTALLATION REBATE.

(A) Installation of a low flow toilet in any building existing on May 22, 1990 may qualify the owner of the building for the incentive provided in this section. All low flow toilets shall meet the criteria described in division (E) of § 9-12-3. Upon presentation by the owner of the building in which the low flow toilet is installed of a purchase sales slip for the low flow toilet and the evidence as may be reasonably required by the chief building official to evidence proof of installation thereof, the city shall pay the sum of $50 to the owner or occupant of the building installing the low flow toilet. The chief building official shall have the right to require a visual verification of the installation of the low flow toilet by the Building Safety Division of the Community Development Department.

(B) Installation of a hot water recirculating pump or point-of-service instant hot water heater in any existing residential building may qualify the owner of the building for the incentive provided in this section. Upon presentation by the owner-occupant or landlord of the building in which the hot water recirculating pump or point-of-service instant hot water heater is installed of a purchase sales slip for the hot water recirculating pump or point-of-service instant hot water heater and the evidence as may be reasonably required by the chief building official to evidence proof of installation thereof, which must include the obtaining of a city building permit, the city shall pay the sum of $100 to the owner or occupant of the building installing the hot water recirculating pump or point-of-service instant hot water heater. The chief building official shall have the right to require a visual verification of the installation of the hot water recirculating pump or point-of service instant hot water heater by the Building Safety Division of the Community Development Department. Building permit fees directly relating to the installation of these devices shall be waived.

(C) Only one rebate shall be issued to each building. All work must be performed by the owner-occupant or landlord of the building or by a properly licensed Arizona contractor authorized by the owner-occupant or landlord, as applicable. All fixtures and appliances must be new and bear the label of a nationally recognized testing laboratory and be properly installed.

(D) The rebate provisions established in this section shall only be applicable to buildings receiving water and sewer services from the city and shall expire on December 31, 2005. A maximum dollar cap of $25,000 per calendar year shall be used on a first come, first served basis. Only owner-occupants or landlords are eligible to receive the rebate. The rebate shall be disbursed by the city within a reasonable time after city verification that the installation is eligible and in compliance.

(Prior Code, § 9-12-5) (Ord. 90-295, passed 2-27-1990; Am. Ord. 90-298, passed 5-22-1990; Am. Ord. 04-882, passed 1-12-2004)


9-12-6 VIOLATION; PENALTIES.

A violation of this article shall be a civil infraction. A single citation shall be issued for each building regardless of the actual number of non-compliances within the building. The owner of the building or person who acquired the building permit shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 per citation. The court may also order such person to correct all non-compliances within the building for which the citation was issued.

(Prior Code, § 9-12-6) (Ord. 90-295, passed 2-27-1990; Am. Ord. 90-298, passed 5-22-1990)


CHAPTER 10: Health and Sanitation

Article

10-1.    DEFINITIONS

10-2.    SERVICE AND BILLING

10-3.    PREPARATION, COLLECTION OF REFUSE

10-4.    HAULING; PROHIBITIONS; PROPERTY MAINTENANCE

10-5.    REFUSE TRANSPORTERS; LANDFILL/WASTE FACILITIES

10-6.    ENFORCEMENT


ARTICLE 10-1: Definitions

Section

10-1-1    Definitions


10-1-1 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

ANIMAL MANURE means waste resulting from farm animals (i.e., chickens, horses, pigs, and cows) or other nondomestic animals.

BUILDING MATERIALS. See "Construction Materials," "Building Materials."

BULK REFUSE means large refuse that cannot be placed inside a City issued refuse container with the lid of the container closed. Light metal pipe less than one inch in diameter, with no objects exceeding four feet in length, uncontained household appliances (e.g., washer, stove, refrigerator, water heater), household furniture (e.g., couches, chairs, patio furniture), brush, tree branches, palm fronds and other large items not exceeding four feet in length that will not fit into City provided containers. Bulk refuse does not include bagged household garbage not placed in City provided containers.

BUNDLED means items are grouped together such as tree limbs, branches or other items similar in nature, which are stacked parallel to one another and banded or fastened together by rope, twine, cord, or item similar in characteristic. Each individual bundle shall not exceed 50 lbs and four feet in length.

CITY means the City of Goodyear or designee, or any entity with which the City contracts to provide the specific service(s) identified in this chapter on behalf of the City.

CITY MANAGER means the City of Goodyear City Manager or designee.

COMMERCIAL ACCOUNT means an account for a profit or nonprofit business and multi-family residential dwelling units, excluding single family residences.

COMMERCIAL CONTAINER means any container, other than a City issued residential refuse and recycling container.

CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS, BUILDING MATERIALS means materials used in, from or related to construction, excavation, demolition, remodeling, or site preparation including, but not limited to, rocks, trees, debris, bricks, concrete, lumber, nails, plumbing materials, stone, shingles, drywall, wires, packaging, plaster, all types of scrap building materials or excavated materials. Construction and building materials are not picked up by the City.

CUSTOMER means the property owner or any person, renter, lessee, occupant, government agency, nonprofit or entity responsible for payment of utility service(s) provided by the City.

DANGEROUS REFUSE. See "Hazardous Waste, Dangerous Refuse."

DEBRIS means all forms of refuse, garbage, trash, litter, construction materials, hazardous waste, green waste, and any form of waste, refuse or recycling materials as defined in this chapter which is less than one foot in length.

DILAPIDATED means decayed, deteriorated, or fallen into partial ruin.

DIRECTOR means the person or his/her designee authorized by the City Manager to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter.

DOMESTIC ANIMAL REFUSE means refuse resulting from a pet, including but not limited to dogs, cats, birds or other tame animals traditionally found to reside inside a home or residential dwelling.

GARBAGE means all putrescible wastes (excluding sewage and body wastes), including all organic wastes which have been prepared for, or intended to be used as, food or resulted from the preparation of food, including all such substances from public and private establishments or residences.

GREEN WASTE means all tree limbs, branches, palm fronds, shrub trimmings, grass clippings and other landscape debris. Brush, tree branches, palm fronds and the like that are placed for bulk collections. Green waste shall not exceed four feet in length and shall be placed in neat order parallel to the street at the appropriate bulk collection points on the designated collection days.

HAZARDOUS WASTE, DANGEROUS REFUSE means any potentially flammable items, medical waste, explosives, radioactive materials, hazardous or toxic substances, mixture, article, material or waste or related materials, including any substances defined as or included in the definition of hazardous substances, hazardous waste, hazardous materials or toxic substances, now or subsequently regulated under any applicable Federal, State or local laws or regulations, including without limitation petroleum-based products, paints, solvents, lead, cyanide, DDT, printing inks, acids, pesticides, ammonia compounds and other chemical products, compound, mixture, substance or article, asbestos, PCBs and similar compounds, medical marijuana byproducts and associated waste, and including any different products and materials which are subsequently found to have adverse effects on the environment and health and safety of persons. This definition shall include anything defined or designated as hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or other applicable Federal, State or local law or regulations. Hazardous waste shall not be disposed of in City containers or placed curbside for collection and will not be collected by the City.

INHABIT means to live or dwell in any structure required to have a utility account on a temporary or permanent basis.

LITTER means any rubbish, trash, weeds, green waste or debris and shall include all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including but not limited to garbage, trash, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, mattresses, couches, appliances, solid market and industrial waste; any deposit, accumulation, pile or heap of brush, grass, debris, weeds, cans, cloth, paper, wood, rubbish or other unsightly or unsanitary matter of any kind whatsoever; and any growth of weeds, brush, grass or other vegetable growth to a height of over six inches. Any debris created during any construction shall be considered litter for purposes of this chapter.

MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ACCOUNT means an account for a multi-family residential dwelling unit which has requested and receives sanitation service from the City using containers designed to service more than one dwelling unit.

MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNITS means any residential property comprised of two or more dwelling units, including duplexes, apartments and condominiums.

NON-RECYCLABLE MATERIALS include but are not limited to garbage, hazardous materials and medical waste; plastic bags; film or sheeting; any plastic not made from PETE or HDPE; any organic material other than acceptable paper, newsprint, cardboard, and chipboard; contaminated materials and any other trash which, at the Director’s discretion, is deemed unacceptable. See also "Recyclable materials."

OCCUPANT means a person, persons or legal entity that, through rights of ownership, tenancy or other legal means, has possession or the use of the subject real property.

PERSON means any enterprise, individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, trust, estate, governmental entity, municipality, State or Federal agency or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, property managers, agents, assigns, or employee thereof.

PRIVATE PROPERTY means any real or personal property which is privately owned.

PROPERTY means buildings, ground, lots, tracts of land, or other real property whether publicly or privately owned.

PROPERTY OWNER means any person, with reference to real property, that holds or has any of the following: (A) fee title, (B) equitable title, (C) any possessory right, (D) the right to occupy the premises, or (E) the right to lease, sublease or authorize another to occupy the premises for real property located in the City of Goodyear. A person is presumed to be a property owner if identified as such on any of the following: a deed, contract, lease agreement, sales agreement, the Maricopa County Recorder’s Office, Maricopa County Assessor’s Office and/or any other public record system wherein these records may be located.

PUBLIC PLACE means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, buildings, facilities or other real or personal property which are publicly owned.

PUTRESCIBLE means solid waste that contains organic matter capable of being decomposed by microorganisms and of such a character and proportion as to cause obnoxious odors and to be capable of attracting or providing food for birds or animals.

RECYCLABLE MATERIALS means clean and dry: paper, cardboard, chipboard, plastic containers made from polyethylene terephthalate ("PETE") or high density polyethylene ("HDPE"), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), low density polyethylene (LDPE), polypropylene (PP), polystyrene (PS), steel food cans, aluminum cans, disposable aluminum bake ware and aluminum foil. See also "Non-recylable materials."

RECYCLING means the removal of recyclable materials, such as plastic, paper, glass and aluminum cans, from the waste stream and placing them back in product manufacturing.

RECYCLING CONTAINER means a container provided by the City for the disposal of items that meet the definition of recycling.

REFUSE means all solid waste, garbage, trash, litter, green waste and debris.

REFUSE CONTAINER means a container provided by the City for the disposal of items that meet the definition of refuse.

REFUSE TRANSPORTER means non-City owned vehicles used for collection and transportation of garbage, or refuse containing garbage.

RESIDENT means any person that lives full or part time within the City limits.

RESIDENTIAL CONTAINER means a receptacle of various sizes designed in accordance with City standards for use with an automated solid waste and recyclable materials program, which is provided by the City and assigned to the customer’s address at the time of account activation.

SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE means a single family detached dwelling.

SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ACCOUNT means an account for a single family detached dwelling which receives sanitation services from the City using residential containers provided by the City.

STRUCTURE means buildings, improvements and other structures that are constructed or placed on land.

TRAFFICWAY means any land way open to the public as a matter of right or custom for moving persons or property from one place to another. A trafficway’s boundaries are from property line to property line and include the roadside, roadways (travel lanes), medians, separators, shoulders and alley.

TRASH. See the definitions for "Refuse," "Debris," "Litter" and "Garbage."

UNCONTAINED BULK REFUSE means items that cannot be bagged or otherwise placed inside a refuse or recycling container.

UTILITY ACCOUNT means all accounts with the City of Goodyear for sanitation, sewer and/or water when provided by the City.

UTILITY SERVICE(S) means sewer, sanitation and/or water service provided by or on behalf of the City of Goodyear.

(Ord. 08-1151, passed 12-15-2008; Am. Ord. 09-1190, passed 7-13-2009; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014)


ARTICLE 10-2 Service and Billing

Section

10-2-1    Sanitation service required

10-2-2    Rates, fees and deposits

10-2-3    Containers

10-2-4    Container lids

10-2-5    Containers for commercial purposes

10-2-6    Applications for sanitation service

10-2-7    Billing, payment, additional fees, termination, collections and liens

10-2-8    Discontinuance of sanitation service

10-2-9    Temporary suspension of sanitation service

Prior legislation: Prior Code, § 10-4-1.


10-2-1 SANITATION SERVICE REQUIRED.

(A) All persons must sign up and maintain an account with the City to receive sanitation service, when such service is provided by the City at the time the person purchases, owns, leases, uses or occupies, whichever occurs first, property within the City, regardless of whether the sanitation service is used. For purposes of this subsection, maintain an account means to open an account with the City for sanitation service and make all payments due on that account.

(B) All property owners shall provide the City with the names of all tenants occupying the property owner’s property within 30 days of the inhabitation of the property owner’s property.

(C) Base fees and any charges for sanitation service shall apply even if a residence is unoccupied.

(D) No person within the City shall be permitted to avoid or refuse to accept residential sanitation service if available to be provided by the City to their residence. The failure of any person to accept sanitation service shall not exempt that person from the payment of the charges for the service and any fine or penalty for noncompliance.

(E) Failure to Subscribe. Any person that is required to receive sanitation service from the City who fails to activate a sanitation account with the City as required in this section shall be subject to penalties, which include but are not limited to the total monthly fees they would have been assessed and an activation fee. This shall be in addition to any other penalties provided in this chapter.

(F) It is unlawful for any property owner to allow any person to lease, rent, or inhabit the property owner’s property if that person leasing, renting, occupying or inhabiting the property owner’s property does not maintain all utility services available and provided by the City.

(G) It is unlawful for any person to lease, rent, or inhabit any property if that person does not maintain all utility services available and provided by the City.

(H) For purposes of subsections (F) and (G) of this section, maintain all utility services means to open and keep open an active account with the City for all utility services available and provided by the City and to make all payments when due on that account for the duration of the lease, rental, occupancy or inhabitance of the property owner’s property.

(Ord. 08-1151, passed 12-15-2008; Am. Ord. 09-1190, passed 7-13-2009; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-1-2(A), (B))


10-2-2 RATES, FEES AND DEPOSITS.

(A) The Council by way of resolution shall set the monthly rates for sanitation services provided by the City. The sanitation rates may be adjusted annually effective July 1st of each year based on May-to-May Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers ("CPI-U") or the findings of a cost of service study by resolution of Council.

(B) The rate which constitutes the sanitation service fee shall be payable to the City by every person for every single family residence and multi-family residential dwelling unit, building or property that is purchased, owned, leased, used or occupied from which an activity is carried on which generates refuse, upon which refuse is found or which is connected to a water source of any type, irrespective of whether or not refuse services are being utilized if City sanitation services are available.

(C) Account Activation Fee. A nonrefundable activation fee will be charged for the activation of any utility account. No more than one activation fee will be required when the customer is signing up for multiple utility services with the City, at one location, at the time of the initial application.

(D) Security Deposit. A refundable deposit in an amount to be set by resolution of Council may be charged for activation of sanitation services. Such deposit shall be retained by the City as security for payment of future utility service charges until all utility services are terminated and the account is closed with the outstanding balance on all utility accounts paid in full. Upon receipt of a written request from the applicant, the City Manager may waive the deposit required under this section if during the preceding 18 months the applicant’s payment history with any public utility or government entity evidences that the applicant has timely paid their bills for 12 consecutive months. The customer’s deposit may be returned to the customer if there have been no late utility payments during the prior 12 months on the customer’s account.

(E) In the event a customer’s deposit has been previously refunded or waived, the Director may require a new deposit as a condition of continued service in the event the customer fails to pay the charges required under Chapter 10, 12, or 14, when each bill is due and payable for any three billing periods within a 12 month period. The three billing periods need not be consecutive.

(F) Manual Collection Fees. Additional rates or charges may be assessed when manual collection of containers is requested and/or required by unusual, unique or special needs. The rates and charges for such services will be added to the monthly bill.

(G) Unscheduled or Excessive Bulk Collections. Additional fees may be assessed for unscheduled or excessive volume pickup and disposal of bulk refuse. Bulk collection will be considered excessive when it exceeds five cubic yards of material per collection. The rates and charges for such services will be added to the monthly bill.

(H) All fees, charges, rates, penalties and deposits referenced in this chapter shall be set by resolution of Council.

(I) Owner Guarantee. A property owner may pay the deposit required for utility services on behalf of a tenant, or the deposit may be waived on behalf of a tenant, if the property owner meets the waiver requirement set forth in this section, and if, in either situation, the property owner agrees to be financially responsible for the payment of any and all unpaid amounts due for utility services provided to the tenant and the tenant consents to the City’s disclosure of the tenant’s utility account information to the property owner.

(Ord. 08-1151, passed 12-15-2008; Am. Ord. 09-1190, passed 7-13-2009; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014; Am. Ord. 18-1401, passed 8-28-2018. Formerly 10-1-2(C) – (E), (G), (H))


10-2-3 CONTAINERS.

(A) Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, all refuse and recycling shall be hauled for disposal by the City, only in the designated containers provided by the City and assigned to the customer’s address. The container is assigned to the customer’s address at the time service is activated at that location by that customer. No container may be transferred or reassigned to a new or different address without the prior written consent from the City.

(B) All customers shall accept both the refuse and recycle containers provided by the City. Those persons receiving service in the area formerly known as Mobile may be exempt from this requirement upon receipt of written approval from the City Manager. Customers that refuse to accept a recycling container or have had container(s) removed due to excessive contamination may be charged an additional fee.

(C) Container Size. Customers may select the size of refuse and recycling containers for use in the City’s sanitation collection services, at the time the account is activated. One change in each container size will be permitted per fiscal year without incurring any additional fee. An additional administrative fee shall automatically be charged to any account requesting more than one size change for each refuse or recycling container per fiscal year.

(D) Additional Refuse Containers. Customers may request an additional container for refuse, provided the customer is utilizing the largest container size. An exception will be made for customers in which physical or storage limitations require multiple, smaller containers as determined by the City. Customers may be required to pay an additional security deposit for additional containers and will be billed an additional monthly service fee for the collection of each additional refuse container.

(E) Additional Recycling Containers. Customers may request an additional recycling container, provided the customer is already utilizing the largest container size. An exception will be made for customers in which physical or storage limitations require multiple, smaller containers as determined by the City. Customers may be required to pay an additional security deposit for additional containers. No additional monthly service fee for collection will be assessed for the additional recycling container.

(F) Replacement Container Fee. A replacement fee may be assessed and/or security deposit(s) may be forfeited when a container is lost, damaged, missing or when pulled by the City for repeated container inspection violations. Customers may be required to pay an additional deposit for every replacement container. Customers should contact the Finance Department if their assigned containers are damaged, lost, missing or stolen to mitigate additional fees.

(G) Closed Account. The security deposit and all container(s) deposit(s) will be refunded to the customer once the customer’s Goodyear utility accounts (sanitation, sewer, and water) are all paid in full with no remaining or pending balance due and the City receives confirmation that the assigned undamaged containers have been returned to the City.

(H) Multi-Family Residential Dwelling Unit Refuse and Recycling. Participation in the City’s refuse and recycling program is optional for all multi-family residential dwelling units when City sanitation services are provided. If City sanitation services are not provided, a refuse transporter shall be used for sanitation services.

(I) Commercial Recycling. Commercial entities may sign up to participate in the City’s recycling program. Upon request, recycling container(s) will be provided based on the need and a refundable container deposit and monthly fee will be assessed and paid.

(J) Bulk Roll-Off Collections. Additional deposits and fees will be assessed for drop-off, pickup and disposal for various sizes of roll-off dumpsters utilized for short term collection periods.

(K) Container Maintenance. Customers are required to properly bag all refuse before placing it in a container, and shall maintain containers in a sanitary condition, and in good repair. Hot ashes, hazardous materials, objects that could result in damage to the container or other precluded waste shall not be placed in City containers. Containers may be periodically inspected by the City, and any container that is damaged due to the negligence of the customer shall be replaced at the expense of the customer. The cost of the container will be added to the customer’s monthly bill.

(L) Only customers that have paid all outstanding City sanitation, water and sewer fees will receive City provided containers for refuse and recycling collection, unless otherwise authorized in writing by the City Manager.

(Ord. 08-1151, passed 12-15-2008; Am. Ord. 09-1190, passed 7-13-2009; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-1-3)


10-2-4 CONTAINER LIDS.

The lids or covers of all containers shall at all times be kept closed so that flies and other insects may not have access to the contents and shall only be opened while the containers and receptacles are being filled, emptied, cleaned, or inspected. The customer shall ensure that containers are secure with no refuse overhanging or obstructing the lid from completely closing. Customers shall report to the Director any damaged container lids or container lids that do not fit securely on the container.

(Ord. 08-1151, passed 12-15-2008; Am. Ord. 09-1190, passed 7-13-2009; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-1-4)


10-2-5 CONTAINERS FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES.

(A) The City will not provide refuse containers for commercial purposes unless otherwise provided in the chapter. Business establishments must either provide containers necessary for the collection of refuse or have the commercial hauler that will collect refuse provide the necessary containers.

(B) All containers used for a commercial purpose shall include decals stating that container lids must be closed at all times other than placing refuse in the container. Other industry standard decals required by ANSI, OSHA or other regulating agencies must also be affixed to these containers. All containers must be painted and include the name and telephone number of the commercial hauler responsible for collecting the refuse placed in the containers legibly printed thereon.

(C) It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the container to maintain containers in a sanitary condition, in good repair, with no graffiti.

(Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-1-5)


10-2-6 APPLICATIONS FOR SANITATION SERVICE.

(A) Service applications are required of all persons requesting activation of sanitation services. Application information must be submitted for each service address. Once the application for sanitation services has been approved, activation of sanitation services will be the next scheduled sanitation pick up day for the community in which the service was activated.

(B) Required Information. Applicants shall provide the following information when activating an account.

(1) Single Family Residential Account:

(a) Legal names of all responsible parties (entity or individual must include all persons identified on the rental or lease agreement);

(b) Social security number and/or Federal tax identification number for commercial entities;

(c) Service address;

(d) Mailing address, if different;

(e) If property owner, provide proof of ownership;

(f) If tenant, provide landlord’s name and address and copy of occupancy agreement (rental or lease agreement);

(g) If agent, provide proof of agency;

(h) Applicant’s employer’s name, address and phone number;

(i) Requested start date;

(j) A photocopy of a valid driver’s license/identification card, or other official government identification;

(k) Any other information deemed relevant by the Director.

(2) Commercial and Multi-Family Residential Accounts.

(a) Legal name(s) of all responsible parties/entities;

(b) Federal tax identification number and/or social security number;

(c) Service address;

(d) Mailing address, if different;

(e) Name and address of property owner(s);

(f) If property owner, provide proof of ownership;

(g) If tenant, provide:

1. Landlord’s name and address and copy of rental or lease agreement;

2. Names of all persons identified on the rental or lease agreement;

(h) If agent, provide proof of agency;

(i) Requested start date;

(j) A photocopy of a valid driver’s license/identification card, or other official government identification; and

(k) Any other information deemed relevant by the Director.

(C) All applications for any and all utility service(s) submitted by any person or entity shall be signed by the person who will be responsible for payment of the sanitation services to be provided by the City, or a person legally authorized to act on their behalf. When submitting an application electronically, the named applicant(s) on the application will be deemed to have signed the applications.

(D) The City reserves, at all times, the right to reject an application or terminate any utility service should any person provide false or misleading information on their application; sanitation service is not available under a standard rate; sanitation service involves excessive service expense; or until the applicant requesting sanitation service pays in full any and all outstanding utility balance(s) for all utility accounts of the named applicant(s).

(E) It is the responsibility of the customer to ensure that the customer’s contact and billing information on file with the City remains current at all times.

(Ord. 08-1151, passed 12-15-2008; Am. Ord. 09-1190, passed 7-13-2009; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-1-6)


10-2-7 BILLING, PAYMENT, ADDITIONAL FEES, TERMINATION, COLLECTIONS AND LIENS.

(A) Payment of All Charges.

(1) Single Family Residential and Multi-Family Residential Accounts. All persons identified as the applicant on the application to establish the sanitation services account shall be joint and severally responsible for payment in full of all fees and charges, including interest and penalties, for the utility account. Services that have been discontinued for any reason shall not be reinstated until all past due amounts on the utility account, including interest and penalties, have been paid in full. No person may activate or reactivate an account until all outstanding utility account balances have been paid in full.

(2) Commercial Account. The person establishing the account shall be responsible for the payment of all charges including interest and penalties for all agreed-to containers and services provided. Services that have been discontinued for any reason shall not be reinstated until all past due amounts on the utility account, including interest and penalties have been paid in full. No person may activate or reactivate an account until all outstanding utility account balances have been paid in full.

(B) The customer shall be responsible for paying any unpaid amounts upon terminating service, regardless of whether termination is at the City or customer’s request. Service shall be charged at a prorated monthly rate.

(C) All rates and service charges are due and payable when rendered. Payment must be received by the due date printed on the bill. If the total amount of such bill is not paid by the due date, the customer will be assessed a late fee which is 1.5% of the unpaid balance due and a notice of delinquency and intent to disconnect service will be mailed to the customer indicating the scheduled disconnect date. If the total amount due is not paid prior to the scheduled termination date, the notice of delinquency and intent to disconnect having been given, service will be terminated and the containers may be removed. Failure of the customer to leave the containers curbside on the requested date and in an accessible area for removal at disconnect due to account delinquency may result in the forfeit of any security deposit and/or an assessment to the customer for the replacement cost of the containers, which amount shall be added to the bill.

(D) The City may discontinue utility service(s) under any of the following conditions:

(1) to prevent fraud or abuse, or unauthorized use of service;

(2) for the violation of this chapter or of any Federal, State, or local laws or environmental issues;

(3) legal process;

(4) direction of public authorities;

(5) local emergency requiring emergency measures, or for emergency repairs;

(6) misuse or damage to container(s) by the customer or someone on their behalf;

(7) nonpayment of any utility charges or deposit(s); or

(8) false information provided in the application or in the application process.

(E) Service Termination Notice. The customer will receive service termination notice when an account becomes delinquent indicating the scheduled termination date, and will be assessed an administrative penalty fee set by resolution of Council. Additional fees and charges will be assessed and continue to accrue until the past due balance is paid in full. In the event a payment plan has been agreed upon by the Director for the payment of any delinquent amount, the late fee herein provided for shall not apply unless the customer fails to comply with the payment agreement.

(F) Payment Plan. The customer may enter into a payment plan agreement with the Director for the payment of any delinquent amount. Failure to comply with the payment plan agreement will result in the imposition of additional fees and penalties relating back to the original date of the outstanding debt and may result in the imposition of additional fees and costs as provided by the City Code and discontinuance of utility service.

(G) City reserves the right to reject any application for utility service(s) as provided herein.

(H) Non-Sufficient Funds Fee. In addition to all other fees and charges, in the event a customer’s payment for any fee or deposit due the City from a customer under the provisions of this chapter is returned to the City by the customer’s bank for insufficient funds, no account or by reason of a stop payment order, customer shall be charged an insufficient funds check fee.

(I) Appeal Hearing. A customer that disputes the account balance, requests for temporary suspension, or termination of service for nonpayment of amounts due, may submit an appeal in writing to the City Manager within 14 calendar days after the notice has been mailed, or emailed, to the customer’s address on file with the Finance Department. The written request must set forth fully the facts supporting the appeal and the relief requested. A separate appeal must be filed for each dispute. The City Manager shall have authority to compromise disputed billings or establish payment arrangements. The City Manager shall issue a written decision within 14 working days from the City Manager’s receipt of the appeal. The decision and order of the City Manager on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.

(J) Collection Efforts. In the event a customer fails to pay any sum due the City under the provisions of this chapter, the City shall have the right to pursue any and all collection efforts available by law which may include the utilization of collection agencies and reporting of the delinquency to the national credit bureaus. The City shall be entitled to be reimbursed for the costs of collection, including but not limited to attorneys’ fees.

(K) Lien. In the event a property owner fails to pay any sum due the City under the provisions of this chapter, for which the property owner is responsible, the City may record a lien on the real property to which the service is and/or has been provided for the amount of any unpaid amount due. Any and all unpaid amount due may result in a lien placed against the property from the date of recording in the office of the County Recorder in Maricopa County, Arizona, until the fees and all costs are paid as provided by law. A sale of the property to satisfy a lien assessed pursuant to this section shall be made on a judgment of foreclosure and order of sale in accordance with the rules and procedures applicable thereto. The City shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs incurred in the foreclosure of any such lien:

(1) The City will provide the property owner with written notice of intent to file the lien at least 30 days prior to the filing thereof, which shall include an advisement of the opportunity for a hearing with the City Manager. If the sum due for which the lien is claimed is paid prior to the expiration of the 30 day period, no such lien shall be filed for the amount paid.

(2) The notice of intent to file the lien shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the property owner, at the last known address, or to the address to which the tax bill for the property was last mailed. If the owner does not reside on the property, the notice shall be sent to the last known address. Upon payment of the lien, the City Manager is authorized to release the lien on behalf of the City.

(Ord. 08-1151, passed 12-15-2008; Am. Ord. 09-1190, passed 7-13-2009; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-1-7)


10-2-8 DISCONTINUANCE OF SANITATION SERVICE.

(A) All requests for discontinuance of sanitation service must be made in writing by the customer or their authorized agent and submitted to the City along with proof of termination of water service from the water provider, if applicable. Sanitation services will be terminated on the date requested by the customer or the next business day, whichever is later, after approval from the City. When discontinuance of sanitation service is requested, all charges for services provided and fees shall be calculated and due on the date specified on the bill. The customer requesting discontinuance of service must provide a change of address with their request to discontinue service.

(B) Until the City receives the customer’s written request to terminate sanitation services, the premises shall be deemed occupied and services charges will continue to accrue.

(C) In the event that the customer shall have made a deposit and the deposit is still being retained, the deposit amount will be applied to the balance owing on the account. Any credit remaining on the account, after all charges for all utility services have been paid, will be mailed to the customer at the address provided in their request to discontinue service.

(D) Any outstanding balances on the utility account(s) shall be collected as provided by City Code.

(Ord. 08-1151, passed 12-15-2008; Am. Ord. 09-1190, passed 7-13-2009; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-1-8)


10-2-9 TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF SANITATION SERVICE.

(A) Temporary suspension of sanitation services may be authorized in limited situations such as military relocation outside of the State of Arizona, a severe medical condition, death of an immediate family member or other extreme emergency. The administrative process for applying for temporary suspension is set forth in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual, Temporary Suspension of Sanitation Services Application Process:

(1) The residence for which temporary suspension has been approved shall remain vacant during the suspension period. Noncompliance with this section shall result in the immediate reactivation of sanitation services and back payment for all sanitation services for the approved suspension period.

(2) Each period of suspension shall not exceed six months. The customer may apply for additional periods of suspension.

(3) Service will automatically be reactivated at the end of the approved suspension period with no reactivation fee assessed, unless a request for an additional period of temporary suspension has been requested and approved by the City prior to the automatic reactivation. Failure to timely request an extension prior to reactivation will not preclude approval of an extension, but will result in the resident incurring sanitation fees pending approval.

(B) No suspension shall be deemed authorized unless and until the customer receives written confirmation from the City that the customer’s request for temporary suspension of sanitation services has been approved.

(C) Denial of a temporary suspension may be appealed to the City Manager as provided in Section 10-2-7(I).

(Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-1-9)


ARTICLE 10-3: Preparation, Collection of Refuse

Section

10-3-1    Preparation of refuse

10-3-2    Refuse collection services, location for pickup

10-3-3    Bulk collection services, location for pickup

10-3-4    Collection hours


10-3-1 PREPARATION OF REFUSE.

(A) All refuse shall be prepared for collection or disposed according to the nature and type of refuse as provided in this article, using the appropriate designated City container.

(B) Sharp Objects. Materials with a cutting edge or point, such as glass or cacti, must be securely contained so as to prevent the exposure of any sharp points or edges.

(C) Domestic Animal Refuse. All domestic animal refuse must be securely bagged and placed in the customer’s City issued refuse container. Animal excreta from farm animals (e.g., chickens, horses, pigs, and cows) shall not be placed on the curbside or in a City container and will not be collected by the City.

(D) Appliances. The City will only collect discarded appliances that can be readily lifted into a truck by no more than two people. For reasons of safety, all doors to appliances shall be removed, or latches or closing devices removed, in such a manner to allow an individual or animal to escape from the interior of the appliance.

(E) Vehicles. The City will not collect boats, motorcycles, motorized vehicles, large parts or other similar items.

(F) Right of Refusal. The City reserves the right to refuse to pick up any item determined to be in violation of this chapter and its decision shall be final.

(Ord. 08-1151, passed 12-15-2008; Am. Ord. 09-1190, passed 7-13-2009; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-2-1)


10-3-2 REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICES, LOCATION FOR PICKUP.

(A) Containers used for residential automated collection shall be placed for collection in an unobstructed passage, street, or curbside in accordance with the requirements of this article.

(B) Reserved.

(C) Containers shall be placed at the curb in front of the premises except at a corner lot where containers may be placed at the curb of the side street. Refuse and recycling containers may not be placed on sidewalks or curbing in any manner as to interfere with or be hazardous to pedestrians or vehicles. If more than one container is placed out for collection, the containers must have at least three feet of separation in order to accommodate automated collection. Containers should not be located closely to a parked vehicle, mailbox, fence, fire hydrant, plant materials, or other such restrictive objects in order to facilitate safe and efficient automated collection.

(D) When it is necessary to set containers at the front curb, they may be set out after 6:00 p.m. of the day preceding regular collection and no later than 6:00 a.m. of the scheduled collection day. Containers placed out after 6:00 a.m. of the scheduled collection day may not be serviced. Containers shall be removed from the curb by 6:00 a.m. of the day after collection. Containers shall be stored between collections in such a manner that they are not readily visible from the street.

(E) All multi-family, commercial, and institutional zoning districts shall have containers larger than 95-gallon placed in enclosures as required by the zoning ordinance.

(Ord. 08-1151, passed 12-15-2008; Am. Ord. 09-1190, passed 7-13-2009; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014; Am. Ord. 18-1401, passed 8-28-2018. Formerly 10-2-2)


10-3-3 BULK COLLECTION SERVICES, LOCATION FOR PICKUP.

(A) All bulk refuse shall be bundled and properly prepared for collection or disposed according to the nature and type of refuse as provided in this chapter.

(B) Bulk. Bulk service shall only be provided to residential accounts that have an active sanitation account. This service is provided and included in the monthly rate for this service. Collections shall include items that cannot be placed inside a container due to size or content. Material placed out for bulk collection shall not exceed five cubic yards per each collection. Bulk material shall be placed out for collection only when designated by the City for the pickup of the specific material.

(C) Excluded Items. Items excluded from bulk collections include, but are not limited to, pipe longer than four feet or greater than one inch in diameter, tires of any type, hazardous waste such as paint, oil, lead acid batteries, infectious and/or medical waste, concrete, cement blocks, bricks, dirt, rocks, pallets and household refuse, large auto and boat parts, and/or food waste. Any items resulting from any contracted work or services shall not be placed for bulk pickup, including those items resulting from work or services conducted on behalf of the customer.

(D) Bulk material should be set out after 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding collection, but may be set out up to seven days prior to the customer’s scheduled bulk collection day. Bulk material set out after 6:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection day may not be serviced.

(E) Manner of Placement. Bulk collection piles shall be placed in neat stacks no farther than four feet from the sidewalk or curb edge; or on the street parallel to the curb line and in such a manner that does not obstruct vehicle or pedestrian traffic. All piles shall be a minimum of five feet away from fences, cable junction boxes, electrical junction boxes, gas meters, water meter boxes, fire hydrants, mailboxes or any structure that may lead to property damage or injury.

(F) The City shall not be responsible for any property damage caused by improper bulk collection placement or the content of bulk set out for pick up, including damage from bulk placed on or near existing landscaping.

(Ord. 08-1151, passed 12-15-2008; Am. Ord. 09-1190, passed 7-13-2009; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014; Am. Ord. 18-1401, passed 8-28-2018. Formerly 10-2-3)


10-3-4 COLLECTION HOURS.

The hours of collection of refuse, recycling, and bulk collection shall be designated by the Director. The hours of collection may vary depending on operational needs. All containers shall be placed curbside by 6:00 a.m. on the normally scheduled collection day, excluding holidays.

(Ord. 08-1151, passed 12-15-2008; Am. Ord. 09-1190, passed 7-13-2009; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-2-4)




ARTICLE 10-4: Hauling, Prohibitions, Property Maintenance

Section

10-4-1    Hauling, spill proof vehicles, spillage, dumping

10-4-2    Refuse, prohibitions

10-4-3    Home owner’s association

10-4-4    Maintenance of property


10-4-1 HAULING, SPILL PROOF VEHICLES, SPILLAGE, DUMPING.

(A) It is unlawful for any person to knowingly transport or cause to be transported any refuse, trash, garbage, debris, green waste, hazardous water or recycling on or along any trafficway in the City, other than bulk refuse, when City sanitation services are available, unless authorized by this chapter.

(B) Private Services. It is unlawful for any person to provide residential sanitation services, such as collecting, gathering, hauling or disposing of refuse, except as provided in this chapter.

(C) Spill Proof Vehicle. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly transport or cause to be transported on or along any trafficway in the City any refuse, debris, litter, garbage, green waste, hazardous waste or recycling material unless such refuse, debris, litter, garbage, green waste, hazardous waste or recycling is contained in strong, secure, watertight vehicles or vehicles with secure watertight receptacles constructed to prevent any such refuse, litter, garbage, green waste, hazardous waste or recycling material from falling, leaking or spilling and any odor from escaping.

(D) Spillage. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly transport or cause to be transported on or along any trafficway in the City any refuse, debris, litter, garbage, green waste, hazardous waste or recycling material in or on a vehicle from which any refuse, garbage, green waste, hazardous waste or recycling falls, leaks, spills or emits odor.

(E) It is unlawful to knowingly throw, deposit or cause to be deposited any refuse, debris, litter, garbage, green waste, hazardous waste or recycling material, regardless of form, upon any private or public property within the City. It is a defense if the responsible person has a valid current customer account and their action is specifically permitted in this chapter.

(F) All violations of this article are class 1 misdemeanors subject to the penalties provided in Article 1-8 and Chapter 18. All violations may be pursued both civilly and criminally.

(Prior Code, §§ 10-3-1 – 10-3-4, 10-4-2) (Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-3-1)


10-4-2 REFUSE, PROHIBITIONS.

(A) Landscaping Business Refuse. It is unlawful, when performing work for compensation, to knowingly leave tree trimmings, shrubs, brush, plant and/or landscaping material(s)for bulk or curbside collection provided by the City, or deposited on lots (public or private), alleys, streets, or other property of a similar characteristic in the City or any public property and not authorized for that purpose. Landscaping business refuse may be hauled away in compliance with this chapter.

(B) Construction, Building Refuse. It is unlawful to knowingly leave lumber scraps, shingles, plaster, brick, stone, concrete and/or other building materials including all packaging from which materials were removed, generated from an activity for compensation for bulk or curbside collection provided by the City, or deposited on lots (public or private), alleys, streets, or other property of a similar characteristic in the City and not authorized for that purpose.

(C) Bulk Refuse. It is unlawful for customers to knowingly place bulk refuse curbside more than seven calendar days prior to the customer’s scheduled bulk collection day.

(D) Animal Manure. It is unlawful to knowingly place animal manure in City containers. Animal manure will not be collected by the City.

(E) Dumping; Property of Another. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly deposit, throw, or place any refuse, trash, filth, garbage, hazardous waste/dangerous refuse, green waste, litter, or debris upon or in public or private property (including refuse and recycling containers), not owned or under the control of that person.

(F) Dumping. It is unlawful for any person to recklessly deposit or cause to be deposited any refuse, bulk, debris, litter, garbage, green waste, hazardous waste or recycling material, regardless of form, if deposited or caused to be deposited:

(1) in the wrong location; or

(2) in the wrong container; or

(3) in a container assigned by the City to another utility account; or

(4) outside the times authorized by this chapter for refuse, recycling or bulk to be put out for pickup by the City.

(G) Spillage. It is unlawful for the customer to knowingly fail to clean up any refuse, trash, filth, garbage, green waste, litter, debris, spillage or residual refuse or recycling that is caused by container overflows, inclement weather, foraging or collections services. The customer shall collect and place in the refuse container any debris remaining after collection.

(H) Scavenging. It is unlawful to collect, scavenge, or disturb the refuse, garbage, recycling or bulk trash/refuse of another; or to add or remove any item from garbage, recycling or bulk trash/refuse set out for collection and/or disposal by another. This prohibition does not apply to law enforcement officers or City employees acting within the scope of their official duties. It is a defense if the person received prior authorization from the property owner/customer.

(I) Improper Deposit of Waste. It is unlawful to knowingly deposit or cause to be deposited, in any refuse or recycling container, any waste precluded from pickup due to the nature of the waste pursuant to this chapter.

(J) Each day, any violation of this article that exists shall constitute a separate violation or offense.

(K) The customer of record with the City at which a violation of this article exists may be presumed to be a person having lawful control over any building, structure or parcel of land to give consent.

(L) If in the opinion of the City Manager the condition constitutes an imminent health or safety hazard, the City Manager may immediately abate the hazard without notice as provided by law. Such abatement of an imminent health or safety hazard shall be limited to the minimum work necessary to remove the hazard. Abatement fees and charges will be assessed as provided in Article 10-6.

(Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 12-1260, passed 6-11-2012; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014; Am. Ord. 18-1401, passed 8-28-2018. Formerly 10-3-2)


10-4-3 HOME OWNER’S ASSOCIATION.

Any home owner’s association having maintenance responsibility for any common area or private property shall be responsible under this chapter with respect to such property as if it were the owner thereof.

(Prior Code, § 10-4-10) (Am. Ord. 2000-686, passed 11-14-2000; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-3-3)


10-4-4 MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY.

(A) It is unlawful for any property owner, tenant, renter, lessor, lessee, manager, entity, fiduciary or person with control of any property, building, structure or vacant land to fail to maintain such property, building, or structure in a clean manner free from garbage, rubbish, refuse, trash, weeds, waste or other accumulation of filth, debris, including but not limited to solid waste, litter, contamination, garbage, remodeling and demolition refuse/debris, hazardous materials, green waste, recyclables and weeds in excess of six inches in height.

(B) It is unlawful for any property owner, tenant, renter, lessor, lessee, manager, entity, fiduciary or person with control of any property, building, structure or vacant land to fail to remove dilapidated structures which constitute a hazard to public health and safety from buildings, grounds, lots, property and its contiguous sidewalks, streets and alleys.

(C) It is unlawful for any property owner, tenant, renter, lessor, lessee, manager, entity, fiduciary or person with control of any property, building, structure or vacant land to fail to maintain the area adjacent or abutting the property under their control, including alleys, public walkways, public streets and rights-of-way, free from garbage, refuse, trash and waste, including but not limited to solid waste, litter, contamination, garbage, remodeling and demolition refuse/debris, hazardous materials, green waste, recyclables and commercial and residential noncollectible items and weeds in excess of six inches in height.

(D) It is unlawful for any property owner, tenant, renter, lessor, lessee, manager, entity or any fiduciary or person with control of any property, building, structure or vacant land to fail to maintain landscaping including all trees, shrubs, hedges, and ground cover on the property and within, adjacent or abutting street right-of-way to the property in an appropriate and healthy manner and so that such landscaping will not interfere with the public convenience or safety in the use of streets and sidewalks. This responsibility shall include all areas between sidewalk and curb commonly referred to as a right-of-way, whether public or private property unless specified otherwise in a duly and properly executed agreement with the City. In locations where no curb exists, this responsibility shall extend to the edge of the roadway. For the purposes of this section, maintenance of trees, shrubs, hedges and other landscaping includes but is not limited to: deep root watering, pruning, clearance and structural trimming, fertilizing, pest control, irrigation system maintenance, and removal of branches, leaves and other debris.

(E) The City shall be responsible for maintaining all landscaping within the median islands on arterial and collector public streets within the City. The City shall not be responsible to maintain landscaping in the right-of-ways adjacent to arterials and collectors.

(F) It is a defense to subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section that the responsibility was one that belonged to the City pursuant to a properly executed agreement with the City or if the landscape development and maintenance has been accepted by the City prior to or at the time of the adoption of this section.

(Prior Code, § 10-4-3) (Am. Ord. 2000-686, passed 11-14-2000; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-3-4)


ARTICLE 10-5: Refuse Transporters, Landfill/Waste Facilities

Section

10-5-1    Refuse transporter, requirements

10-5-2    Refuse transporter, container requirements

10-5-3    Landfill, waste facilities

Prior legislation: Prior Code, §§ 10-6-1 – 10-6-3, 10-7-1 – 10-7-3, 10-7-7 and 10-7-8 and Ord. 93-488.


10-5-1 REFUSE TRANSPORTER, REQUIREMENTS.

(A) All vehicles used for refuse transportation for commercial or construction activities within the City must comply with the following:

(1) Commercial refuse transporters must have a current business registration on file with the City;

(2) Vehicles must be in good condition and repair and comply with current Arizona Department of Transportation standards;

(3) Vehicles shall be maintained and operated in a clean and neat manner so as to prevent refuse from spilling, leaking and blowing from the container onto the roadway;

(4) All open top roll-off containers must be securely covered when in transit to prevent refuse or contents from spilling or blowing from the container onto the roadway;

(5) When driven or operated by one person, front loading refuse packers shall be equipped with a backup protection device;

(6) Vehicles shall be maintained and operated in such a manner so as the noise levels do not exceed 75 decibels at a distance of 25 feet during stationary operation.

(Prior Code, § 10-7-4) (Ord. 96-558, passed 7-23-1996; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-4-2)


10-5-2 REFUSE TRANSPORTER, CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS.

(A) Commercial refuse transporter may service only standard commercial refuse containers, roll-off bodies and refuse compactors furnished by either the refuse transporter or the refuse customer.

(B) Commercial refuse transporter shall have joint responsibility with the refuse customer to keep and maintain sufficient standard commercial containers as to accommodate the disposal needs of the establishment.

(C) Commercial refuse transporter shall at all times maintain their containers, roll-off bodies and refuse compactors in sanitary conditions and good repair as may be determined by the Director. All refuse transporter containers, roll-off bodies and refuse compactors shall be painted and have the registries name and telephone number legibly identified thereon.

(D) Refuse transporter containers, roll-off bodies and refuse compactors shall be located so as not to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic and shall be in conformance with all City Code requirements.

(Prior Code, § 10-7-5) (Ord. 96-558, passed 7-23-1996; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-4-3)


10-5-3 LANDFILL, WASTE FACILITIES.

(A) It is unlawful to knowingly operate within the City limits a temporary or permanent site for any landfill or waste facility designed to store, treat or dispose of any hazardous or solid waste to be treated at a treatment plant, except by and under the control and operation of the City.

(B) Before the City commences operation of such facility, the City shall provide notice of the selection of the possible facility as required by the City Charter.

(C) Before the City makes final approval of the facility, the City shall hold a public hearing at the City Hall at least 30 days before a final decision concerning the location and operation of the facility.

(Prior Code, §§ 10-5-1 – 10-5-3) (Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-4-4)


ARTICLE 10-6: Enforcement

Section

10-6-1    Enforcement, penalties

10-6-2    Compliance, abatement notice

10-6-3    Appeal

10-6-4    Abatement by City

10-6-5    Lien

Prior legislation: Prior Code, § 10-7-6.


10-6-1 ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES.

(A) Enforcement Official. Law Enforcement, Code Enforcement, the Sanitation Inspector, Sanitation Supervisor, and Sanitation Superintendent shall have the authority and responsibility for enforcement and compliance with this chapter.

(B) No oversight or dereliction of duties by any person assigned to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall legalize, allow, or excuse a violation of this chapter.

(C) All violations of this chapter are subject to criminal and civil penalties and enforcement provisions, including abatement, collections, and liens, pursuant to Article 1-8 and Article 18-1. A person who commits a violation of this chapter after previously having been found responsible for committing a prior similar offense shall be subject to increasing civil sanctions for each additional offense as set forth in 18-1.

(D) If a person pleads responsible or is found to be responsible for a civil violation of Section 10-2-1, the court shall impose a civil sanction in accordance with the following guidelines: for a first time offense, the civil sanction shall be in an amount not less than $500 nor more than $750; for a second offense, the civil sanction shall be in a sum not less than $750 nor more than $1,000; and for a third offense or subsequent offense, the civil sanction shall be in an amount not less than $1,000. Any violation of Section 10-2-1 may be dismissed or the fines may be reduced or suspended when proof is filed and accepted by the court which shows that the property owner or tenant has signed up for utility service with the City and paid, or reached an agreement with the City for a payment plan, for the outstanding balance due on the account.

(E) Each day any violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance incorporated herein, or the failure to perform any act or duty required by this code or ordinance incorporated herein, continues shall constitute a separate offense.

(F) The City may obtain an administrative warrant from the Goodyear Municipal Court authorizing the City to enter the property located in the City at reasonable times to inspect the property to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter or when there is probable cause to believe a condition, object, activity or circumstance exists on the property that justifies the inspection. The administrative warrant may also give authorization to City staff to enter the property to remove City containers when there is no active sanitation account associated with the property. No active sanitation account means no current sanitation account has been opened with the City related to the property or the sanitation account related to the property has been terminated for any reason.

(Prior Code, § 10-4-11) (Am. Ord. 2000-686, passed 11-14-2000; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014; Am. Ord. 18-1419, passed 12-3-2018. Formerly 10-5-1)


10-6-2 COMPLIANCE, ABATEMENT NOTICE.

(A) When there has been a violation of this chapter, the Enforcement Official addressing that violation may cause to be prepared and served a Notice of Violation and Order to comply to the property owner, the beneficiary of a deed of trust, the owner’s authorized agent, or the owner’s statutory agent and the occupant or lessee. If the violation has occurred on public property, the notice shall be served to the person responsible for the violation. The enforcement official may issue a citation to the responsible party without issuing a notice of violation.

(B) If a notice of violation or citation is issued, it shall include:

(1) Identification of property in violation;

(2) Statement of violations in sufficient detail to allow an owner or responsible party to identify and correct the problem;

(3) Reinspection date, if applicable;

(4) Address and phone number of a City representative to contact;

(5) If the notice is associated with an abatement action, then include a cost estimate to correct the violations;

(6) City’s authority to abate should owner or responsible party not correct the violation within 30 days, and assess a lien against the property for the costs of abatement; and

(7) Appeal procedures, if applicable.

(C) Service.

(1) Any notice or citation given for any purpose under this code shall be deemed effective on the date when notice or citation is hand-delivered, mailed certified and/or mailed regular, addressed to the property owner, owner’s agent, or responsible party, to the last known address or the address to which the tax bill for the property was last mailed.

(2) If personal service or mailed service is not practicable, service of notice shall also be deemed effective upon notification through one-time public notice published in a newspaper of general circulation and by posting the property for a period of 30 days.

(3) Nothing herein shall preclude the city from giving additional written notice at its discretion. If the City does elect to give any additional notice in any instance, it shall not thereby become obligated to give such additional notice thereafter in the same or other situations.

(4) The City may record the notice in the County Recorder’s office in the county where the property is located. If the notice is recorded and compliance with the notice is subsequently satisfied, the City shall record a release of the notice.

(D) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude the City from pursuing the matter civilly and/or criminally as well as any and all other remedies provided by law.

(E) Nothing in this section shall require the issuance of a notice of violation prior to the commencement of civil or criminal action, as well as any and all other remedies provided by law. If a responsible party has been issued two notices of violation for the same violation within a two-year period then the enforcement official may immediately issue a civil or criminal citation without any additional notices.

(Prior Code, §§ 10-4-4 – 10-4-6) (Am. Ord. 92-456, passed 2-25-1992; Am. Ord. 2000-686, passed 11-14-2000; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014; Am. Ord. 18-1419, passed 12-3-2018. Formerly 10-5-2)


10-6-3 APPEAL.

(A) On or prior to the date set for compliance on the notice, the owner or person controlling such property may appeal the notice and assessments in writing to the City Manager. Appeals of the notice of violation shall be filed with the City Clerk in writing within 14 calendar days after receipt of the notice. Appeals of the assessment shall be filed with the City Clerk in writing within 30 days of the assessment. All appeals shall contain a written statement fully setting forth the grounds for the appeal and the relief requested. The City Manager shall issue a written decision within 14 working days from the City Manager’s receipt of the appeal. The City Manager shall have authority to affirm, reverse, or modify the compliance requirements set forth in the notice and/or the assessment. The decision and order of the City Manager on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.

(B) This provision does not apply when the notice and assessment are a result of a court order.

(Prior Code, § 10-4-7) (Am. Ord. 93-488, passed 7-27-1993; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-5-3)


10-6-4 ABATEMENT BY CITY.

(A) The Enforcement Official may cause the condition identified in the notice to be abated at the expense of the owner and/or person controlling the property or when deposited on or in a public place, at the expense of the person depositing the litter therein or thereon, when the person served with the notice to comply fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the demand identified in the notice by the date identified in the notice.

(B) Upon completion of the work, the Enforcement Official shall prepare a statement of account of the actual cost of abatement, the date the work was completed, the street address on which said work was done, including five percent, or such additional amount as may hereafter be provided by law, of the actual cost for additional inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith, and shall serve a copy of such statement upon the person(s) owning or controlling such property, or in the case of a person placing litter in or on a public place, the person placing the litter therein or thereon in the manner prescribed in this chapter. The statement of account shall include notice that a lien may be filed on the abated property if the outstanding balance is not paid in 30 days from the date of service. Failure to comply with this notice of lien provision will not preclude the placing of the lien so long as 30 days advance notice that a lien may be filed is provided prior to the filing of a lien.

(C) The person to whom the statement is given shall have 30 days from the date of service to appeal in writing to the City Manager from the abatement fees as contained in the verified statement as provided in Article 10-6. If an appeal is not filed with the Clerk within the 30 day period, the abatement fees shall become final and binding.

(D) An assessment that is past due accrues interest as provided in A.R.S. § 9-499 at the rate prescribed in A.R.S. § 44-1201.

(E) In the event the property owner fails to pay the cost of abatement, the City may record a lien on the real property identified in the notice of violation. Unpaid sums are a lien on the property from the date of recording in the office of the County Recorder in Maricopa County, Arizona, until the fees and all costs are paid as provided by law.

(Prior Code, § 10-4-8) (Am. Ord. 93-486, passed 5-11-1993; Am. Ord. 2000-686, passed 11-14-2000; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014; Am. Ord. 18-1419, passed 12-3-2018. Formerly 10-5-4)


10-6-5 LIEN.

(A) If no appeal as provided in this chapter is taken from the amount of assessment, or if an appeal is taken and the City Manager has affirmed or modified the amount of the assessment, the original assessment or the assessment as modified shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder in the county in which the property is located and, from the date of its recording, shall be a lien on the lot or tract of land until paid. The lien obtained under the provisions of this article may be foreclosed in any manner allowed by law. The recorded fees shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of all matters recited therein and of the regularity of all proceedings prior to the recording thereof.

(B) A prior assessment for the purposes provided in this chapter shall not be a bar to subsequent assessments for such purposes, and any number of liens on the same lot or tract of land may be enforced in the same action. The persons against whom the lien is foreclosed shall have the same rights of redemption as provided anyone in the judicial foreclosure or a real estate mortgage in the State.

(Prior Code, § 10-4-9) (Am. Ord. 92-456, passed 2-25-1992; Am. Ord. 2000-686, passed 11-14-2000; Am. Ord. 11-1232, passed 1-24-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1297, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 10-5-5)




CHAPTER 11: Offenses

Article

11-1.    OFFENSES


ARTICLE 11-1 Offenses

Section

11-1-1    Abandoned vehicles

11-1-2    Dangerous constructions

11-1-3    Defacing public and private property

11-1-4    Excavations to be covered

11-1-5    Explosives

11-1-6    Fences; barbed wire or electric

11-1-7    Curfew hours for minors

11-1-8    Noise

11-1-9    Obstruction of view

11-1-10    Offensive business

11-1-11    Offensive premises

11-1-12    Prostitution

11-1-13    Public nuisances

11-1-14    Signs and banners

11-1-15    Spitting

11-1-16    Water; flow upon streets prohibited

11-1-17    Smoking prohibited in City enclosed facilities and vehicles

11-1-18    Public non-smoking

11-1-19    Regulation of hours for use of City parks

11-1-20    Regulation of firearms in City parks and preserves

11-1-21    Slum property designation and appeals; inspection fees

11-1-22    Sexual assault of an animal

11-1-23    Sale of products containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine

11-1-24    Operation of vehicles on public and private property

11-1-25    Graffiti prevention, prohibition and removal

11-1-26    Fugitive dust control

11-1-27    Disorderly conduct

11-1-28    Disorderly party, gathering, event

11-1-29    Criminal trespass

11-1-30    Public urination or defecation

11-1-31    Making a false or misleading statement

11-1-32    Obstructing a law enforcement officer

11-1-33    Interfering with police service dog

11-1-34    Fireworks

Cross-reference:

Rules and regulations for animals, see Art. 7-1


11-1-1 ABANDONED VEHICLES.

(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is without the required current license plates or tabs, inoperable, stripped, unclaimed, scrapped, junked or discarded. This term shall also mean a vehicle being repaired when such repairs take 72 hours or more.

ABANDONED VEHICLE PARTS. Any vehicle part which is inoperable, unclaimed, scrapped, junked, discarded or not used in or on any vehicle within any seven-day period.

CLASSIC CAR. A vehicle licensed pursuant to A.R.S. § 28-2483 as a horseless carriage, classic car or historic vehicle.

PRIVATE PROPERTY. Land owned by any person other than the United States, the state, the county or the City.

UNSHELTERED. Anything located outside a garage in such a manner as to be visible to a person standing upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way or to any person standing at ground level upon any adjoining piece of property.

VEHICLE. A self-propelled device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway or street, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

VEHICLE PARTS. Any parts, components or accessories of a vehicle.

(B) Unsheltered storage prohibited.

(1) The unsheltered storage of any abandoned vehicle or abandoned vehicle parts for a period of 15 days or more on any private property within the corporate limits of this City is declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public safety.

(2) The provisions of subsection (B)(1) of this section shall not apply to the storage of abandoned vehicles or abandoned vehicle parts on the premises of a business enterprise operating in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise or to a storage place or depository for vehicles or vehicle parts maintained in a lawful place and manner. The exceptions contained in this subsection shall be an affirmative defense to be pled and proved by the defendant in any judicial proceedings under this section.

(3) The provisions in subsection (B)(1) of this section shall not apply to classic cars while such are maintained or stored on the owner’s private property.

(C) Removal.

(1) The owner, tenant, lessee or other occupant of any private property within the corporate limits of the City upon which storage is prohibited by subsection (B) of this section and also the owner of such abandoned vehicles or abandoned vehicle parts involved in such storage shall jointly and severally abate the nuisance. Every person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to abate the nuisance as provided in this section shall also be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this section.



(2) Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to abate such nuisance shall be notified in writing by certified or registered mail or by personal service by the City Manager or his or her representative to abate the nuisance within 15 days from the date appearing on such written notice.

(3) When any person to whom notice as provided in this subsection has been mailed fails, neglects or refuses for more than 15 days from the date appearing on the notice to abate the nuisance, the City Manager or his or her representative is authorized to remove the abandoned vehicle or abandoned vehicle parts from the premises and dispose of same according to law.

(4) The owner, tenant, lessee or other occupant of any private property, from which the city has removed an abandoned vehicle or abandoned vehicle parts pursuant to this section, shall be liable for all costs incurred in removing said items from the property.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-1)


11-1-2 DANGEROUS CONSTRUCTIONS.

It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any signs, billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-2) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


11-1-3 DEFACING PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.

(A) It is unlawful for any person to deface any public property, including, but not limited to writing or drawing thereon, or painting or pasting thereon, or attaching thereto any handbill or advertisement or other drawing or to scratch, mar, disfigure or defile such property or the floors or walls thereof. A complaint may be filed against any person in violation of this section by any citizen of the city or any police officer or other public official of the city who witnesses the incident.

(B) It is unlawful for any person to deface any private property, by writing or drawing thereon or by painting or pasting thereon, or attaching thereto any handbill or advertisement or other drawing or to scratch, mar, disfigure or defile such property or the floor or walls thereof without the express permission of the owner of such property. In the event of a violation of this subsection, the owner or the person entitled to possession may file with the Police Department a complaint against any individual who violates this section of the code.

(C) In the event of a conviction for a first offense under this section, the minimum fine shall be $100 with a maximum fine of $300; the fine for a second conviction under this section shall be a minimum fine of $300 with a maximum fine of $1,000. In the event the defendant charged is a juvenile, his or her parents or other persons with whom he or she resides or who have custody over such juvenile shall be likewise cited and shall be subject to the fines provided herein.

(D) In addition to the fines provided herein, the City Magistrate may impose other appropriate sentencing, including the requiring of public service time within the city limits, cleaning up graffiti, picking up waste and other papers and providing for such other community service as the court deems appropriate.

(E) The Council is specifically authorized to offer a reward for the apprehension of parties who might be guilty of violation of this section and to solicit reward funds and other cooperation from the citizens and business community of the city.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-3)


11-1-4 EXCAVATIONS TO BE COVERED.

(A) It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation or dig any hole, drain or ditch in any highway or thoroughfare in the city without providing a sufficient light at night and a temporary fence or suitable obstruction around such excavation to protect the public during the day.

(B) It is unlawful for any person to maintain a well, cellar, pit or other excavation of more than two feet in depth on any unenclosed lot without substantial curbing, covering or protection.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-4) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


11-1-5 EXPLOSIVES.

It is unlawful for any person within the limits of the City to blast or use powder or other explosives without a permit from the Fire Marshal in writing.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-5) Penalty, see Art. 1-8 (Am. Ord. 10-1224, passed 9-27-2010)


11-1-6 FENCES; BARBED WIRE OR ELECTRIC.

Unless permitted by zoning, it is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain within the city any electric fence or any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire. Any such fence is declared a public nuisance and subject to abatement by order of the city court.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-6) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


11-1-7 CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS.

(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

EMERGENCY. An unforseen combination of circumstances of the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring an immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

GUARDIAN. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of a minor or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court or at least 18 years of age and authorized by a minor’s parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

INSUFFICIENT CONTROL. Failure to exercise reasonable care and diligence in the supervision of a minor.

MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.

PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step parent of a minor.

REMAIN. To linger or stay or fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a police officer, an owner, an operator or other person that controls the premises.

(B) Offenses.

(1) It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 16 years to be or remain in, about or upon any place in the city away from the dwelling house or usual place of abode of said minor between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day.

(2) It is unlawful for any minor 16 years or older to be or remain in, about or upon any place in the city away from the dwelling house or usual place of abode of said minor between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.

(3) It is unlawful for a parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control, allow such minor to violate subsections (1) or (2) of this subsection.

(C) Defenses/exceptions. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (B) of this section, including (B)(3), that the minor was:

(1) Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;

(2) With prior permission of the minor’s parent or guardian in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;

(3) With prior permission of the minor’s parent or guardian in an employment activity or going to or returning from an employment activity without any detour or stop;

(4) Involved in an emergency;

(5) With prior permission of the minor’s parent or guardian, was engaged in reasonable, legitimate and specific business or activity. Examples will include, but are not limited to a juvenile with prior permission of the minor’s parent or guardian, attending an official school, religious or other recreational activities supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor or going to or returning home from an official school, religious or other recreational activities supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;

(6) With prior permission of the minor’s parent or guardian, exercising a First Amendment right protected by the United States Constitution;

(7) Married and 16 years of age or over or in the military.

(D) Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the appearing offender’s age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based upon the circumstances, the minor’s responses and minor’s conduct, no defense as provided in subsection (C) of this section is present.

(E) Penalty.

(1) Each violation of the provisions of (B)(1), (2) and (3) of this section shall constitute a separate offense.

(2) A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. This offense is designated an incorrigible offense for minors under the jurisdiction of the juvenile court.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-7) (Am. Ord. 95-525, passed 3-28-1995)


11-1-8 NOISE.

(A) Public nuisance declared. It is declared to be a public nuisance, and it is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or operating or in control of any restaurant, hotel, dance hall, show, store or any place of public amusement, entertainment or accommodation to play or permit to be played any music or musical instrument or instruments, whether played by individuals, orchestra, radio, phonograph, music box or other mechanical device or means in such a loud or unusual manner as to be offensive to the senses or so as to disturb the slumber, peace and quiet or otherwise interfere with or annoy the comfortable enjoyment of life or property of any person and is no less a nuisance because the extent of the annoyance inflicted is unequal.

(B) Prohibited noises. It is unlawful to play, operate or use any device known as a sound truck, loud speaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph with loud speaker or sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle unless such person in charge of such vehicle shall have first applied to and received permission from the Chief of Police to operate any such vehicle so equipped.

(C) Operation of construction equipment. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate equipment or perform any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures or projects or to operate any pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, power hoist or any other construction type device within a residential zoning district, or within 500 feet of a residential zoning district, except within the time periods specified herein, unless a permit has been obtained beforehand from the City Manager or his or her authorized representative.

(D) Construction start/stop times.

(1) Concrete. From April 15 to October 15 inclusive, concrete may be poured each day between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or at such times as authorized by permit. From October 16 to April 14 inclusive, concrete may be poured each day between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. or at such times as authorized by permit.

(2) All other construction activities in residential zoning districts or within 500 feet of a residential zoning district. From April 15 to October 15 inclusive, construction or repair work shall not begin prior to 6:00 a.m. and must stop by 7:00 p.m. each day in or within 500 feet of a residential zoning district or at such times as authorized by permit. From October 16 to April 14 inclusive, all other construction or repair work shall not begin prior to 7:00 a.m. and must stop by 7:00 p.m. each day in or within 500 feet of a residential zoning district or at such times as authorized by permit.

(3) Commercial and industrial zoning districts. Construction and repair work in commercial and industrial zoning districts not within 500 feet of a residential zoning district may be conducted seven days a week, 24 hours a day at any time of the year.

(E) Weekends and holidays. Notwithstanding the foregoing, construction or repair work within a residential zoning district, or within 500 feet of a residential zoning district, shall not begin prior to 7:00 a.m. and must stop by 7:00 p.m. on any Saturday, Sunday or a legally recognized city holiday, unless such other times are authorized by permit.

(F) Permit. Construction and repair work may be conducted at different times than otherwise permitted herein if, upon written application, a permit is obtained beforehand from the City Manager, or his or her authorized representative. In granting such special permit, the City Manager, or his or her authorized representative, shall consider if construction noise in the vicinity of the proposed work site would be less objectionable at night than during the daytime because of different population levels or different neighboring activities; if obstruction and interference with traffic, particularly on streets of major importance, would be less objectionable at night than during the daytime; if the kind of work to be performed emits noises at such a low level as to not cause significant disturbance in the vicinity of the work site; if the neighborhood of the proposed work site is primarily residential in character wherein sleep could be disturbed; if great economic hardship would occur if the work was spread over a longer time; if the work will abate or prevent hazard to life or property; if the proposed early morning or night work is in the general public interest, and he or she shall prescribe such conditions, working times, types of construction equipment to be used and permissible noise emissions as he or she deems to be required in the public interest. No permit shall be required to perform emergency repair or construction work.

(G) Revocation of permit and appeal. The City Manager, or his or her authorized representative, may revoke any permit granted hereunder upon complaints based upon evidence that the construction activity causes significant disturbance in the vicinity of the work site. Any person aggrieved by the granting of a permit or the refusal to grant a permit by the City Manager, or his or her authorized representative, may appeal the decision to the City Manager who shall schedule a hearing with the aggrieved person within ten calendar days after receipt of the written appeal. The City Manager’s decision shall be final.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-8) (Am. Ord. 2000-693, passed 8-28-2000)


11-1-9 OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW.

It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other obstruction which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-9)


11-1-10 OFFENSIVE BUSINESS.

It is unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any slaughterhouse or make a practice of slaughtering cattle, hogs, sheep or any other kind of animal or establish or maintain any soap factory, render tallow or pursue, maintain or carry on any other business or occupation offensive to the senses or prejudicial to the public health within the limits of the city.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-10) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


11-1-11 OFFENSIVE PREMISES.

It is unlawful for any person to suffer, or permit any premises belonging to or occupied by him or her, or any cellar, privy, vault, pool, sewer or private drain therein to become nauseous, foul or offensive to the senses or prejudicial to the public health or comfort.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-11) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


11-1-12 PROSTITUTION.

It is unlawful for any person to practice prostitution, to patronize a prostitute or to solicit any person to visit or patronize a prostitute or place of prostitution.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-12) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


11-1-13 PUBLIC NUISANCES.

(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is without the required current license plates or tabs, inoperable, stripped, unclaimed, scrapped, junked or discarded.

CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS. Asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, sand, dirt, lumber, blocks or any other material commonly used in construction or landscaping material.

UNSHELTERED. Anything located outside a garage in such a manner as to be visible to a person standing upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or right of way or to any person standing at ground level upon any adjoining piece of property.

VEHICLE. A self propelled device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway or street, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

(B) Public nuisance. Anything which is injurious to health or is indecent or offensive to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire community or neighborhood or by any person, or which unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use in the customary manner of any public park, square, alley, sidewalk, street or highway is a public nuisance and is no less a nuisance because the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted is unequal.

(C) Specific acts, omissions, conditions and places. No person shall erect, maintain, use, place, deposit, cause, allow, leave or permit to be or remain in or upon any private lot, building, structure or premises or in or upon any public right of way, street, avenue, alley, park, parkway or other public or private place any condition, thing or act to the prejudice, danger or annoyance of others, including, but not limited to, the following:

(1) Throwing, depositing, dumping or discharging into or about any ditch within the city anything injurious to the public health or offensive to the senses;

(2) No owner, lessee, tenant or other person who keeps or controls any animal shall cause, allow or permit any bodily waste or liquid discharge of such animal to accumulate on private property or to be unloaded, left or dumped in or upon any ditch, street, alley, sidewalk, place, vacant lot or public property within the city. If in the act of walking, exercising or transporting said animal, the animal deposits waste excrement, it shall be picked up, placed in a plastic bag and deposited in the owner’s garbage container;

(3) Storage of construction materials for a period in excess of 14 days in whole, broken or discarded condition in unsheltered areas of the yard and in which insects may breed or multiply or which provides harborage for rodents or which constitutes a hazard to the public health and safety. This subsection shall not apply to any construction material when a valid building permit exists for the property on which the construction material is located and the construction material is intended to be incorporated in the project for which the permit is issued.

(4) No person shall park, or permit to be parked, any motor vehicle for the purpose of sale upon any lot or area within the city. Violation of this subsection shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. This subsection shall not apply to:

(a) The display of one motor vehicle for sale when the motor vehicle is owned by the resident of the property and is not being sold in connection with an automobile sales business; or

(b) Property appropriately zoned by the zoning code which allows such activity.

(5) Storage of bottles, glass, cans, pieces of scrap metal, metal articles, paper or other abandoned material or items in unsheltered areas of private property, unless the same is kept in covered bins or metal receptacles approved by the county health officer or this code or any other ordinance of the city.

(6) No person shall leave, place or park any abandoned vehicle upon any city right of way, street, alley, parking lot or other city property.

(7) No person shall place, deposit or leave in or upon any city right of way, street, alley, park or other city building or property any bottles, glass, cans, graffiti, hand bills, posters, pieces of scrap metal, metal articles, paper or other abandoned material or items, except in proper containers for collection.

(D) Violations.

(1) A violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be considered to be a public nuisance and be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor.

(2) Any police officer, code enforcement officer or designated sanitation official who observes a violation of any of the provisions of this section is empowered to issue a citation to the alleged violator.

(E) Violators liable for costs.

(1) If the owner or occupant of any property within the city does not remove or abate such public nuisance from such property within a reasonable period after the citation has been served by the city, a reasonable period being a maximum of 14 days or less if the interests of public safety and health so necessitate, the city may, at the expense of the owner or occupant, remove or cause the removal thereof.

(2) Any person who places, deposits, leaves or causes a public nuisance in or upon any city right of way, street, alley, park or other city building or property shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city to remove or cleanup such nuisance.

(F) Assessment of costs. When the city has effected removal pursuant to this section, the actual cost of such removal shall become an assessment upon the building or property from which such public nuisance is removed, and the record owner of such property shall be liable for the payment of same. If the actual cost of such removal has not been paid within 14 days of billing by the city by ordinary mail, such assessment shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder, and from the date of its recording, it shall be a lien on such building or property until paid. Such liens shall be subject and inferior to the lien for general taxes and to all prior recorded mortgages and encumbrances of record.

(G) Subsequent assessments. A prior assessment against the building or property shall not be a bar to a subsequent assessment for such purposes, and any number of liens on the same property may be enforced in the same action.

(H) Right of record owner to appeal. The owner of record of such building or property shall have the right to appeal such citation to the Council within the time allowed in such citation to remedy the alleged violation. The decision of the Council on such appeal shall be final.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-13) (Am. Ord. 90-315, passed 9-25-1990)


11-1-14 SIGNS AND BANNERS.

It is unlawful for any person to place any banner or sign upon any streetlight pole, traffic signal pole or utility pole within the city without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the City Manager and owner of the pole.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-14) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


11-1-15 SPITTING.

It is unlawful for any person to spit upon any of the public sidewalks or crosswalks in the city or upon any public path, by way or highway or in or on any public ground or park in the city or upon the floor or interior of any public building in the city.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-15) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


11-1-16 WATER; FLOW UPON STREETS PROHIBITED.

(A) It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or cause the escape or flow of water in such quantity as to cause flooding, to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous condition to such traffic or to cause damage to the public streets of the city.

(B) It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or cause the escape or flow of irrigation water in such quantity as to cause flooding, to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous condition to such traffic or to cause damage to the public streets of the city through the failure or neglect to properly operate or maintain any irrigation structure, delivery ditch or waste ditch in which said person has a vested right or interest or through the willful or negligent failure of said person to accept irrigation water after it has been ordered by him or her.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-16) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


11-1-17 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN CITY ENCLOSED FACILITIES AND VEHICLES.

(A) The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the public frequenting enclosed city facilities or city vehicles and employees of the city who utilize city enclosed facilities or city vehicles by establishing restrictions on the use of smoking devices in city enclosed facilities and vehicles of the city.

(B) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CITY ENCLOSED FACILITIES. Any enclosed building or structure that is owned, leased or operated by the city, including, but not limited to, City Hall, Police Department and Fire Department at 119 North Litchfield Road, Finance and Court at 120 East Western Avenue, Community Development at 112 East Western, Public Works at 100 Calle de Pueblo, Wastewater Treatment Plant at 5742 South 157th Avenue and Goodyear Community Center at 420 East Loma Linda.

ENCLOSED. A building enclosed on all sides and covered with a roof with the only access to the outside being through doors or windows.

SMOKE or SMOKING. The act of burning any tobacco product, weed filler, plant of any kind or other combustible substance in a cigarette, cigar, pipe, waterpipe or similar form.

SMOKING DEVICE. Any cigarette, cigar, pipe or similar form or device in which smoking occurs or which in and of itself is used for smoking.

VEHICLE. A piece of mechanized equipment that can be described as, but not limited to, automobiles, pick up trucks, trucks and street sweepers, all as utilized by any now or hereafter existing department of the city and city administration.

(C) It shall be prohibited and unlawful for any person to smoke or carry any lighted smoking device in any city enclosed facilities or vehicle.

(D) A violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of $50 for each violation of this section.

(Prior Code, § 11-1-17) (Ord. 92-474, passed 11-24-1992)


11-1-18 PUBLIC NON SMOKING.

(A) Purpose. The Mayor and Council of the City of Goodyear, Maricopa County, Arizona declare that the purpose of this section is to protect the working environment of its citizens and improve the public health of all citizens, business and visitors by prohibiting smoking in public places and places of employment.

(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

BAR. A business establishment devoted primarily to alcoholic beverage service to which food service is only incidental, i.e. where state sales tax receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages equals or exceeds 55% of the total state sales tax receipts, including food.

BUSINESS. Any employment, occupation, profession or commercial activity or enterprise engaged in for gain, benefit, advantage or livelihood.

EMPLOYEE. Any person in the service of another, working for salary or wages or on a volunteer basis.

EMPLOYER. Any person or entity that employs the services of others.

ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of door or passage ways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid, office landscaping or similar structures.

PHYSICALLY SEPARATED. An enclosed area with doors that are self closing, self latching and self sealing and maintained to be operated as originally installed and the use of air curtains or similar ventilation methods are not to be used to meet the requirement for opening protection. Doors are to remain closed except for the immediate passage of patrons, guests and employees.

PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any area under the control of a private or public employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, offices, employee lounges, conference and meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, employee stairways and hallways, waiting areas, restrooms and vehicles. A private residence is not a place of employment (unless it is used as a child care, adult day care or health care facility).

PUBLIC PLACE. Any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, which is available to and customarily used by the public, including, but not limited to:

(a) Airport service lines and airport waiting lounges;

(b) Aquariums, galleries, libraries and museums, exhibit halls;

(c) Banks, financial institutions;

(d) Child care centers (public and private);

(e) Churches and other places of worship;

(f) Community centers;

(g) Health facilities, medical office buildings;

(h) Hotel and motel public areas;

(i) Laundromats;

(j) Lobbies, hallways and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes and other multiple unit residential facilities;

(k) Public and private educational facilities;

(l) Public restrooms;

(m) Public transportation facilities, taxi cabs or other means of public transit, ticket, boarding and waiting areas of public transit depots;

(n) Reception areas, waiting rooms, indoor and outdoor service lines;

(o) Restaurants, cafeterias, lunchrooms and eating establishments, food service operations;

(p) Retail food production and marketing/grocery establishments;

(q) Retail service establishments;

(r) Retail stores, shopping malls, drugstore pharmacies;

(s) Theaters and waiting rooms, sports arenas and their lobbies, auditoriums, bingo halls, pool halls, bowling alleys;

(t) All indoor facilities and any public places already regulated by A.R.S. § 36-601.01.

RESTAURANT. Any coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, private and public school cafeteria and any other eating establishment which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or employees, as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering facilities.

RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental.

SEPARATELY VENTILATED. An enclosed area with an independent heating, ventilating and air conditioning system with separate duct work relative to any adjacent area where smoking is prohibited.

SERVICE LINE. Any indoor or outdoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of money.

SMOKE or SMOKING. The act of burning any tobacco product, weed filler, plant of any kind or other combustible substance in a cigarette, cigar, pipe, waterpipe or similar form.

SPORTS ARENA. Sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports events.

(C) Regulation of smoking in public places, businesses, places of employment and restaurants.

(1) Unless otherwise indicated in this section, smoking is prohibited in any public place, business or place of employment as defined in subsection (B) of this section.

(2) Smoking is prohibited in all restaurants, cafeterias, lunchrooms and eating establishments and other food service operations.

(3) Smoking is prohibited within 25 feet of the main entrance and within ten feet of any secondary, side or back entrance of any enclosed area where smoking is prohibited.

(4) The provisions of this section shall not be construed to limit the ability of the owner, operator or manager of a public place to declare the whole or any portion of that public place to be smoke free.

(5) This section shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.

(D) Smoking optional areas. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this section:

(1) Private residences, except when used as a child care, adult day care or health care facility;

(2) No more than 20% of hotel and motel rooms rented to guests may be designated as smoking areas unless they are on a separately partitioned ventilation system;

(3) Retail tobacco stores that deal exclusively in the sale of tobacco products and smoking paraphernalia and that are separately ventilated from other attached businesses;

(4) On stage smoking as part of a stage production, ballet or similar exhibition;

(5) Restaurants, hotel and motel conference/meeting rooms and public and private meeting rooms while these places are being used exclusively for private functions, so long as they are separately ventilated and have a door that remains closed except for the immediate passage of guests and employees from the rest of the facility;

(6) A private residence serving as a place of employment;

(7) Outdoor areas of places of employment except those covered in subsection (C) of this section;

(8) Fraternal lodges and organizations or any organization licensed by the State of Arizona as a private club;

(9) Bars, as defined in subsection (B), that are physically separated and separately ventilated from a smoking prohibited area.

(E) Posting requirements.

(1) No Smoking signs or the international No Smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every building or other area where smoking is prohibited by this section by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or other area.

(2) Every public place where smoking is prohibited by this section shall have posted at every public entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.

(3) All ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such area.

(F) Enforcement and penalties.

(1) Any person who fails to comply with the requirements of this section shall be responsible for a petty offense, punishable by:

(a) A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation;

(b) A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation;

(c) A fine not exceeding $300 for a third violation;

(d) Any person who violates any provision of this section four or more times in any 24 month period may be charged with and found guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor.

(2) Any owner, manager, operator, employer or employee of any establishment controlled by this section shall, upon either observing or being advised of a violation of subsection (C) of this section, has the obligation to inform the violator of the appropriate requirements of this law and then request immediate compliance.

(3) Any person or employer who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to this section has the responsibility:

(a) To properly set aside required No Smoking areas;

(b) To properly post and maintain signs required hereunder; and

(c) To take action required by subsection (F)(2) of this section when observing or being advised of a violation.

(4) By enforcing this section, the city undertakes only to promote the general welfare. It does not assume, nor does it impose on its officers and employees, an obligation for breach of which it is liable in money damages to any person claiming injury from such breach.

(5) Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may initiate enforcement with the City of Goodyear Code Compliance Officer or other law enforcement agency.

(6) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to regulation under this article to fail to comply with any of its provisions.

(G) Providing for separability. If any division, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of the ordinance or parts thereof.

(H) Effective date. This section shall become effective on June 12, 2002.

(Ord. 02-791, passed 5-13-2002)


11-1-19 REGULATION OF HOURS FOR USE OF CITY PARKS.

(A) It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any public park during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., except as provided in subsection (B) of this section.

(B) It is not unlawful for a person to enter or remain in any public park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 10:30 p.m.:

(1) As participant or spectator at a special event for which a permit has been issued by the city, but only during the hours allowed by such permit;

(2) As a participant or spectator at a city approved league or tournament game, not concluded by 10:30 p.m.; provided, however, that such persons must vacate the park within ten minutes after the conclusion of the event or by 10:30 p.m., whichever occurs first;

(3) The city shall post signs in its parks giving notice of these hours of operation;

(4) Park lighting shall be extinguished during hours of closure.

(Ord. 02-779, passed 2-11-2002; Am. Ord. 02-802, passed 5-28-2002)


11-1-20 REGULATION OF FIREARMS IN CITY PARKS AND PRESERVES.

(A) Except as otherwise allowed by law, it shall be unlawful to possess a firearm (as defined in A.R.S. Title 13) in a park or preserve of one square mile or less without a valid concealed weapon permit pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3112. Any park or preserve subject to this restriction shall post the following notice: Carrying a firearm in this park is limited to persons who possess a permit issued pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3112.

(B) Except as otherwise allowed by law, it shall be unlawful to possess a firearm (as defined in A.R.S. Title 13) in a developed or improved area of a park or preserve larger than one square mile without a valid concealed weapon permit pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3112. A developed or improved area means an area of property developed for public recreation or family activity, including picnic areas, concessions, playgrounds, amphitheaters, racquet courts, swimming areas, golf courses, zoos, horseback riding facilities and boat landing and docking facilities. Developed or improved area does not include campgrounds, trails, paths or roadways except trails, paths and roadways directly associated with and adjacent to designated developed or improved areas. Any area subject to this restriction shall have posted notice stating the following: Carrying a firearm in this park is limited to persons who possess a permit issued pursuant to A.R.S. § 13-3112.

(C) Unless otherwise allowed by law, it is unlawful for any person to possess or discharge any prohibited weapon while on or within any public bike trail, hiking trail, river trail, horse trail, city park or preserve, picnic area, ball field, court, play ground or other area designated or reserved for any other temporary gathering of people. A prohibited weapon is any of the following: BB gun, pellet gun, paint ball gun, bow or sling shot.

(D) This section shall not apply to persons participating in sanctioned school activities such as archery practice or competition on school property nor shall it apply where federal, state or county law provides to the contrary.

(Ord. 02-758, passed 2-11-2002)


11-1-21 SLUM PROPERTY DESIGNATION AND APPEALS; INSPECTION FEES.

(A) If the Code Compliance Manager finds that a residential rental property constitutes a slum property within the meaning of A.R.S. § 33-1901(3), then the Code Compliance Manager or designee shall issue to the property owner or the owner’s statutory agent a written notice of designation, either personally or by certified mail. The notice of designation shall identify what conditions exist on the property that meet the statutory criteria.

(B) An owner of a residential rental property that has been designated as a slum property pursuant to subsection (A) of this section may file an administrative appeal contesting the designation. A hearing officer designated by the City Manager shall hear the administrative appeal.

(C) The decision of the hearing officer on an administrative appeal of a slum property designation shall be the city’s final administrative decision.

(D) In order to recoup the costs of a city inspection of a slum property or property that is not registered pursuant to A.R.S. § 33-1902, the city shall assess upon a property owner a fee of $50 per hour per inspector, with a four hour minimum fee for an inspection of a slum property.

(Ord. 02-820, passed 9-9-2002)


11-1-22 SEXUAL ASSAULT OF AN ANIMAL.

(A) A person commits the crime of sexual assault of an animal by:

(1) Contacting the mouth, anus or sex organs of an animal, for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person;

(2) Causing an object person to contact the mouth, anus or sex organs of an animal, for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person;

(3) Coercing another person to contact the mouth, anus or sex organs of an animal, for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person;

(4) Allowing the mouth or sex organs of an animal to contact the anus or sex organs of any person, for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person;

(5) Coercing another person to allow the mouth or sex organs of an animal to contact his/her anus or sex organs, for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person;

(6) Photographing or videotaping contact between the mouth, anus, or sex organs of an animal and the mouth, anus, or sex organs of a person; or

(7) Killing or violently abusing an animal, for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of any person.

(B) A violation of this section is a misdemeanor subject to the penalties set forth in Article 1-8(A).

(C) For purposes of this section, the term ANIMAL means any nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, amphibian or fish.

(Ord. 2005-941, passed 5-9-05)


11-1-23 SALE OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING EPHEDRINE OR PSEUDOEPHEDRINE.

(A) Person(s) selling products containing ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norpseudoephedrine, and/or phenylpropanolamine shall keep such products behind a counter or otherwise in a manner that is inaccessible to the public and in an area where such products are monitored to prevent theft, or unauthorized or uncontrolled purchases.

(B) Person(s) making a retail sale of a product containing ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norpseudoephedrine, and/or phenylpropanolamine shall require acceptable photo identification from the purchaser and shall record in a Purchaser’s Log, the purchaser’s name, date of birth, address, and quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norpseudoephedrine, and/or phenylpropanolamine product purchased.

(1) For purpose of this subsection, acceptable photo identification means any of the following:

(a) Current driver’s license or picture identification card issued by this or any other state;

(b) A current passport;

(c) A current tribal identification card; or

(d) A current military identification card.

(2) The Purchaser Log shall be kept confidential and made available, upon written request, only to law enforcement personnel (local, state, or federal) and others authorized by law or court order to receive such information. The Purchaser Log shall be maintained for a period of six months unless otherwise directed by law enforcement personnel, law, or court order.

(C) For purposes of this article, a product containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine includes any compound, mixture or preparation that contains any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norpseudoephedrine, and/or phenylpropanolamine. Product packaging that lists ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norpseudoephedrine, and/or phenylpropanolamine as an active ingredient shall constitute prima facie evidence that it is a product containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine.

(Ord. 05-974, passed 12-5-05) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


11-1-24 OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.

(A) It is unlawful for any person to operate or drive any motor vehicle, motorcycle, minibike, dune buggy, all terrain vehicle (ATV), motor scooter, or other form of transportation propelled by an internal combustion engine on private and/or public property that is not held open to the public for vehicle use without the prior written permission of the owner of the property, the person entitled to the immediate possession of the property, or the authorized agent of either. The property owner, person entitled to immediate possession of the property, or invitee who has written permission may operate such vehicles if such use does not violate any other applicable laws.

(B) The prior written permission required under this section shall:

(1) Contain the name, address, and telephone number of the person granting permission for the use of the property;

(2) Describe the interest the person granting permission has in the property (i.e., property owner, lessee, agent, etc.);

(3) If the person granting permission is not the owner of the property, the written permission shall also contain the name, address, and telephone number of the property owner;

(4) Specify the period of time for which permission for the use of the property is being granted; and

(5) Be signed by the person granting permission for the use of the property.

(C) Whenever any person is stopped by a Police Officer of the City for a violation of subsection (A) of this section, he or she shall, upon the request of the Police Officer display the written permission required in this section.

(D) It shall be unlawful to park or use a vehicle on any vacant lot in the city. Owners of vacant lots shall comply with all applicable zoning ordinances and Section 11-1-26(C). Owners and operators of vehicles shall comply with subsections (A) through (C) of this section as may be applicable.

(Ord. 06-981, passed 2-13-06; Am. Ord. 08-1107, passed 3-24-2008) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


11-1-25 GRAFFITI PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REMOVAL.

(A) Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide a program for abatement of graffiti from public and private property to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the City of Goodyear, Arizona, by expediting the removal of graffiti from structures on both public and private property. The City finds and determines as follows:

(1) Graffiti contributes to blight and neighborhood deterioration, provides a communication system for gangs and other vandals, damages property and constitutes a public nuisance and a threat to public safety which must be abated to alleviate the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the City, and to prevent the further spread of graffiti.

(2) Certain categories of graffiti which incite violence are especially harmful and must be removed as quickly as possible to avoid or minimize harm to persons and the whole community.

(B) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them:

ABATE. The removal, painting over or other obscuring of graffiti.

AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER. Any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substances capable of defacing property.

BROAD TIP MARKER. Any marker or similar implement which has a writing surface which is one-half of an inch or greater, or any similar implement containing an ink or other pigmented substance that is not water soluble.

CITY. The City of Goodyear and its employees and any private contractor authorized by the City to act on behalf of the City to abate graffiti.

ETCHING EQUIPMENT. Any tool, device or substance that can be used to make permanent marks on natural or manmade surface.

GRAFFITI. Any inscription, etching, scratching, word, figure, painting, design or otherwise placing of a mark, symbol, figure, inscription, word, design, drawing, or name upon public or private real or personal property visible when viewed from a public right-of-way which is not authorized by the City Code or City Manager.

GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT. (1) Aerosol paint container, (2) broad tip marker, (3) paint stick, (4) graffiti stick, (5) bleeder, (6) gum label, or (7) any other item intended for, designed or used for graffiti purposes.

GUM LABEL. Any sheet of paper, fabric, plastic or other substance with an adhesive backing which, when placed on a surface, is not easily removable.

IMMEDIATELY ADJACENT. Within 10 feet of the property.

OWNER. An owner, occupant, manager, licensee, tenant, renter and/or any person, entity or entities having the right to possess or control property or who is responsible for property.

PAINT STICK, GRAFFITI STICK or BLEEDER. Any device containing paint, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark of at least one-eighth of an inch in width.

PERSON. Any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.

PROPERTY. Any real or personal property, including but not limited to any premises, house, building, wall, fence, tree, structure, sidewalk, curb or any separate part thereof whether permanent or not.

(C) Prohibited acts.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to plan to apply or apply graffiti of any type on any public real or personal property without the consent of the City Manager or on private real or personal property without the express consent of the owner.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or command another person to apply graffiti.

(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or abet or agree to aid or abet another person to plan to apply or apply graffiti.

(4) It shall be unlawful for any owner to permit or allow any graffiti to remain on property if the graffiti can be viewed from a public right-of-way.

(5) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess any graffiti implement while in, on, or upon any school property, which includes school grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures; on public property immediately adjacent to school property; or on private property immediately adjacent to school property.

(6) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess any graffiti implement while in, on or upon any public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or other public building or structure owned or operated by the City or any other governmental entity.

(7) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess any graffiti implement while in or within 50 feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, or other public infrastructure that has a surface to which graffiti can be applied.

(8) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any aerosol paint container, broad tip marker, or paint stick to any person under the age of 18 years.

(9) It shall be unlawful for any person who interferes, prevents, or attempts to interfere or prevent an individual employed or contracted for by the City from investigating an alleged violation of this chapter, or from correcting or abating a violation of this chapter.

(D) Defenses.

(1) It is a defense to a prosecution or violation of subsections (C)(1), (2), and (3) of this section if the graffiti was authorized by the City Manager on public property or by the property owner of private property. The property owner may not consent to an act of graffiti on their property if the location of the graffiti would be a violation of this chapter.

(2) It is a defense to a prosecution or violation of subsection (C)(5) of this section if the graffiti implement was in the minor’s possession while attending or traveling to or from a school at which the minor is enrolled if the minor is participating in a class at the school that formally requires the possession of the specific graffiti implement for a proper school-related purpose.

(3) It is a defense to a prosecution or violation of subsection (C)(6) of this section if possession of the graffiti implement was authorized by the City Manager.

(4) It is a defense to a prosecution or violation of subsection (C)(8) of this section if the transfer of graffiti implement(s) was from parent to child, guardian to ward, employer to employee, teacher to student or in any other similar relationship when such transfer is for a lawful purpose.

(5) It is a defense to a prosecution or violation of subsection (C)(8) of this section that the person, employee or agent demanded and was shown acceptable evidence of majority and acted upon such evidence in a transaction or sale. Acceptable evidence of majority shall include, but is not limited to, a driver’s license, state-issued identification or military identification.

(E) Display and storage.

(1) No person who owns, conducts, operates, or manages a retail commercial establishment where aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, or broad tip markers are sold, nor any person who sells or offers for sale aerosol paint containers or broad tip markers, shall store or display, or cause to be stored or displayed, such aerosol paint containers or broad tip markers in an area that is not continuously observable, through direct visual observation or surveillance equipment, by employees of the retail establishment during the regular course of business.

(2) In the event that a commercial retail establishment is unable to store the aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, or broad tip markers in an area as provided in subsection (E)(1) of this section, the establishment shall store the aerosol paint containers, paint sticks, and broad tip markers in an area not accessible to the public in the regular course of business without employee assistance.

(F) Abatement and penalties.

(1) Abatement. Notwithstanding the procedures set forth in this section, if it is determined by the City that graffiti exists on property in violation of this section, the City shall, in writing, notify the owner of the property through the issuance of a civil code citation providing a maximum of seven days to abate the graffiti and appear in the Goodyear Municipal Court to respond as provided in Article 18-1.

(a) The civil code citation shall contain the following information:

1. Street address or legal description sufficient to identify the property;

2. General location and description of the graffiti on the property;

3. The requirement that the graffiti must be removed within seven days after receipt of the notice;

4. An approximate cost of abatement if abated by the City;

5. An advisement that failure to remove the graffiti within seven days, or schedule a hearing, will result in the City taking steps to abate the graffiti and bill the owner for the costs of abatement; and

6. That permitting graffiti on private property is a criminal violation subject to the applicable penalties as provided by law.

(b) Service of the civil code citation shall be as provided in Article 18-1. The civil code violation may be dismissed if the owner appears in court or submits, prior to the hearing date, proof that the graffiti has been abated by the owner.

(c) If the owner fails to abate the graffiti as required by the civil code citation or appear in the Goodyear Municipal Court on the date specified in the citation, the City may proceed to abate the graffiti and bill the owner for the costs of said abatement. In the event that the bill is not paid by the owner, a statement of the account shall be certified to the Finance Director who shall proceed with all actions necessary to collect the costs of abatement due (including the imposition of property liens), together with interest at the rate established by law.

(d) The owner may contact the City prior to the seven days and consent to the City abating the graffiti on the owner’s property. In such situations, the owner will be billed for the abatement and the case dismissed upon payment of the abatement fees or waiver.

(e) Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a public entity other than the City for the purpose of graffiti removal, the City shall attempt to secure the consent of the property owner or responsible party. If the graffiti is not abated by the owner, or the owner refuses to provide consent, the City is authorized to commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the graffiti removal as set forth in this chapter. The City Police Department shall assist in the enforcement of this section.

(2) Penalties.

(a) Violation of subsections (C)(1) through (9) of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor. In addition to other penalties authorized by law, the court shall order restitution for damage or loss caused directly or indirectly by the defendant’s offense, to any person or entity including a political subdivision that has incurred expense to repair or abate such damage or loss, in an amount to be determined by the court.

(b) Violations of subsections (E)(1) and (2) of this section are civil offenses and are subject to a fine of not less than $500.

(Ord. 07-1090, passed 10-9-07; Am. Ord. 09-1188, passed 6-22-2009)


11-1-26 FUGITIVE DUST CONTROL.

(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City by improving air quality through the regulation of fugitive dust and PM-10 particles to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law.

(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

FUGITIVE DUST. Particulate matter not collected by a capture system that is entrained in the ambient air and is caused from human and/or natural activities, such as, but not limited to, movement of soil, vehicles, equipment, blasting, and wind. For the purpose of this section, FUGITIVE DUST does not include particulate matter emitted directly from the exhaust of motor vehicles and other internal combustion engines, from portable brazing, soldering, or welding equipment, or from piledrivers.

LANDSCAPE DEBRIS. Debris generated or accumulated as a result of, or moved in the course of, landscape operations. LANDSCAPE DEBRIS includes, but is not limited to, grass clippings, leaves, branches, vegetative matter, rubbish, soil and rock.

LEAF BLOWER. Any device that generates a stream of air that is designed, or used, to move landscape debris.

PERMIT. A permit issued by Maricopa County, Arizona, evidencing that a dust-generating operation has a satisfactory dust control plan in place approved by the Maricopa County Air Quality Department.

PM-10. The standard adopted by the Environmental Protection Agency that focuses on smaller particulates in the air that are likely responsible for adverse health effects because of their ability to reach the lower regions of the respiratory tract. The PM-10 standard includes particles with a diameter of 10 micrometers or less (0.0004 inches or 1/7 the width of a human hair).

PUBLIC ROADWAY. Any street, alley, road, highway or thoroughfare of any kind that is used by the public or that is open to the public as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular travel.

STABILIZED SURFACE. Surfaces that have been treated with asphaltic concrete, cement concrete, penetration treatment of bituminous material and seal coat of bituminous binder and a mineral aggregate, or a suitable stabilization method approved by the City Engineer applied to a sufficient thickness to withstand repeated vehicular traffic.

(C) Parking and traffic restrictions on vacant lots or unpaved surfaces. It is unlawful for the owner of a vacant lot to allow the lot to be used for vehicle parking or vehicle use unless the vacant lot has been paved, or otherwise stabilized in a manner approved by the City Engineer, or his or her designee, to minimize the generation of dust or particulate matter. The owner of any vacant lot may be required to take reasonable measures, such as installing post and cable fencing along the street, barricades at driveway openings or posting of no trespassing signs, to prevent the use of said lot by unauthorized persons. This restriction shall not apply to the temporary use of a vacant lot by public service and utility providers or during construction activity for which a permit has been obtained. Owners and operators of vehicles shall comply with Section 11-1-24(A) through (D) as may be applicable.

(D) Operation of leaf blowers. A person shall only operate a leaf blower on a stabilized surface, and shall not operate a leaf blower in a manner that causes landscape debris to be blown into a public roadway.

(E) Exemption. Any site that has been issued a permit by the Maricopa County Control Officer for the control of fugitive dust from dust-generating operations, and is in compliance with that permit, is exempt from these provisions.

(F) Public nuisance. In addition to the penalties provided herein, any fugitive dust caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this section is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and shall be deemed a nuisance that is subject to abatement at the violator’s expense.

(G) Penalty. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. A Class 3 misdemeanor includes fines up to $500 plus surcharges and fees, probation up to one year, and imprisonment up to 30 days. A.R.S. 13-802(C); 13-902(A)(7); 13-707(A)(3).

(Ord. 08-1107, passed 3-24-2008)


11-1-27 DISORDERLY CONDUCT

(A) It is unlawful for any person to knowingly conceal on their person, or knowingly have in their immediate proximity or knowingly possess any dangerous or deadly weapon for purposes of engaging in a fight or violent activity.

(B) It is unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or near any lawful assembly of persons; provided, that participants in athletic contests may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport.

(C) Definitions.

(1) DANGEROUS OR DEADLY WEAPON. Any weapon, instrument or object capable of being used to inflict great bodily injury or death.

(2) PUBLIC PLACE. An area generally visible to public view and includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles (whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general public including those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them or any other area that may be viewed by the public.

(D) Defenses, justification. The use of physical force which would otherwise constitute a violation of subsection (A) or (B) of this section may be justified as provided in A.R.S. Title 13, Chapter 4.

(E) A violation of this section is a Class 1 misdemeanor subject to the penalties set forth in Article 1-8.

(Ord. 09-1201, passed 12-14-09)


11-1-28 DISORDERLY PARTY, GATHERING, EVENT

(A) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to host a party, gathering or event whether on private or public property within the City of Goodyear:

(1) Which is disruptive to the public peace, health, safety, or welfare due to the magnitude of the crowd, loud music or other noise, disturbances, unruly behavior by those attending the party, or destruction of property; or

(2) Where a person under the age of 21 years is in possession of, consuming or has any spirituous liquor, illegal drug, or vapor releasing substance in their body and the person or persons hosting the party knew or reasonably should have known that the person in possession of, consuming, or with spirituous liquor, illegal drug, or vapor releasing substance in their body is under the age of 21 years.

(B) Definitions.

(1) EXPENSES OF ANY PUBLIC SAFETY RESPONSE. Reasonable costs directly incurred by the City in responding to the party, gathering or event or related activity, including the costs of providing police, fire, rescue and emergency medical services and the salaries of those persons.

(2) HOST. Any of the following: (a) the person or persons in charge of the premises where the party takes place, whether or not they had authority to authorize the party; and/or (b) the person or persons authorizing the use of the premises for the party, whether or not they had authority to do so; and/or (c) the person or persons who organized the party.

(3) ILLEGAL DRUG. Any drug or substance regardless of the form, of which possession or consumption in any quantity is prohibited by Arizona State Statute or federal law, or any non-medical use of prescription drugs or other substances. Non-medical use is using a medical prescription of another, or exceeding the prescribed use of a medically prescribed substance.

(4) KNOWINGLY. For purposes of this section means having a general knowledge of or reason to know which warrants further inquiry or inspection.

(5) MINOR. A person under the age of 21 years.

(6) PARTY. A party gathering or event or other assembly of persons for a social occasion or activity.

(7) SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. Any alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, tequila, mescal, gin, wine, porter, ale, beer, any malt liquor or malt beverage, absinthe, a compound or mixture of any of them or of any of them with any vegetable or other substance, alcohol bitters, bitters containing alcohol, any liquid mixture or preparation, whether patented or otherwise, which produces intoxication, fruits preserved in ardent spirits, and beverages containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume.

(C) Restitution. In addition to any other restitution deemed appropriate by the Court, the Court may order the host of the party, gathering or event to pay restitution to the City for the expenses of any public safety response.

(D) A violation of this section is a Class 1 misdemeanor subject to the penalties set forth in Article 1-8.

(Ord. 09-1201, passed 12-14-09)


11-1-29 CRIMINAL TRESPASS

(A) A person is guilty of criminal trespass if the person knowingly enters or remains in or upon the premises of another when the person is not then authorized, invited, or otherwise privileged to so enter or remain.

(B) Authority or privilege to enter or remain in a building which is only partly open to the public is not authority or privilege to enter or remain in that part of the building which is not open to the public.

(C) A person may enter or remain upon unimproved and apparently unused land, which is neither fenced nor otherwise enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders, unless notice against trespass is personally communicated to him or her by the owner of the land or some other authorized person, or unless notice is given by posting in a conspicuous manner.

(D) In any prosecution under subsection (A) of this section it is an affirmative defense that:

(1) The person reasonably believed that the owner of the premises, or other person with authority to grant permission, would have authorized him or her to enter or remain; or

(2) The person was attempting to serve legal process, which includes any document required or allowed to be served upon persons or property by any statute, ordinance, governmental rule or regulation, or court order, excluding delivery by the mails of the United States. This defense is available only if the person did not enter into a private residence or other building not open to the public and the entry onto the premises was reasonable and necessary for service of the legal process.

(E) It is not a defense under this section that the land or premises involved was owned, controlled or in custody of a public agency.

(F) It is not a defense under this section that the offender was authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved when such authorization was secured by deception.

(G) A violation of this section is a Class 1 misdemeanor subject to the penalties set forth in Article 1-8.

(Ord. 09-1201, passed 12-14-09)


11-1-30 PUBLIC URINATION OR DEFECATION

(A) It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in a public place, except in facilities provided for the purpose.

(B) PUBLIC PLACE is defined as an area generally visible to public view and includes but is not limited to streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles (whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general public including those which serve food or drink, or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them or any other area that may be viewed by the public.

(C) A violation of this section is a Class 1 misdemeanor subject to the penalties set forth in Article 1- 8.

(Ord. 09-1201, passed 12-14-09)


11-1-31 MAKING A FALSE OR MISLEADING STATEMENT

(A) It is unlawful for any person to knowingly make a false or misleading material statement to a law enforcement officer.

(B) Definitions.

(l) FALSE OR MISLEADING MATERIAL. A false statement regarding the legal name, address, other identifying information about the person making the statement, or about another person or other statement of fact reasonably likely to be relied upon by a law enforcement officer in the discharge of their official duties or powers.

(2) LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Those persons responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of the Goodyear Municipal Code, including provisions related to fire, building, zoning, and life and safety codes; those individuals empowered to make arrests for offenses under the Goodyear Municipal Code; or those individuals responsible for the enforcement of federal or state criminal laws.

(3) STATEMENT. A written or oral assertion.

(C) A violation of this section is a Class 1 misdemeanor subject to the penalties set forth in Article 1-8.

(Ord. 09-1201, passed 12-14-09)


11-1-32 OBSTRUCTING A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER

(A) A person is guilty of obstructing a law enforcement officer if the person knowingly does any of the following:

(1) Hinders, delays, interferes, impedes, prevents, obstructs or endangers any law enforcement officer in the performance of their official powers or duties;

(2) Refuses to cease an activity or behavior that creates a risk of injury to any person when ordered to do so by a law enforcement officer in the performance of their official powers or duties;

(3) Destroys, conceals or alters or attempts to destroy, conceal or alter any material which the person knows the law enforcement officer is attempting to obtain, secure or preserve during an investigation, search or arrest; or

(4) Refuses or fails to disperse or move on or fails to cease activity when lawfully directed to do so by a law enforcement officer in the performance of their official powers or duties.

(B) LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Those persons responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of the Goodyear Municipal Code, including provisions related to fire, building, zoning, and life and safety codes; those individuals empowered to make arrests for offenses under the Goodyear Municipal Code; or those individuals responsible for the enforcement of federal or state criminal laws.

(C) A violation of this section is a Class 1 misdemeanor subject to the penalties set forth in Article 1-8.

(Ord. 09-1201, passed 12-14-09)


11-1-33 INTERFERING WITH POLICE SERVICE DOG

(A) While a police service dog is being caged, kenneled, transported, exhibited, exercised, or engaged in discharging or attempting to discharge any lawful duty or function, it is unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly commit or attempt to commit any of the following acts:

(1) Kill, injure, strike, kick, taunt, torment, tease, harass, shoot, poison, interfere with or bait a police service dog;

(2) Cause or direct any animal to attack or otherwise interfere with the police service dog;

(3) Throw an object or substance at a police service dog; or

(4) Interfere with or obstruct a police service dog, or interfere with or obstruct a law enforcement officer assisted by a police dog, in a manner that does any of the following:

(a) Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of the police service dog;

(b) Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police service dog;

(c) Releases the police service dog from its area of control;

(d) Enters the area of control of the police service dog without the consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other object or substance into that area without permission of the handler;

(e) Engages in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical injury or death to a police service dog;

(f) Aid, assist, abet or encourage any of the actions identified in subsection (A)(1) through (A)(4) of this section.

(B) Restitution. In addition to other penalties, the court may order any person(s) joint and severally liable for the payment of all of the following:

(1) Any veterinary bills or bills for medication incurred as a result of the violation;

(2) Any damaged equipment that results from the violation; and

(3) The cost of replacing the police service dog and/or any further training of a new police service dog by a law enforcement officer that is required due to the death of or serious physical harm to the police service dog that is the subject of the violation.

(C) As used in this section:

(1) HANDLER. A law enforcement officer who is specially trained, and uses a police service dog during the course of the performance of their law enforcement powers or duties.

(2) LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Those persons responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of the Goodyear Municipal Code, including provisions related to fire, building, zoning, and life and safety codes; those individuals empowered to make arrests for offenses under the Goodyear Municipal Code; or those individuals responsible for the enforcement of federal or state criminal laws.

(3) PHYSICAL HARM. Any injury, illness, or other physiological impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.

(4) POLICE SERVICE DOG. A dog that has been trained, and may be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties.

(D) A violation of this section is a Class 1 misdemeanor subject to the penalties set forth in Article 1-8.

(Ord. 09-1201, passed 12-14-09)


11-1-34 FIREWORKS

(A) Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

CONSUMER FIREWORKS means those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.

DISPLAY FIREWORKS means those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.

FIREWORKS means any combustible or explosive composition, substance or combination of substances, or any article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, that is a consumer firework, display firework or permissible consumer firework as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.

NFPA 1124 means the National Fire Protection Association Code for the manufacture, transportation, storage and retail sales of fireworks and pyrotechnic articles as defined by A.R.S § 36-1601.

NOVELTY ITEMS means federally deregulated novelty items that are known as snappers, snap caps, party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices, sparklers, and certain toys as defined in A.R.S. § 36-1601.

PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS means those fireworks as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601 that may be sold within the City even where the use of those items has been prohibited.

STAGE ONE FIRE RESTRICTIONS means no wood or charcoal burning or outdoor smoking.

SUPERVISED PUBLIC DISPLAY means a monitored performance of display fireworks open to the public and authorized by permit by the Fire Code Official or his designee.

(B) Fireworks prohibited; exceptions.

(1) The use, discharge or ignition of fireworks within the City is prohibited, except for the limited use of permissible consumer fireworks during the time periods and under the conditions provided for in A.R.S. § 36-1606.

(2) Nothing in this subsection or section shall be construed to prohibit the use, discharge or ignition of novelty items or the occurrence of a supervised public display of fireworks.

(3) Permits may be granted by the Fire Code Official or designee for conducting a properly supervised public display of fireworks. Every such public display of fireworks shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired, only after proper inspection and in a manner that does not endanger persons, animals, or property. A permit shall not be issued, and may be revoked, during time periods of stage one or higher fire restrictions. The Fire Code Official has authority to impose conditions on any permits granted.

(4) Except as provided for above, permissible consumer fireworks may be used on private property with the consent of the owner from June 24 through July 6 and December 24 through January 3.

(5) The use of permissible consumer fireworks within the City is prohibited on all publicly owned property which includes, but is not limited to, City buildings, City parking lots, City parks, public schools, and City streets and within one mile of the Corgett Wash, Agua Fria River, and Estrella Mountain Regional Park.

(6) The use of permissible consumer fireworks is prohibited by anyone under the age of 16 years of age.

(7) Failure to comply with any permit requirements issued by the Fire Code Official is a civil offense with a fine of up to $1,000.

(C) Sale of fireworks.

(1) No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible consumer fireworks to a person who is under 16 years of age.

(2) No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible consumer fireworks in conflict with state law or as otherwise authorized by this section, or NFPA 1124.

(3) No person shall sell permissible consumer fireworks to the public except from May 20 through July 6 and December 10 through January 3. The sale of permissible consumer fireworks shall be prohibited from May 20 through July 6 and December 10 through January 3 when a federal or state agency implements a stage one or higher fire restriction during these dates.

(D) Posting of signs by persons engaged in the sale of fireworks; civil penalty.

(1) Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks, every person engaged in such sales shall prominently display signs indicating the following:

STATE OF ARIZONA

CONSUMER FIREWORKS REGULATIONS

ARIZONA REVISED STATUTES § 36-1601, ET AL.

THE USE OF PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS AS DEFINED UNDER STATE LAW IS ALLOWED:

JUNE 24 - JULY 6 AND DECEMBER 24 - JANUARY 3

THE SALE OF PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS AS DEFINED UNDER STATE LAW IS ALLOWED:

MAY 20 - JULY 6 AND DECEMBER 10 - JANUARY 3

ALL OTHER FIREWORKS ARE PROHIBITED, EXCEPT AS AUTHORIZED BY LOCAL FIRE DEPARTMENT PERMIT.

THE SALE AND USE OF NOVELTIES KNOWN AS SNAPPERS (POP-ITS), PARTY POPPERS, GLOW WORMS, SNAKES, TOY SMOKE DEVICES AND SPARKLERS ARE PERMITTED AT ALL TIMES.

PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS MAY NOT BE SOLD TO PERSONS UNDER SIXTEEN YEARS OF AGE.

CHECK WITH YOUR LOCAL FIRE DEPARTMENT FOR ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS AND DATES BEFORE USING.

(2) Signs required under this subsection shall be placed at each cash register and in each area where fireworks are displayed for sale.

(3) The sign shall be eight and one-half inches by 11 inches in size, on cardstock paper, in landscape orientation, and displayed on a contrasting background. A model sign shall be posted on the City’s website and filed with the City Clerk’s office.

(4) Failure to comply with subsections (D)(1) and (D)(2) of this section is a civil offense punishable by a civil fine of up to $1,000.

(E) Authority to enforce violations of this section; means of enforcement.

(1) The Fire Code Official or designee, a City police officer, City code enforcement officers, or the City Attorney may issue civil complaints to enforce violations of this section designated as civil offenses.

(2) Any person authorized pursuant to this subsection to issue a civil complaint may also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be taken and the time in which they are to be taken to avoid issuance of a civil or criminal complaint.

(3) A City police officer, City code enforcement officers, or the City Attorney may issue criminal complaints to enforce this section.

(F) Liability for emergency responses related to use of fireworks; definitions.

(1) A person who uses, discharges or ignites permissible consumer fireworks, fireworks or anything that is designed or intended to rise into the air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly above the ground is liable for the expenses of any emergency response that is required by such use, discharge or ignition. The fact that a person is convicted or found responsible for a violation(s) of this section is prima facie evidence of liability under this subsection.

(2) The expenses of an emergency response are a charge against the person liable for those expenses pursuant to subsection (F)(1) of this section. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and may be collected proportionately by the public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit entities that incurred the expenses. The liability imposed under this subsection is in addition to and not in limitation of any other liability or penalty that may be imposed.

(3) For the purposes of this subsection:

(a) EXPENSES OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE means reasonable costs directly incurred by public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit entities that make an appropriate emergency response to an incident.

(b) REASONABLE COSTS includes the costs of providing police, fire fighting, rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of an incident and the salaries of the persons who respond to the incident.

(G) Penalty. The penalty for violating any prohibition or requirement imposed by this section is a civil penalty with a fine up to $1,000 unless another penalty is specifically provided for.

(Ord. 10-1224, passed 9-27-2010; Am. Ord. 14-1302, passed 6-23-2014; Am. Ord. 18-1390, passed 11-5-2018)


CHAPTER 12: Sewers

Article

12-1.    DEFINITIONS

12-2.    SERVICE AND BILLING

12-3.    DEPARTMENT AND CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITIES

12-4.    USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS

12-5.    EXTENSION OF SERVICE

12-6.    SECTIONS AS PART OF CONTRACT

12-7.    ENFORCEMENT

12-8.    EFFLUENT SERVICE


ARTICLE 12-1 Definitions

Section

12-1-1    Definitions


12-1-1 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions and those set forth in Chapter 12A shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

AVAILABLE means a public sanitary sewer that is within 100 feet of any part of the property is considered an available public sanitary sewer to that property.

BUILDING SEWER or HOUSE SEWER means the extension from the building drain to the building connection or other place of disposal.

CESSPOOL means a covered excavation in the ground receiving sewage or other organic wastes from a drainage system that is designed to retain the organic matter and solids, permitting the liquids to seep into the soil cavities.

CITY MANAGER means the City of Goodyear City Manager or his/her designee.

COMMERCIAL ACCOUNT means an account for a profit or nonprofit business, and multi-family residential dwelling units excluding single family residences.

CUSTOMER means the property owner or any person, renter, lessee, occupant, government agency, nonprofit or entity responsible for payment of utility service(s) provided by the City.

DIRECTOR means the person or his/her designee authorized by the City Manager to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter.

EFFLUENT OR RECLAIMED WATER means non-potable water derived from processing sewage and which is used for certain landscape watering purposes, industrial use or other purposes.

GARBAGE means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.

INDUSTRIAL WASTE means waste produced by industrial user activity.

INDUSTRIAL USER (USER OR IU) means the nondomestic sewer user; a source of discharge into the POTW from a nondomestic source; a source of indirect discharge.

INHABIT means to live or dwell in any structure required to have a utility account on a temporary or permanent basis.

NATURAL OUTLET means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch or other body of surface or ground water.

MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ACCOUNT means an account for a multi-family dwelling unit which has requested and receives utility service(s) from the City.

MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNITS means any residential property comprised of two or more dwelling units, including duplexes, apartments and condominiums.

OCCUPANT (OCCUPY) means a person, persons or legal entity that, through rights of ownership, tenancy or other legal means has possession or the use of the subject real property.

PERSON means any enterprise, individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, trust, estate, governmental entity, municipality, State or Federal agency or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, assigns or employee thereof.

PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM means an on-site wastewater treatment facility, as defined in 18 AAC 9, Article 3, Rule R18-9-101, that consists of a conventional septic tank system or alternative, engineered system installed at a site to treat and dispose of wastewater, predominantly of human origin, generated at the site.

PRIVY means a structure not connected to a plumbing system and which is used by persons for the deposition of human body waste.

PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE means garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-fourth inch in any dimension.

PROPERTY OWNER means any person, with reference to real property, that holds or has any of the following: (A) fee title, (B) equitable title, (C) any possessory right, (D) the right to occupy the premises, or (E) the right to lease, sublease or authorize another to occupy the premises for real property located in the City of Goodyear. A person is presumed to be a property owner if identified as such on any of the following: a deed, contract, lease agreement, sales agreement, the Maricopa County Recorder’s Office, Maricopa County Assessor’s Office and/or any other public record system wherein these records may be located.

PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) means a treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1292), which is owned by the City. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SANITARY DUMPING STATION means a properly designed and constructed facility intended to receive the discharge of wastewater from any holding tank or similar device installed in any vehicle or trailer equipped with living space and amenities found in a home, and having a means of discharging the contents, in an acceptable manner, into the sanitary sewer system.

SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM OR SEWER SERVICE means a City owned sewer system that carries liquid and waterborne waste from residential, commercial and industrial facilities and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.

SEPTIC TANK means a tank that receives and partially treats sewage through processes of sedimentation, flotation and bacterial action to separate solids from the liquid in the sewage, and which discharges the liquid to a soil absorption system.

SEWAGE means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).

SEWAGE METER OR METER means a device used to measure the quantity or rate of sewage flowing into the sanitary sewer system.

SEWER SYSTEM ("SEWER") means the complete sanitary sewer system, including sanitary sewer mains, manholes, lateral sewer lines, pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, forced mains and all other structures, devices, appurtenances, and facilities used for collecting or conducting waters to an ultimate point for treatment or disposal.

SEWER CONNECTION means the connection of sanitary waste and drainage disposal lines from any development on a property to the sanitary sewer system.

SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE means a single family detached dwelling.

SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ACCOUNT means an account for a single family detached dwelling which receives utility services from the City.

UTILITY ACCOUNT means all accounts with the City of Goodyear for sanitation, sewer and/or water when provided by the City.

UTILITY SERVICE(S) means sewer, sanitation and/or water service provided by or on behalf of the City of Goodyear.

(Prior Code, Art. 12-1) (Am. Ord. 99-659, passed 8-23-1999; Am. Ord. 09-1186, passed 6-22-2009; Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014)


ARTICLE 12-2 Service and Billing

Section

12-2-1    Connection required

12-2-2    Application for service

12-2-3    Grounds for rejection of application

12-2-4    Security deposit

12-2-5    Sanitary sewer system charges

12-2-6    Customer service charges and payment

12-2-7    Discontinuance of service

12-2-8    Notice of termination of service

12-2-9    Termination under certain conditions

Prior legislation: Prior Code, § 12-2-2


12-2-1 CONNECTION REQUIRED.

(A) Connection Required. All persons owning real property upon which any building, structure, trailer or house is located with which water is used and which can be served by the sanitary sewer system shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system of the City or, if the sanitary sewer system is not available to said real property, to a private sewer system as provided herein. Service will be considered available when a sanitary sewer system sewer main is located within 100 feet of any part of the property, unless determined otherwise by the City Manager or designee.

(B) All persons in the City must sign up and pay monthly for sewer services for properties located within the City of Goodyear at the time their residence is purchased, owned, leased, used or occupied, whichever occurs first, when such services are provided by the City or when the properties are connected to City of Goodyear sewer.

(C) All persons outside the City must sign up and pay monthly for sewer services at the time their residence is purchased, owned, leased, used or occupied, whichever occurs first, when the property is connected to the City of Goodyear sewer.

(D) All property owners shall provide the City with the names of all tenants occupying the property owner’s property within 30 days of occupancy.

(E) Base fees and any charges for sewer service shall apply even if a building is unoccupied.

(F) No person within the City shall be permitted to avoid or refuse to accept sanitary sewer service if available to be provided by the City. The failure of any person to accept sanitary sewer service shall not exempt that person from the payment of the charges for the service and any fine or penalty for noncompliance.

(G) Failure to Subscribe. Any person that is required to receive sanitary sewer service from the City who fails to activate a sanitary sewer service account with the City as required in this section shall be subject to penalties, which include but are not limited to the total monthly fees they would have been assessed and an activation fee. This shall be in addition to any other penalties provided in this chapter.

(H) It is unlawful for any property owner to allow any person to lease, rent or inhabit the property owner’s property if that person leasing, renting, occupying or inhabiting the property owner’s property does not maintain all utility services available and provided by the City.

(I) It is unlawful for any person to lease, rent or inhabit any property if that person does not maintain all utility services available and provided by the City.

(J) It is unlawful for any person to lease, rent, or inhabit any property if that person deposits or discharges or permits to be deposited or discharged any liquid, substance or sewage into the sanitary sewer system connected to that property if that person does not maintain a utility account with the City for sewer services when such services are provided by the City.

(K) For purposes of this section, it is presumed that any person who leases, rents, or inhabits any property is depositing or discharging substances or sewage into the sanitary sewer system connected to that property.

(L) For purposes of this section, maintain a utility account means to open and keep open an active account with the City for all utility services available and provided by the City and to make all payments when due on that account.

(Prior Code, § 12-2-1) (Am. Ord. 93-478, passed 3-23-1993; Am. Ord. 04-894, passed 4-26-2004; Am. Ord. 09-1186, passed 6-22-2009; Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014)


12-2-2 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.

(A) Application for Sewer Service. Service applications are required of all persons requesting activation of any utility service(s). Application information must be submitted for each service address. An application must also be submitted when requesting any transfer of service. An activation fee will be charged for the activation of any utility service. The activation fee will be due at the time an application is submitted. No more than one activation fee will be required when a person is signing up for multiple utility services with the City at one location.

(B) Required Information. Applicants shall provide the following information when activating an account.

(1) Single Family Residential Accounts.

(a) Legal names of all responsible parties, entity or individual, must include all persons identified on the rental or lease agreement;

(b) Social security number and/or Federal tax identification number for commercial entities;

(c) Service address;

(d) Mailing address, if different;

(e) If property owner, provide proof of ownership;

(f) If tenant, provide landlord’s name and address and copy of occupancy agreement (rental or lease agreement);

(g) If agent, provide proof of agency;

(h) Applicant’s employer’s name, address and phone number;

(i) Requested start date;

(j) A photocopy of a valid driver’s license/identification card or other official government identification; and

(k) Any other information deemed relevant by the Director.

(2) Commercial and Multi-Family Residential Accounts.

(a) Legal name(s) of all responsible parties/entities.

(b) Federal tax identification number and/or social security number;

(c) Service address;

(d) Mailing address, if different;

(e) Name and address of property owner(s).

(f) If property owner, provide proof of ownership.

(g) If tenant, provide:

1. Landlord’s name and address and copy of rental or lease agreement.

2. Names of all persons identified on the rental or lease agreement;

(h) If agent, provide proof of agency;

(i) Requested start date;

(j) A photocopy of a valid driver’s license/identification card, or other official government identification; and

(k) Any other information deemed relevant by the Director.

(C) All applications for any and all utility service(s) submitted by any person or entity shall be signed by the person who will be responsible for payment of the utility service(s) to be provided by the City, or a person legally authorized to act on their behalf. When submitting an application electronically, the named applicant(s) on the application will be deemed to have signed the application.

(D) It is the responsibility of the customer to ensure that the customer’s contact and billing information on file with the City remains current at all times.

(Prior Code, § 12-2-1) (Am. Ord. 93-478, passed 3-23-1993; Am. Ord. 04-894, passed 4-26-2004; Am. Ord. 09-1186, passed 6-22-2009; Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-2-1(B))


12-2-3 GROUNDS FOR REJECTION OF APPLICATION.

The City reserves, at all times, the right to reject an application or terminate any utility service should any person provide false or misleading information on their application; fails or refuses to provide all information requested on the application; sewer services are not available to the property; or until the applicant requesting service pays in full any and all outstanding utility balance(s) for all utility accounts of the named applicant(s).

(Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014)


12-2-4 SECURITY DEPOSIT.

(A) Security Deposit. A refundable security deposit, the amount of which shall be established by resolution of the Council, shall be charged for the activation of sewer services. The deposit may be paid in two monthly installments at the discretion of the City Manager. Upon receipt of a written request from the customer, the City Manager may waive the deposit required under this section if during the preceding 18 months the applicant’s payment history with any public utility or government entity evidences that the applicant has timely paid their bills for 12 consecutive months. All deposits shall be retained by the City as security for payment of future utility service charges until all utility services are terminated or discontinued and the account is closed with the outstanding balance on all utility accounts paid in full. The customer’s deposit may be returned to the customer if there have been no late utility payments during the prior 12 months on the customer’s account.

(B) In the event a customer’s deposit has been refunded or waived as herein provided, the Finance Customer Service Supervisor may require a new deposit as a condition of continued service in the event the customer fails to pay the charges required under Chapter 10, 12 or 14, when each bill is due and payable for any three billing periods within the prior 12 month period. The three billing periods need not be consecutive.

(C) No more than one deposit shall be required and retained when multiple services are received on the same account.

(D) Owner Guarantee. A property owner may pay the deposit required for utility services on behalf of a tenant, or the deposit may be waived on behalf of a tenant, if the property owner meets the waiver requirements set forth in subsection (A) of this section, and if, in either situation, the property owner agrees to be financially responsible for the payment of any and all unpaid amounts due for utility services provided to the tenant and the tenant consents to the City’s disclosure of the tenant’s utility account information to the property owner.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 11-1238, passed 5-9-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-2-3)


12-2-5 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM CHARGES.

(A) Charges for sanitary sewer service will include a monthly wastewater base fee plus a volume charge for all City sewer customers.

(1) The monthly wastewater base fee shall be set by resolution of Council.

(2) The monthly wastewater volume charge shall be determined as follows:

(a) Single-Family Residential Customers. The volume of wastewater contributed by single-family residential customers shall be set at the average monthly water billed during the immediately preceding months of January, February and March. Billing adjustments based on changes in usage shall be implemented in May of each year. If the Finance Director determines that adequate meter information is not available for billing a single-family residential customer, then the customer will be charged an average monthly billing for that user class;

(b) Multifamily Residential and Commercial Customers. The volume of wastewater contributed by multifamily residential and commercial customers shall be set at 80% of monthly water billing. If the Finance Director determines that adequate meter information is not available for billing a multifamily residential or commercial customer, then the customer will be charged an average monthly billing for that user class;

(c) Direct Metering. When a sewage meter has been installed, the sewer volume charges shall be calculated based on total volume discharged into the sanitary sewer system during the monthly billing cycle.

(B) Rates for sanitary sewer service shall be established by resolution of Council and Council shall provide different rates based upon whether the service location is within the City limits, outside the City limits but within the incorporated limits of another municipality, or outside the City limits and outside the incorporated limits of another municipality.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 11-1240, passed 6-27-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-3-1)


12-2-6 CUSTOMER SERVICE CHARGES AND PAYMENT.

(A) The customer shall be required to pay monthly sewer service fees and additional fees which include but are not limited to security deposits, account activation fees, field visit fees, non-sufficient funds fees, delinquent account fees, late fees, interest, collection fees or such other fees as authorized by City Code. All such fees shall be established by Council by way of resolution. The amount of the monthly service fee shall be based on the number and size of the water meter installed on the property and approved by the City. For any property without a City approved water meter, the monthly service charge shall be based on the water meter size required by the City. Any interruption in physical occupancy, whether temporary or permanent, of the property served by the connection for which said service charge is made shall not cause an abatement or termination of such monthly sewer service charge.

(B) Rates may differ depending upon use, occupancy or location. Unless otherwise stated, service provided outside the City limits will be charged a rate of one and one half times the rate for customers inside the corporate limits of the City.

(C) The Council shall regulate and change the rates and fees as deemed appropriate by resolution of Council.

(D) Billing, Payment, Delinquency and Discontinuance of Service. All fee and service charges are due and payable when rendered. Payment must be received by the due date identified on the bill. If the total amount of the bill is not paid by the due date, a notice of delinquency and intent to disconnect service will be mailed to the customer indicating the scheduled disconnect date. If the total amount due on the bill is not paid prior to the scheduled disconnect date, the notice of delinquency and intent to disconnect having been given, service will be disconnected.

(E) Payment Plan. The customer may enter into a payment plan agreement with the Finance Customer Service Supervisor for the payment of any delinquent amount. Failure to comply with the payment plan agreement will result in the imposition of fees and penalties relating back to the original date of the outstanding debt and may result in the imposition of additional fees and costs as provided by the City Code and discontinuance of utility service.

(F) Hearing Provided. All customers that dispute the account balance, or termination of service for nonpayment of amounts due, may submit an appeal in writing to the City Manager within 14 calendar days after the notice has been mailed, or emailed, to the customer’s address on file with the Finance Department. The written request must set forth fully the facts supporting the appeal and relief requested. A separate appeal must be filed for each dispute. The City Manager shall issue a written decision within 14 working days from the City Manager’s receipt of the appeal. The decision and order of the City Manager on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. The request for hearing shall not waive or stay the collection of any fees or charges that may be due.

(Prior Code, § 12-2-4) (Am. Ord. 91-441, passed 10-8-1991; Am. Ord. 93-478, passed 3-23-1993; Am. Ord. 98-623, passed 9-14-1998; Am. Ord. 02-823, passed 9-23-2002; Am. Ord. 11-1238, passed 5-9-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-2-4)


12-2-7 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.

(A) All requests for discontinuance of sewer service must be made in writing by the customer or their authorized agent and submitted to the City along with proof of termination of water service from the water provider, if applicable. When discontinuance of sewer service is requested from any premises all charges for services supplied to the premises shall be calculated and due on the date specified on the bill. The customer requesting discontinuance of service must provide a change of address with their request to discontinue service.

(B) Until the customer provides a written request to terminate to the City, the premises shall be deemed occupied, and services charges will continue to accrue.

(C) In the event that the customer shall have made a deposit and the deposit is still being retained, the deposit amount will be applied to the balance owing on all utility accounts with the City. Any credit remaining on the account after the account has been paid will be mailed to the customer at the address provided in their request to discontinue service.

(D) Any outstanding balances due on the utility account(s) shall be collected as provided by law.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-2-5)


12-2-8 NOTICE OF TERMINATION OF SERVICE.

(A) It is the policy of the City to terminate utility service to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills as provided herein.

(1) All bills are due and payable on the date set forth on the bill; and

(2) If the total amount of the outstanding bill is not paid by the due date, a service termination notice will be mailed to the customer indicating the scheduled disconnect date, and customer will be assessed an administrative penalty fee set by resolution of Council. If the total amount due is not paid by the due date on the disconnect notice, service will be disconnected for nonpayment and fees may be assessed; and additional fees and charges will be assessed and continue to accrue until the past due balance is paid in full.

(3) A customer that disputes the account balance, meter reading, or termination of service for nonpayment of amounts due, may submit an appeal in writing to the City Manager within 14 calendar days after the notice has been mailed, or emailed, to the customer’s address on file with the Finance Department. The written request must set forth fully the facts supporting the appeal and the relief requested. A separate appeal must be filed for each dispute. The City Manager shall have authority to compromise disputed billings or establish payment arrangements. The City Manager shall issue a written decision within 14 working days from the City Manager’s receipt of the appeal. The decision and order of the City Manager on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. Utility services will not be terminated until after the expiration of the appeal period and/or the decision from the City Manager.

(B) When it becomes necessary for the City to terminate utility service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after all bills for service then due have been paid, in addition to a reconnect fee in an amount to be set by resolution of Council. Reconnect of service will be completed during the next business day unless the customer requests otherwise. Same day connection will result in the assessment of an additional fee.

(Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014)


12-2-9 TERMINATION UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS.

(A) The City may terminate sewer service under any of the following conditions:

(1) To prevent fraud or abuse, or unauthorized use of sewer services;

(2) For the violation of this chapter or of any Federal, State, or local laws applicable to water service or environmental issues;

(3) Legal process;

(4) Direction of public authorities;

(5) Local emergency requiring emergency measures, or for emergency repairs;

(6) Tampering with meter or connection by the customer or someone on their behalf;

(7) Nonpayment of any utility fees, charges or deposit(s); or

(8) False information provided in the application or in the application process.

(B) The City will make reasonable efforts to notify customers prior to the discontinuance of services due to emergency circumstances. In the event the City has determined it necessary to terminate services for reasons listed in subsections (A)(1), (2), (5) and (6) of this section, the City is authorized to terminate services without prior notice to the customer. Prior to terminating service for reasons listed in subsections (A)(3), (4), (7) and (8) of this section, the City will give written notice to the customer. All customers will be provided an opportunity for a hearing with the City Manager to address any complaints that may arise with the discontinuance of service. All hearings will be held in compliance with this chapter.

(Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014)


ARTICLE 12-3 Department and Consumer Responsibilities

Section

12-3-1    City responsibilities and liabilities

12-3-2    Property owner responsibilities

12-3-3    Interference with City staff

12-3-4    Deposits and discharges

12-3-5    Private sewage disposal systems

12-3-6    Tampering

12-3-7    Permit required

12-3-8    Permit application

12-3-9    Inspection and approval by City

Prior legislation: Prior Code, § 12-4-10


12-3-1 CITY RESPONSIBILITIES AND LIABILITIES.

(A) The City shall not be responsible for the installation, maintenance or inspection of the customer’s service line (which extends from the dwelling unit up to the sewer main interconnection), piping and apparatus or for any defects therein.

(B) The City shall not be responsible for the negligence of third persons or forces beyond the control of the City resulting in any interruption of service or damage to the property of the customer.

(C) The City may refuse service to any prospective customer when the capacity of the sewer system will not permit additional loads being placed thereon.

(Prior Code, § 12-4-1) (Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-4-1)


12-3-2 PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES.

(A) Building or house sewer connections on any property shall be arranged to provide service to one lot. If additional service is required, it may be considered as a separate and individual account.

(B) Property owners must obtain written consent from the City prior to any modifications to a sewer connection.

(C) Service line(s), sewer connection(s) and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the property owner, at the property owner’s expense, in a safe and efficient manner and in accordance with the Federal, State and local law, rules, regulations and building standards. The property owner’s failure to comply with Federal, State and local law, rules, regulations, and building standards relieves the City of any and all liability from injury or damage proximately caused therefrom.

(D) The property owner and customer shall safeguard the City’s property placed on the property owner’s premises and shall permit access to it only by the authorized representatives of the City.

(E) In the event that any loss or damage to the property of the City or any accident or injury to persons or property is caused by or results from the negligence or wrongful act of the property owner and/or customer, his or her agents or employees, the cost of necessary repairs or replacements shall be paid by the property owner and/or customer to the City and any liability otherwise resulting shall be assumed by the property owner and/or customer. The amount of such loss or damage or the cost of repairs may be added to the customer’s bill, and, if not paid, service may be terminated after providing notice and an opportunity for a hearing as provided herein.

(F) When service to a property owner requires the laying of any City sewer lines or the installation of any other City property on, under, across or over the property owner’s property, the property owner shall grant to the City an easement, right-of-way or license for such installation.

(Prior Code, § 12-4-2) (Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-4-2)


12-3-3 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY STAFF.

It is unlawful for any person:

(A) To deny reasonable access or interfere in any way with City staff in the discharge of any of their official duties, which include but are not limited to tapping of any sewer pipe, main or lateral belonging to the City or in the laying or connecting of pipe, main or lateral or in operation, maintenance or inspection of any part of the sanitary sewer system;

(B) To dig up, or cause to be dug up, any street or alley in the City for the purpose of connection with the sewer system of the City without first obtaining a permit from the City;

(C) Authorized by the City to dig up any portion of any street or alley of the City for the purpose of connecting with the sewer system of the City to fail or neglect to place the street or alley in its original condition under the supervision of the authorized officers of the City and as required by the City.

(Prior Code, § 12-4-3) (Am. Ord. 90-316, passed 9-25-1990; Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-4-3) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


12-3-4 DEPOSITS AND DISCHARGES.

(A) It is unlawful for any person to deposit or discharge, or permit to be deposited or discharged to any natural outlet or upon public or private property within the City or the sanitary sewer system or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City any sewage, industrial waste, hazardous waste, effluent, fats, oils, grease, medical waste, paint, animal excrement or any other prohibited discharge identified in Section 12A-2-1(C)(1), unless otherwise authorized by law.

(B) It is unlawful to remove or deposit sewage or any other substance into a manhole installed in the sanitary sewer system, without prior written approval from the Director.

(C) A recreational vehicle sanitary dumping station may be constructed or maintained with prior written authorization of the Director and the installation of a City approved meter capable of recording and measuring the flow of sewage discharged into the sanitary sewer system. Such meters shall be subject to all requirements set forth in this chapter and Article 12A-6 and will be assessed a rate to be set by resolution of Council.

(Prior Code, § 12-4-4) (Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-4-4) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


12-3-5 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.

(A) Compliance with Article. Except as provided in this article, it is unlawful to construct or maintain within the City any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage without the prior written authorization of the City.

(B) When Permitted; Sanitation. Where a sanitary sewer system is not available within the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system which complies with the regulations of the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, Maricopa County Department of Environmental Services and the City. Such private sewage disposal system shall be constructed, maintained and operated at all times in a sanitary manner and as required by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, Maricopa County Department of Environmental Services and the City. Before issuance of a building permit for any new building that is to be served by a private sewage system, the applicant must demonstrate to the City that the following requirements have been met:

(1) The private sewage disposal system has been designed to ensure a sanitary sewer service line stub is in a location sufficient to facilitate future connection to a sanitary sewer system, as determined by the City Engineer.

(2) The property owner(s) shall sign and record with the Maricopa County Recorder’s Office an affidavit of disclosure stating that they agree to suspend use of the private sewage disposal system and connect to a sanitary sewer system when it is available to the property in accordance with the time frames for compliance specified below, whichever one occurs first:

(a) Within five years from the date that the sanitary sewer line became available to the property; or

(b) Immediately, or as soon as practicable thereafter as determined by the City Engineer, upon evidence of failure of the existing private sewage disposal system; or

(c) Within 30 days of a change in ownership of the property.

(C) Discontinuance Required. At such time that a sanitary sewer line becomes available to any property served by a private sewage disposal system, the landowner(s) shall be required to discontinue use of the private sewage disposal system and connect to the sanitary sewer system in accordance with the time frames for compliance specified below, provided notice of such time frames for compliance has been recorded by the City with Maricopa County Recorder’s Office on the property to be served at the time the sanitary sewer line became available to the property or the property owner(s) affidavit of disclosure has been recorded with the Maricopa County Recorder’s Office on the property regarding such time frames for compliance:

(1) Within five years from the date that the sanitary sewer line became available; or

(2) Immediately, or as soon as practicable thereafter as determined by the City Engineer, upon evidence of failure of the existing private sewage disposal system; or

(3) Within 30 days of a change in ownership of the property, whichever occurs first.

(D) Discontinuance Standards. Whenever the use of a private sewer system is discontinued due to a voluntary or mandatory connection to the sanitary sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the property owner shall fill any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage facilities with suitable material in accordance with State and county regulations within 90 days after discontinuance.

(E) Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the strict application of this section shall be provided an opportunity for an appeal hearing with the City Manager. The City Manager shall have the authority to temporarily or permanently waive, or conditionally waive, the provisions of this section. All hearings shall be held in accordance with this chapter.

(F) Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this section shall be assessed a penalty as provided for by Article 1-8.

(Prior Code, § 12-4-5) (Am. Ord. 09-1186, passed 6-22-2009; Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-4-5) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


12-3-6 TAMPERING.

It is unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully, negligently or knowingly:

(A) Bypass the sewer meter, without prior authorization from the City;

(B) Tamper with the sewer meter;

(C) Break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sanitary sewer system; or

(D) Connect with the sanitary sewer system directly or indirectly without prior authorization from the City.

(Prior Code, § 12-4-6) (Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-4-6) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


12-3-7 PERMIT REQUIRED.

No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City.

(Prior Code, § 12-4-7) (Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-4-7) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


12-3-8 PERMIT APPLICATION.

Upon issuance of a required permit to any person, each and every permit issued shall be presented by the person to the City and application made for the building connection.

(Prior Code, § 12-4-8) (Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-4-8)


12-3-9 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL BY CITY.

No building sewer will be connected to the building connection until it has been inspected and approved by the City.

(Prior Code, § 12-4-9) (Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-4-9)


ARTICLE 12-4 Use of Public Sewers

Section

12-4-1    Prohibited substances

12-4-2    Interceptors required

Prior legislation: Prior Code, §§ 12-5-3 – 12-5-6


12-4-1 PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES.

(A) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any sewer which directly or indirectly connects to the POTW any substance which would be in violation of Section 12A-2-1.

(Prior Code, § 12-5-1) (Am. Ord. 90-316, passed 9-25-1990; Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-5-1)


12-4-2 INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.

(A) Grease, oil and sand interceptors are required as provided in Section 12A-3-2.

(Prior Code, § 12-5-2) (Am. Ord. 90-316, passed 9-25-1990; Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-5-2)


ARTICLE 12-5 Extension of Service

Section

12-5-1    Outside City limits

12-5-2    Approval required

12-5-3    In subdivisions


12-5-1 OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.

Use of the City sewer system will not be granted to persons outside the limits of the City who are not supplied with City water without a prior written agreement with the City.

(Prior Code, § 12-6-1) (Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-6-1)


12-5-2 APPROVAL REQUIRED.

No public sewer extensions shall be made until the plans and specifications are approved by the authorized officers of the City.

(Prior Code, § 12-6-2) (Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-6-2)


12-5-3 IN SUBDIVISIONS.

In new subdivisions where public sewer extensions are authorized by the City and constructed at the subdivider’s expense, the City may authorize the subdivider’s agent, if so desired, to install building connections with wyes and connect the building sewers to the building connection under the following provisions:

(A) The construction of the public sewer, building connections and connections of the building sewers to the building connection shall be in compliance with the requirements of the City.

(B) Before any sewer construction commences, plumbing permits must be obtained by the subdivider or agent, from the City.

(Prior Code, § 12-6-3) (Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-6-3)


ARTICLE 12-6 Sections As Part of Contract

Section

12-6-1    Sections as part of contract


12-6-1 SECTIONS AS PART OF CONTRACT.

All sections contained in this chapter shall be considered a part of the contract of every resident of the City taking sewer service from the City, and such resident taking sewer service shall be considered as having expressly consented to be bound thereby. Consumers outside the City limits shall, upon application for sewer service, be required to sign a statement agreeing to the sections set forth in this chapter.

(Prior Code, Art. 12-7) (Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-7-1)


ARTICLE 12-7 Enforcement

Section

12-7-1    Enforcement, penalties

12-7-2    Liens


12-7-1 ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES.

(A) Enforcement Official. Law Enforcement, Code Enforcement, Operation Supervisor—Wastewater Collection and the Wastewater Superintendent shall have the authority and responsibility for enforcement and compliance with this chapter.

(B) No oversight or dereliction of duties by any person assigned to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall legalize, allow, or excuse a violation of this chapter.

(C) All violations of this chapter are subject to criminal and civil penalties and enforcement provisions, including abatement, collections, and liens, pursuant to Article 1-8 and Article 18-1.

(D) If a person pleads responsible or is found to be responsible for a civil violation of Section 12-2-1 the court shall impose a civil sanction in accordance with the following guidelines: for a first time offense, the civil sanction shall be in an amount not less than $500 nor more than $750; for a second offense, the civil sanction shall be in a sum not less than $750 nor more than $1,000, and for a third offense or subsequent offense, the civil sanction shall be in an amount not less than $1,000. Any violation of Section 12-2-1 may be dismissed or the fines may be reduced or suspended when proof is filed and accepted by the court which shows that the property owner or tenant has signed up for utility service with the City and paid, or reached an agreement with the City for a payment plan, for the outstanding balance due on the account.

(E) Each day any violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance incorporated herein, or the failure to perform any act or duty required by this code or ordinance incorporated herein, continues shall constitute a separate offense.

(F) The City may obtain an administrative warrant from the Goodyear Municipal Court authorizing the City to enter the property located in the City at reasonable times to inspect the property to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter or when there is probable cause to believe a condition, object, activity or circumstance exists on the property that justifies the inspection.

(Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014)


12-7-2 LIENS.

(A) In the event a property owner fails to pay any sum due the City under the provisions of this chapter, for which the property owner is responsible, the City may record a lien on the real property to which the service is and/or has been provided for the amount of any unpaid amount due. Any and all unpaid amounts due may result in a lien placed against the property from the date of recording in the Maricopa County Recorder’s Office until the fees and all costs are paid. The lien is subject and inferior to the lien for general taxes and to all prior recorded mortgages and encumbrances of record. A sale of the property to satisfy a lien assessed pursuant to this section shall be made on a judgment of foreclosure and order of sale in accordance with the rules and procedures applicable thereto. The City shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney’s fees and costs incurred in the foreclosure of any such lien.

(B) The City will provide the property owner with written notice of intent to file the lien at least 30 days prior to the filing thereof, which shall include an advisement of the opportunity for a hearing with the City Manager. If the sum due for which lien is claimed is paid prior to the expiration of the 30 day period, no such lien shall be filed for the amount paid.

(C) Notice of intent to file the lien shall be given by personal service or certified mail, to the property owner, at the last known address, or to the address to which the tax bill for the property was last mailed. If the owner does not reside on the property, the notice shall be sent to the last known address. Upon payment of the lien, the City Manager is authorized to release the lien on behalf of the City.

(Prior Code, Art. 12-8) (Am. Ord. 91-332, passed 8-13-1991; Am. Ord. 11-1238, passed 5-9-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-8-1)


ARTICLE 12-8 Effluent Service

Section

12-8-1    Distribution of effluent

12-8-2    Effluent rates and fees

12-8-3    Effluent service charges; termination of service


12-8-1 DISTRIBUTION OF EFFLUENT.

(A) Through a contractual agreement with the City, the City may provide effluent to customers for non-potable use, if such use and contract are approved by the City Council and comply with Federal, State and local law, rules and regulations.

(B) The City shall have no obligation to enter into a contract to provide effluent or install distribution lines.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-9-1)


12-8-2 EFFLUENT RATES AND FEES.

The Council by way of resolution shall, from time to time, establish rates to be charged for the use of effluent and the fee for connection to the effluent delivery line.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-9-2)


12-8-3 EFFLUENT SERVICE CHARGES; TERMINATION OF SERVICE.

(A) Charges for effluent service will be billed monthly and shall be due and payable on the date indicated on the billing.

(B) In the event of billing delinquency for effluent service, the City shall have the same rights to collect delinquent fees, to terminate service and to collect fees for discontinuance and reestablishment of service as applicable to water service accounts.

(C) The procedures for application for service and the making of a deposit, which are applicable in the case of establishing water service, shall be applicable to effluent service. This does apply to effluent hydrant meters.

(D) The City shall have the right to terminate effluent service in the event effluent furnished by the City is used for any unlawful purpose; provided, however, that the user shall have the right to appeal termination of service in the same manner as provided for an appeal in Chapter 10.

(Prior Code, § 12-9-3) (Am. Ord. 99-659, passed 8-23-1999; Am. Ord. 14-1298, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 12-9-3)


CHAPTER 12A: Sewer Pretreatment

Article

12A-1.    GENERAL PROVISIONS

12A-2.    GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS

12A-3.    PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER

12A-4.    WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS

12A-5.    REPORTING REQUIREMENTS

12A-6.    COMPLIANCE MONITORING

12A-7.    RELEASE OF INFORMATION

12A-8.    ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN

12A-9.    AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES FOR DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS

12A-10.    MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS


ARTICLE 12A-1: General Provisions

Section

12A-1-1    Purpose and Policy

12A-1-2    Administration

12A-1-3    Definitions


12A-1-1 PURPOSE AND POLICY.

(A) This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for Users of Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) for the City and enables the City to comply with State and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR § 403). The objectives of this chapter are to do the following:

(1) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with its operation;

(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;

(3) Protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;

(4) Promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the POTW; and

(5) Enable the City to comply with its Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other Federal or State laws to which the POTW is subject.

(B) This chapter shall apply to all Users of the POTW. This chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires User reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-1-2 ADMINISTRATION.

Except as otherwise provided, the City Manager or their designee shall administer, implement,

and enforce the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-1-3 DEFINITIONS.

Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.

ACT means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS means enforcement documents that direct Industrial Users to undertake, or to cease, specified activities; may incorporate compliance schedules, timeframes, administrative fines, and termination of service orders.

ADMINISTRATIVE WARRANT means a warrant issued by the court which authorizes City staff to conduct an administrative search to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and permits.

APPROVAL AUTHORITY means the State of Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) or Regional Administrator for Region IX of the U.S. EPA.

ARIZONA POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (AZPDES) means the state program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring, and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment and bio-solids requirements under A.R.S. Title 49, Chapter 2, Article 3.1 and 18 A.A.C. 9 Articles 9 and 10.

AUTHORIZED OR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER means the following:

(1) If the User is a corporation:

(a) The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or

(b) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.

(2) If the User is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively.

(3) If the User is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee.

(4) The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition may designate a Duly Authorized Representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the City Manager.

BASELINE MONITORING REPORT (BMR) means a report submitted by categorical industrial users which indicates the compliance status of the categorical industrial user within an applicable categorical standard.

BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices and industry standards to implement prohibitions identified in City Code and 40 CFR § 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.

BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).

BLOWDOWN means the minimum discharge of re-circulating water for the purpose of discharging materials contained in the water, the further buildup of which would cause concentration in amounts exceeding established limits.

BYPASS means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a treatment facility.

CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER (CIU) means an Industrial User subject to national categorical pretreatment standards.

CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) means a measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.

CITY means the City of Goodyear.

CITY MANAGER means the manager of the City of Goodyear or their designee.

CIVIL ACTION means order(s), hearing(s), or other action(s) to enforce the City Code and other local, federal, and Arizona regulations, including judicial proceedings; orders may include fines, damages, and injunctive relief and/or any other action or remedy available by law.

CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS (CFR) means Title 40 Code of Federal Regulations, Environmental Protection Agency regulations.

COMPLIANCE INSPECTION means inspection(s) to determine compliance status and identify practices that may lead to noncompliance; inspections may or may not be scheduled in advance.

COMPLIANCE MEETING means meeting with Industrial User to discuss the causes of noncompliance, corrective actions to achieve compliance, and time frames for implementation of corrective actions.

COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE means the timetable for the implementation of corrective actions to be performed by the User to achieve consistent compliance.

COMPOSITE SAMPLE means a combination of no fewer than eight individual samples obtained at equal time intervals for 24 hours or for the duration of the discharge, whichever is shorter. In the case of a batch discharge with a flow duration of less than 15 minutes, a single grab sample will meet the intent of a composite sample.

CONTROL AUTHORITY means the City of Goodyear.

CONSISTENT COMPLIANCE means no more than one parameter in violation with value less than twice the most stringent limit; Industrial User is able to correct cause of violation and verify through testing within 30 days of identification of noncompliance.

CRIMINAL ACTION means order(s), hearing(s), or other action(s) to enforce the City Code and other local, federal, and Arizona law, including judicial proceedings, involving violations for criminal offenses; orders may include fines, damages, injunctive relief, prohibition, and imprisonment and/or any other action or remedy available by law.

DAILY MAXIMUM means the arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day.

DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT (DML) means the maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.

DAY means calendar days unless otherwise specified in the text.

DIRECT DISCHARGE means the wastewater that goes directly into waters of the state (groundwater, streams, lakes, rivers, etc.) without treatment from a POTW. This includes through a storm sewer system that enters waters of the state, a ditch, or other conveyance.

DIRECTOR means the person authorized by the City Manager to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter.

DISCHARGE means the intentional or unintentional release of substance into the POTW.

DISCHARGE LIMIT means the limit on the amount of a regulated waste that is discharged to the POTW.

ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN (ERP) means a document which outlines procedures that the POTW will use to identify, track and respond to noncompliance of this chapter.

ENTERPRISE means any corporation, partnership, association, labor union or other legal entity or any group of persons associated in fact although not a legal entity.

ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE SUPERVISOR (ECS) means the supervisor of the City of Goodyear Environmental Quality Division of the Environmental Services Division.

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency.

EXISTING SOURCE means any source of discharge that is not a New Source or a new indirect discharger.

FATS, OILS, AND GREASES (FOG) means animal and plant derived substances that may solidify or become viscous between the temperatures of 32°F and 150°F (0°C to 65°C), and that separate from wastewater by gravity. Any edible substance identified as grease per the most current EPA method as listed in 40 CFR § 136.3.

FOOD PREPARATION ESTABLISHMENTS means establishments that use food preparation processes and that are regulated by the Health Department. These facilities include but are not limited to restaurants, Hotel/Motel kitchens, hospitals, school kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias, clubs, delis, kiosks, tea rooms, snack bars, ice cream shops, fudge shops, food courts, coffee shops, cafeterias, diners and any other facility deemed to produce fats, oils, and grease.

GOOD FAITH EFFORT means Industrial User’s honest intention to achieve compliance and/or remedy noncompliance coupled by actions supporting this intention.

GPD means gallons per day.

GRAB SAMPLE means a sample that is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.

GREASE TRAP means a device for separating and retaining waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Such traps are typically compact under-the-sink units that are near food preparation areas.

GREASE INTERCEPTOR means a structure or device designed for the purpose of removing and preventing fats, oils, and grease from entering the sanitary sewer collection system. These devices are often below-ground units in outside areas and are built as two or three chamber baffled tanks.

GUIDELINE means the City of Goodyear Waste Water Discharge Permit Application Process Guideline which is found in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual.

HAULER means a person who transports sanitary sewage, industrial wastewater, or sludge off-site by other than the POTW conveyance system.

HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE means as provided in 40 CFR Part  300.5.

HAZARDOUS WASTE means as provided in 40 CFR Part  261.3.

INCONSISTENT COMPLIANCE means more than one parameter in violation, or any one parameter in violation with value exceeding twice the most stringent limit; Industrial User is able to correct the cause of the violation and verify through testing within 30 days of identification of noncompliance.

INDIRECT DISCHARGE means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source through a sanitary sewer or through a storm sewer.

INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT TECHNICIAN (IPT) means the City of Goodyear staff assigned to conduct compliance monitoring and facility inspections.

INDUSTRIAL USER (user or IU) means the nondomestic sewer user; a source of discharge into the POTW from a nondomestic source; a source of indirect discharge.

INDUSTRIAL WASTE means waste produced by Industrial User activity.

INSPECTION means compliance inspection to determine compliance status and identify practices that may lead to noncompliance; inspections are typically not scheduled in advance.

INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.

INTERFERENCE means the discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City of Goodyear’s AZPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued there under, or any more stringent State or local regulations: section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.

LOCAL LIMIT means the specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the City upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR § 403.5(a)(1) and (b).

MANHOLE means a structure of suitable design and construction to permit access to the sewer from the surface for inspection, control and maintenance to the public sewer.

MANHOLE COVER is a removable plate forming the lid over the opening of a manhole, to prevent anyone or anything from falling in, and to keep out unauthorized persons and material.

MASS LIMITATION means regulatory limitations expressed in units of mass, e.g., pounds per day, as opposed to concentration, e.g., milligrams per liter.

MEDICAL WASTE means the isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, dialysis wastes, and marijuana, in any form, including but not limited to pharmaceutical drug and pharmaceutical waste.

Mg/l means milligrams per liter.

MONITORING EQUIPMENT OR SAMPLING EQUIPMENT means equipment that is used for investigating, surveying and sampling wastewater sources in an effort to obtain information on the quality and quantity of wastewater flows.

MONTHLY AVERAGE means the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month.

MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT means the highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month.

NEW SOURCE means the following:

(1) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards under section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such Standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:

(a) The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or

(b) The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production; or

(c) Equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an Existing Source; or

1. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an Existing Source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the Existing Source, should be considered.

2. Construction on a site at which an Existing Source is located results in a modification rather than a New Source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(b) or (c) of this section but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.

3. Construction of a New Source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has:

a. Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program

i. any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or

ii. significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or

b. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.

NONCONTACT COOLING WATER means the water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.

NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM (NAICS) means the standard used by Federal statistical agencies in classifying business establishments for the purpose of collecting, analyzing, and publishing statistical data related to the U.S. business economy; formerly known as the Standard Industrial Classification System.

NOTICE OF VIOLATION (NOV) means the office notice of violation delivered to the Industrial User requiring a formal response and action.

NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE means the official notice provided to the Industrial User of the meeting with the Director, or a duly authorized representative, to provide reasons why a proposed enforcement action should not occur.

NPDES means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.

NSCIU means the Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User.

OPERATOR means a person who operates a business and therefore controls the operation and indirect discharge.

PASS THROUGH means the discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City’s AZPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.

PERSON means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, trust, estate, governmental entity, municipality, state or federal agency or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, assigns or employee thereof.

pH means the measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.

PHARMACEUTICAL DRUG means any form of medicine, medication, medicament, that can be loosely defined as any chemical substance intended for use in the medical diagnosis, cure, treatment, or prevention of disease.

PHARMACEUTICAL WASTE means any prescription drug or any nonprescription drug (legal or non legal substance) or any proprietary medicine, regardless of form, that is no longer suitable for its intended purpose or is otherwise being discarded.

POLLUTION means man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of the water.

POLLUTANT means the dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, Medical Wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g. pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).

POLLUTION PREVENTION means the steps taken to reduce or eliminate the creation of pollutant through:

(1) increased efficiency in the use of raw materials, energy, water, or other resources, or

(2) protection of resources through conservation. Examples include substitute nontoxic materials for toxic materials, reformulate products, modify manufacturing, and recycling.

PRETREATMENT means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable Pretreatment Standard.

PRETREATMENT DEVICE means the equipment, material, or structures used to reduce, eliminate, or alter the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater before, or in lieu of, introducing pollutants into the POTW.

PRETREATMENT PROGRAM means City’s procedures developed to regulate and enforce Industrial User compliance with waste water discharges to the POTW.

PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a User, other than a Pretreatment Standard.

PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARDS means the limitations of pollutant discharges to POTW promulgated by EPA in accordance with the Section 307 of the Clean Water Act, prohibited discharge standards, categorical Pretreatment Standards, and Local Limits.

PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED DISCHARGES means the absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances as provided in this chapter.

PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) means a treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section  1292), which is owned by the City. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.

REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE means a sample portion of material or wastestream that is as nearly identical in content and consistency as possible to the material or industrial wastewater being sampled.

SAMPLING EQUIPMENT. See the definition of monitoring equipment.

SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM means a City owned sewer system that carries liquid and waterborne waste from residential, commercial and industrial facilities and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.

SELF-MONITORING means the sampling and analyses performed by a facility to determine compliance with a permit or other regulatory requirements.

SELF-MONITORING REPORT (SMR) means the report submitted by the User to provide compliance sample results to the City.

SEPTAGE means an aerobic wastewater originating from a domestic source, be it from a residential, commercial, or industrial facility that is not hazardous waste and is compatible with the biological wastewater treatment plant process.

SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.

SEWER SYSTEM means the complete municipal sewer system, including, sanitary sewer mains, manholes, lateral sewer lines, pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, forced mains and all other structures, devices, appurtenances, and facilities used for collecting or conducting waters to an ultimate point for treatment or disposal.

SEWAGE means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).

SIGNIFICANT CHANGES means, but is not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutant.

SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) means the following:

(1) An Industrial User subject to categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR; or

(2) An Industrial User that:

(a) Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blow down wastewater); or

(b) Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or

(c) Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement.

(3) Upon a finding that a User meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the City may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an Industrial User, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR § 403.8(f)(6), determine that such User should not be considered a Significant Industrial User.

SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC) means any violation of pretreatment requirements (limits, sampling, analysis, reporting and meeting compliance schedules) as defined in Section 12A-7-2 and 40 CFR § 123.45.

SLUG LOAD OR SLUG DISCHARGE means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards. A Slug Discharge is any Discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause Interference or Pass Through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations, Local Limits or Permit conditions.

SOLID WASTE means any garbage, refuse, sludge from a treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or containing gaseous materials resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from community activities.

SPILL PROTECTION FACILITIES means physical barrier which provides protection from accidental discharge or spill into the POTW of prohibited, hazardous, or other industrial wastewaters which are regulated through this chapter.

STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION CODE (SIC) means a system for classifying industries by a four-digit code. The SIC code is being supplanted by the six-digit North American Industry Classification System (NAICS code).

STORM WATER means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.

TECHNICAL REVIEW CRITERIA (TRC) means 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria to determine exceedance. Value for biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), oil and grease is 1.4 value for other parameters except pH is 1.2.

TERMINATION OF SERVICE OR PERMIT REVOCATION means the notice delivered to the Industrial User of the City’s intent to revoke the discharge permit or terminate service.

TOTAL ORGANIC CARBON (TOC) means the measurement of organic (carbon based) contaminants in a water system.

TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) OR SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering.

TOXIC POLLUTANT means any pollutant listed as toxic under Section 307(a)(1) of the Clean Water Act (CWA) of 1977 as amended by the Water Quality Act (WQA) of 1987.

µg/l means micrograms per liter.

UPSET means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with discharge limits because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the User. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, and lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation.

VERBAL WARNING means the informal warning communicated to the Industrial User; associated violation is usually slight or within range of analytical error.

VIOLATION means any failure of the User to comply with any provision of this Article. Violations include the following:

(1) RANDOM VIOLATION means any Violation that exceeds a federal, state or local discharge limitation or compliance schedule. Random violations may include the first, second, or third offense and may not be severe or frequent enough to be classified as a Significant Violation or a Pattern Violation.

(2) PATTERN VIOLATION means a series of random Violations (four or more) that is not severe or frequent to be classified as a Significant Violation, but which contribute to a pattern of noncompliance when viewed over a moving 12-month period. Four random violations occurring during a moving 12-month period would constitute a Pattern Violation.

(3) SIGNIFICANT VIOLATION means any Violation, which by its impact, severity, or frequency of occurrence presents a hazard or nuisance to the POTW, general public, or the environment.

WARNING NOTICE means a written notice that a violation has occurred; directs the Industrial User to take actions to correct the violation but does not require a formal response.

WASTEWATER means the liquid and water carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.

WASTEWATER SLUDGE means the solids or semisolids, residues, and precipitate separated from or created in wastewater.

WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


ARTICLE 12A-2: General Sewer Use Requirements

Section

12A-2-1    Prohibited Discharge Standards

12A-2-2    Preliminary Pretreatment

12A-2-3    Manholes

12A-2-4    Special Agreements with Industrial Concerns

12A-2-5    National Categorical Pretreatment Standards

12A-2-6    Local Limits

12A-2-7    Medical Waste

12A-2-8    Right of Revision

12A-2-9    Dilution

12A-2-10    Tampering; Sewer System; Manhole

12A-2-11    Tampering; Monitoring/Sampling Equipment; Pretreatment Device


12A-2-1 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.

(A) General Prohibitions. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any sewer, which directly or indirectly connects to the POTW, any storm water, swimming pool water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or industrial process waters, waste, pollutant or wastewater which may have an adverse or harmful effect on the POTW, POTW personnel or equipment, POTW effluent quality, public or private property; or which may otherwise endanger the public, the environment or create a public nuisance, or which exceed limitations as set by this chapter or the Director or cause the POTW to violate state or federal regulations or permits. Prohibited waste described in this chapter shall not be discharged to the POTW. Included within the prohibition set forth above, is the discharge of any wastes which adversely affect water reclamation, water reuse or sludge disposal or air quality. These general prohibitions apply to all Users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other federal, state, or local Pretreatment Standards or Requirements. Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited in this chapter shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. This provision applies unless otherwise permitted by rules and regulations promulgated by the Director.

(B) The Director, in determining the acceptability of specific waste, shall consider the nature of the waste and the adequacy and nature of the collection, treatment and disposal system available to accept the waste.

(C) Specific Prohibitions. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:

(1) Any wastewater that may be adverse or harmful to the POTW, POTW personnel, POTW equipment or POTW effluent quality including but not limited to:

(a) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, solvent, fuel oil or any other liquids, solids, or gases which create or tend to create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, or to be injurious in any other way to the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flash point of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit;

(b) Any solids or viscous substances of such size or in such quantities that they may cause obstruction to flow in the sewer or be detrimental to POTW operations. These objectionable substances include, but are not limited to, asphalt, dead animals, ashes, sand, mud, straw, industrial process shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, grass clippings, tar, plastic resins, wood, blood, paunch manure, grease, bones, hair, fleshings, entrails, paper cups, paper dishes, milk cartons or other similar paper products, either whole or ground;

(c) Any amounts of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that would cause or tend to cause interference or pass-through;

(d) Any biodegradable oils, fats and greases, such as lard, tallow, or vegetable oil, in concentrations > 50 mg/l;

(e) Any wastes containing a concentration in excess of the discharge limitations specified in this chapter or in any permit for the following parameters arsenic, BOD, cadmium, chromium, copper, cyanide, lead, mercury, oil and grease, selenium, silver, TKN, TSS or zinc;

(f) Any waste in such concentration or volume that is toxic to humans, animals, the local environment or to biological wastewater treatment processes; which causes interference, upset or pass-through at the POTW;

(g) Any waste having a pH lower than 5.5 or greater than 9.0 standard units; or which causes incrustations or scale, or precipitates on sewer walls; or having any corrosive or detrimental characteristics that may cause injury to the POTW or service and maintenance personnel;

1. Where a user is required by its permit to continuously monitor its pH discharge over a 30 day period, the user shall maintain the pH of such wastewater within the range set forth in its permit, except that excursions from the range are permitted subject to the following limitations: 

a. The total time during which the pH values are outside the required range of pH values shall not exceed seven hours and 26 minutes in any calendar month, and 

b. No individual excursion from the range of pH values shall exceed 60 minutes nor shall the pH be less than 5.0,

2. Where a user is required by its permit to continuously monitor its pH discharge on any representative day, the user shall maintain the pH of such wastewater within the range set forth in its permit, except that excursions from the range are permitted subject to the following limitations:

a. The total time during which the pH values are outside the required range of pH values shall not exceed 10% of the duration of discharge,

b. No individual excursion from the range of values shall exceed 45 minutes, nor shall the pH be less than 5.0,

3. For purposes of this section, an "excursion" is the time or volume of discharge, from when the range is exceeded until the discharge has returned to compliance;

(h) Any waste having a temperature of 140 Fahrenheit or higher at the discharge point, or which causes the POTW influent to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit;

(i) Any excessive amounts of chlorinated hydrocarbon or organic phosphorous type compounds;

(j) Any waste containing substances that may precipitate, solidify, gel, polymerize or become viscous under conditions normally found in the sewer system, which would include but is not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, grits such as brick, cement, onyx, carbide or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the POTW;

(k) Any waste producing discoloration of treatment plant effluent;

(l) Any solid waste, other than that normally found in domestic wastewater, that is not ground sufficiently to pass through a 3/8-inch mesh screen;

(m) Any waste containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances, which may cause excessive foaming in the sewerage system;

(n) Any sludge from water or wastewater treatment plants not owned and operated by the City. The Director may permit a user to discharge this substance upon a finding that the discharge will not adversely affect the operation of the POTW and the pollutant concentration does not exceed those in the sludge produced by the POTW. No such permit shall be issued which would violate any other federal, state or local rule, regulation or standards;

(o) Any hazardous wastes discharged to any portion of the POTW by truck, rail or dedicated pipeline;

(p) Any trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points as designated by the Director;

(q) Any slug load;

(r) Industrial wastewater which may be dangerous to the public, the environment, or which creates a public nuisance, including, but not limited to:

1. Any excessive quantities of radioactive material wastes;

2. Any waste containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in such quantities that alone, or in combination with other waste substances, may create a hazard for humans, animals, or the local environment, interfere detrimentally with wastewater treatment processes, cause a public nuisance, or cause any condition requiring emergency response in the POTW;

3. Any pollutants which can result in the formation or presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW that may cause or tend to cause worker health and safety problems;

4. Any strongly odorous waste or waste tending to create odors;

5. Any industrial wastewater in such concentration or volume that may cause failure in the effluent toxicity testing;

6. Any recognizable portions of the human anatomy.

(s) Industrial wastewater that may cause dilution or POTW hydraulic loading problems, including, but not limited to:

1. Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which would otherwise exceed maximum concentration limits;

2. Any rainwater, storm water runoff, groundwater, street drainage, roof drainage, yard drainage, water from yard fountains, ponds, swimming pools, lawn sprays or uncontaminated water except where prior approval for such discharge is given by the Director;

3. Any deionized water, steam condensate or distilled water in amounts which cause problems with hydraulic loading;

4. Any blow down or bleed water from heating, ventilating, air conditioning or other evaporative systems exceeding one-third of the makeup water in a 24 hour period;

5. Any single pass cooling or heating water.

(t) Any of the following prohibited substances:

	4,4’-DDE

	4,4’-DDT

	Aldrin

	BHC-Alpha

	BHC-Beta

	BHC-Gamma (Lindane)

	Heptachlor

	Heptachlor Epoxide

	Polyclorinated Biphenyl Compounds (PCBs)

(u) Any water or waste exceeding the limits for the following substances that are expressed in the total form except if otherwise stated;

	Instantaneous Maximum Allowable Discharge Limitations

	Substance	Limitation

	Benzene	35 (µg/l)

	Chloroform	2000 (µg/l)

(v) A five day biochemical oxygen demand (B.O.D.) greater than 300 parts per million by weight;

(w) Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; and/or

(x) An average daily flow of greater than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of the City.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-2-2 PRELIMINARY PRETREATMENT.

(A) Required. Where necessary in the opinion of the City, the owner shall provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:

(1) Reduce the B.O.D. to 300 parts per million and the total suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight;

(2) Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in Section 12-5-3;

(3) Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes.

(B) Approval. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for all approval from state and local government. No construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approvals are obtained in writing.

(C) Maintenance of Facilities. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-2-3 MANHOLES.

(A) When required by the City, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation and sampling of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the City. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.

(B) All tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes, to which reference is made in Sections 12-5-1, 12-5-3 and 12-5-4, shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in this section or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole.

(C) Manhole inspection fees and costs for sampling and analysis of industrial wastewater shall be charged to the customer in addition to regular sewer charges.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-2-4 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS WITH INDUSTRIAL CONCERNS.

No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment to the City from the industrial user.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-2-5 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.

(A) Users must comply with the categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.

(1) Where a categorical Pretreatment Standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the City may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR § 403.6(c).

(2) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR § 403.13.

(3) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR § 403.6(e).

(4) A user may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR § 403.15.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-2-6 LOCAL LIMITS.

(A) The City is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR § 403.5(c).

(B) All persons owning or operating facilities or engaged in activities that will or may reasonably be expected to result in pollutants entering the City sanitary sewer system or affecting the sanitary sewer system or affecting the POTW shall undertake all practicable best management practices identified by the Director to minimize the discharge of pollutants. Such measures shall include the requirements imposed by this chapter, any applicable NPDES or AZPDES permits, and any written guidelines promulgated for general use by the Director.

(C) The Director shall have the authority to:

(1) Establish limitations for individual users or classes of users for various pollutants, materials, waters, or wastes that can be accepted into the sanitary sewer system;

(2) Specify those pollutants, materials, waters, or wastes that are prohibited from entering the sanitary sewer system;

(3) Identify those pollutants, materials, waters, or wastes that shall be controlled with best management practices; and

(4) Require individual users or classes of users to implement best management practices for any pollutant.

(D) All affected individual users or classes of users shall comply with the prohibitions and effluent limitations established pursuant to this article, and with any best management practices required by the Director.

(E) All prohibitions and effluent limitations so established and all best management practices identified by the Director will be placed on file with the City Clerk and become effective and enforceable on the 31st day after the date of filing.

(F) The following pollutant concentration limitations are established to protect the POTW against pass through and interference. Each User who discharges an indirect discharge to the POTW and is designated as a Significant Industrial User by the Director shall not discharge or cause to be discharged at any entry point to the POTW any wastewater containing in excess of the following daily maximum limits as set forth below:

	Parameter	Maximum Allowable Industrial Loading (pounds per day)	Daily Maximum Limit (milligrams per liter)	Sample Type

	Arsenic	0.083	0.020	Composite

	Cadmium	0.068	0.016	Composite

	Chromium (Total)	Reserved	User Specific Limitation	Composite

	Copper	2.5	User Specific Limitation	Grab

	Cyanide	0.35	0.081	Composite

	Lead	0.22	0.051	Composite

	Mercury	0.0084	0.0020	Composite

	Molybdenum	17	Reserved	Composite

	Nickel	2.5	Reserved	Composite

	Selenium	Reserved	User Specific Limitation	Composite

	Silver	11	2.5	Composite

	Zinc	10	2.4	Composite

	BOD	880	1100	Composite

	TSS	540	680	Composite

	TKN	320	User Specific Limitation	Grab

The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations are expressed in the "total" form unless indicated otherwise. The Director may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above.

(G) When the Director determines that a user is discharging to the POTW any wastes not previously identified as prohibited in such amounts as may interfere with, pass through, or upset the operation of the POTW, the Director shall: (1) advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; (2) develop a discharge limitation for such user to correct the interference with the POTW; and (3) require the user to comply with the discharge limits.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-2-7 MEDICAL WASTE.

(A) Regulated Facilities. Hospitals, clinics, offices of medical doctors, mortuaries, morgues and long-term health care:

(1) May discharge through a grinder installation after Director approval. The installation will have inlet size and design features suitable for its intended use and so constructed that all particles pass through a maximum 3/8-inch mesh opening;

(2) Shall not discharge to the sewer by any means:

(a) Solid wastes generated in the rooms of patients who are isolated because of a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease;

(b) Recognizable portions of the human anatomy;

(c) Equipment, instruments, utensils and other materials of a disposable nature that may harbor or transmit pathogenic organisms and that are used in the rooms of patients having a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease which by the nature of the disease is required to be isolated by public health agencies;

(d) Wastes excluded by other provisions of this chapter.

(B) Limit of Authority. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality or other federal, state or local authorities to define waste as being medical waste and, with the concurrence of the Director, to require that the waste will not be discharged to the POTW.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-2-8 RIGHT OF REVISION.

The City of Goodyear reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits more stringent Standards or Requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this chapter.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-2-9 DILUTION.

No User shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable City Pretreatment Standard or Requirement. The Director may impose mass limitations on Users who are using dilution to meet applicable Pretreatment Standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-2-10 TAMPERING; SEWER SYSTEM; MANHOLE.

(A) No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:

(1) Knowingly open, remove or interfere with or tamper with, in any manner, any manhole, manhole cover or public sewer of the City.

(2) Knowingly divert or direct, or cause to divert or direct, the flow of water or any other fluid or foreign substances into manholes installed in the sanitary sewer system of the City;

(3) Knowingly enter into any City owned manhole or deposit any substance, regardless of form, into a City owned manhole or City sewer system.

(B) A violation of this section is subject to all civil and criminal penalties provided in Article 1-8 and Chapter 18 of the Goodyear City Code.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-2-11 TAMPERING; MONITORING/SAMPLING EQUIPMENT, PRETREATMENT DEVICE.

(A) No person, without lawful authority, shall knowingly do any of the following:

(1) Alter, interfere, modify, remove, damage, or destroy any public or privately owned monitoring or sampling equipment, or any part of the monitoring or sampling equipment, in a manner that could improperly modify the readings, analysis or operation of the monitoring or sampling equipment.

(2) Alter, bypass, or reroute the discharge or flow of wastewater in a manner that could improperly modify the readings, analysis or operation of the monitoring or sampling equipment.

(3) Alter, modify, tamper, damage, destroy or bypass a pretreatment device in a matter that could improperly modify the readings, analysis or operation of a pretreatment device.

(B) A violation of this section is subject to all civil and criminal penalties provided in Article 1-8 and Chapter 18 of the Goodyear City Code.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


Article 12A-3: Pretreatment of Wastewater

Section

12A-3-1    Pretreatment Facilities

12A-3-2    Additional Pretreatment Measures

12A-3-3    Accidental Discharge/Slug Discharge Control Plans


12A-3-1 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.

(A) Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical Pretreatment Standards, Local Limits, and the prohibitions provided in this Article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State, or the City, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities and equipment necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the User’s sole expense.

(B) User shall provide detailed plans describing its wastewater treatment facilities, equipment and operating procedures to the Director for review. This requirement applies to both initial approval and any subsequent modifications. The plans must be accepted and approved by the City prior to commencing construction or installation of the facilities or equipment. The approval of the plans and inspection of construction shall not relieve the owner from complying with, and achieving, discharge limitations set forth in this chapter. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the User from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a Discharge acceptable to the City under the provisions of this chapter.

(C) The process for plan submission, approval and denial shall be in accordance with the procedures and timeframes outlined in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-3-2 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.

(A) The Director may require Users to restrict their discharge, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be determined necessary by the Director to protect the POTW and determine the User’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

(B) The Director may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their sole expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.

(C) The Director may require Users, which includes food preparation facilities, to install grease, lint, sand/oil interceptors, oil/water separators, hair or grease trap(s) as needed for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of fats, oils, grease, lint or sand; except that such interceptors or traps shall not be required for residential users. Requirements for the proper handling of fats, oils, grease, lint, sand and solids in wastewater are as follows:

(1) Grease interceptors and grease traps shall be required, installed, and maintained as specified in this article for the sizing and cleaning of interceptors and traps for the food preparation establishments.

(2) Lint, sand/oil interceptors and oil/water separators shall be installed in compliance with the City code.

(3) All interceptors, separators and traps shall be of the type and capacity approved by the Director and shall be located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Interceptors, separators and traps shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly by the user at the user’s expense. The User shall keep records of all cleaning, repair and maintenance for at least three years. Such records shall be readily available for inspection by the Director upon request at no expense to the City.

(4) The User shall be responsible for reimbursing the City for any and all expenses, costs, and penalty fees and fines for the cleanup of any sanitary sewer overflow from the Sewer System as a result, directly or indirectly, of the User actions.

(D) The method for determining the size of traps or interceptors is the drainage fixture unit value. The minimum size for all interceptors is a capacity of 500 gallons and the maximum size for all interceptors is a capacity of 2,500 gallons. Interceptors must be constructed with at least two chambers. Sizing for all traps is a minimum of a 50 gallon per minute, 100 pound capacity with the flow control valve installed in a manner that provides access at all times. The appropriate size for interceptors and traps is determined as follows:

(1) Interceptor Sizing. The interceptor shall be sized using the drainage fixture-unit value as defined in the following table. Using the drain outlet or trap size, these sizes are converted to discharge rates on the basis that one fixture-unit equals 7.5 gpm.

	Fixture Outlet or Trap Size (Inches)	Drainage Fixture-Unit Value	Gpm Equivalent

	1 1/4	1	7.5

	1 1/2	2	15.0

	2	3	22.0

	2 1/2	4	30.0

	3	5	37.5

	4	6	45.0

	Floor Drains (All Sizes)	2	15.0

	Dishwashers	Double Size	 

(2) Calculating Interceptor Size. Formula to calculate the size of the interceptor is:

(a) Determine total fixture-unit value by multiplying fixture type count by drainage value;

(b) Total all values;

(c) Determine total flow by multiplying total value by flow rate of three gpm;

(d) Multiply total flow by 12; and

(e) Round up to the next nearest size interceptor.

(3) Requirements for Interceptors. The interceptor shall be:

(a) A minimum of 500 gallon capacity, two chamber concrete container (fiber glass and/or other type material must be approved by the Director);

(b) When calculated to have a capacity of 750 gallons or more, the interceptor must have three chambers, each with a manway;

(c) Constructed with inlet piping with a 90 degree elbow and minimum of an 18 inch down spout;

(d) Constructed with outlet piping with a tee connection and a threaded cover with a minimum of an 18 inch down spout;

(e) Installed with a two way clean-out within five feet before and five feet after the interceptor; and

(f) Constructed with the appropriate traffic rated cover. The cover(s) must not be marked with any wording indicating it is owned by the City of Goodyear.

(g) Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gas tight and watertight.

(h) Lockable shut off valves shall be provided between interceptors and service taps into sewer mains where required by rules and regulations promulgated by the Director.

(4) Grease Trap Installation and Sizing. Grease traps are allowed only when there are four or fewer than four fixtures used for food preparation. Any facility installing a dishwasher shall install a grease interceptor. For the purpose of sizing a grease trap, a fixture means the entire unit, e.g., a three compartment sink is considered one unit. Grease traps must be installed as follows:

(a) A grease trap shall be installed whenever a three compartment sink is required by Maricopa County;

(b) The minimum size grease trap to be installed shall be rated no smaller than 50 gallon-per-minute with a 100 pound grease capacity; and

(c) A flow restriction valve shall be installed upstream of the grease trap and vented properly. If placed below floor level the flow restriction valve must be installed in a manner which allows for inspection and maintenance.

(E) Except for residential sources, users shall not install or replace equipment designed to convert garbage or solid waste into liquefied waste and introduce such waste into the POTW by means of a garbage grinder/disposal. Garbage and solid waste shall be disposed of as provided in Article 10-1 of the Goodyear City Code.

(F) All grease traps, oil, sand, and grease interceptors shall be pumped out or cleaned out completely at least once every 180 days, or more frequently as required by the City, unless otherwise authorized in writing by the administrator.

(G) Administrative and penalty fees and costs will be assessed by the City for the inspections and tracking compliance with this subsection.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-3-3 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG DISCHARGE CONTROL PLANS.

(A) The Director shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge and/or slug discharge control plan or other action to control Slug Discharges. The Director may require any User to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary to control Slug Discharges. Alternatively, the Director may develop such a plan for any User. An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:

(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;

(2) Description of stored chemicals;

(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the Director of any accidental or Slug Discharge, as required by this chapter; and

(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or Slug Discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


Article 12A-4: Wastewater Discharge Permits

Section

12A-4-1    Wastewater Analysis

12A-4-2    Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement

12A-4-3    Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration

12A-4-4    Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents

12A-4-5    Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals

12A-4-6    Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification

12A-4-7    Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer

12A-4-8    Wastewater Discharge Permit Renewal

12A-4-9    Regulation of Waste Received from Other Jurisdictions


12A-4-1 WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.

When requested by the Director, a User must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 45 calendar days of the request to the Director. The Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require Users to update this information.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-4-2 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.

(A) All Industrial Users are required to apply for a Wastewater Discharge permit in compliance with City Code and the Guideline, with an application fee set by resolution of council. If a permit is issued, payment of an annual permit discharge fee to be set by resolution of council may also be required. The Director is responsible for issuing all permits.

(B) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any industrial wastewater directly or indirectly to the POTW without first obtaining Director approval. Director approval is demonstrated by the issuance of an industrial wastewater discharge permit. The Director shall set requirements at least as stringent as applicable state or federal rules, regulations or pretreatment standards.

(C) All Industrial Users discharging pursuant to this section shall comply with the following requirements:

(1) Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and processes, including but not limited to the Act and the general pretreatment regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part  403);

(2) Not introduce pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with its operation and the efficient functioning of the system;

(3) Conduct periodic maintenance of the User’s private system to ensure that it is cleaned and functioning properly according to federal, state and local law, rules, and regulations;

(4) Take all necessary actions to prevent an overflow of sewage from the User’s private System. Should an overflow occur, the User shall be responsible, at its sole expense, to clean and properly sanitize any area that could create a public health hazard; and

(5) Notify the Director immediately by phone if a sewage overflow enters the public right-of-way or the property of another.

(D) No Industrial User shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining authorization to discharge wastewater from the Director, except that Industrial Users that have properly filed a timely and complete application may continue to discharge during the application process as provided in the Guidelines. This exception will not be available for applications after January 1, 2014.

(E) The Director may require other Users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this Article.

(F) Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state Pretreatment Standards or Requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law.

(G) A separate permit may be required for each connection to the POTW. Any User required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain a new permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge.

(H) The Director may require a separate permit from each tenant as well as the owner or manager of any multi-tenant property, including, but not limited to: shopping centers, medical centers, and industrial or commercial parks.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-4-3 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION.

A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years or period of use, at the discretion of the Director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-4-4 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS.

(A) A Wastewater Discharge Permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the Director to prevent Pass Through or Interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.

(1) Wastewater discharge permits must contain:

(a) Issuance date, effective date and expiration date;

(b) A statement that wastewater discharge permits are nontransferable or assignable;

(c) Effluent limits, including Best Management Practices, based on applicable Pretreatment Standards;

(d) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on Federal, State, and local law;

(e) A statement of applicable civil penalties for violation of Pretreatment Standards and Requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.

(B) Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:

(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;

(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;

(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;

(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;

(5) The unit charge or schedule of User charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;

(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices;

(7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and State Pretreatment Standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and

(8) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Director to ensure compliance with this chapter, and State and Federal laws, rules, regulations and guidelines.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-4-5 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS.

(A) Any person, including the User, may appeal to the Director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 20 calendar days of its issuance.

(1) Failure to submit a petition within 20 calendar days of the issuance of the discharge permit will constitute a waiver of the right to petition for review.

(2) In the petition, the appealing party must identify the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the basis for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.

(3) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending an appeal.

(4) Upon receipt of a petition for review, the Director has 30 calendar days to respond to the petition and may modify, revoke, or affirm the wastewater discharge permit in whole or part. If the Director fails to act within 30 calendar days from receipt of the petition, the petition will be deemed to be denied. The Director’s decision, including all denials, shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-4-6 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODIFICATION.

(A) The Director may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:

(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local Pretreatment Standards or Requirements;

(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the User’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the issuance of the wastewater discharge permit;

(3) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;

(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the City’s POTW, City personnel, biosolids, or the receiving waters;

(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;

(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;

(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical Pretreatment Standards pursuant to 40 CFR § 403.13;

(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit;

(9) Increased monitoring or reporting required as a result of enforcement activities.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-4-7 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER.

Wastewater Discharge Permits are not transferable or assignable.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-4-8 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT RENEWAL.

A User with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for the renewal of their wastewater discharge permit by submitting a completed permit application and any application and annual fee at least 90 days prior to the expiration of the User’s existing wastewater discharge permit.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-4-9 REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.

(A) Before another municipality, User located within another municipality, or private utility contributes wastewater to the POTW they must enter into an agreement with the City, and comply with the provision of subsection (B) of this section.

(B) All agreements with any municipality, User located within another municipality, or private utility shall contain the following, along with such other provisions and information requested by the City:

(1) Provide a description of the quality and volume of wastewater to be discharged to the POTW;

(2) A requirement for the contributing municipality, User located in another municipality, or private utility to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and Local Limits, including required Baseline Monitoring Reports (BMRs) which are at least as stringent as those provided in this chapter. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City’s ordinance or Local Limits;

(3) A requirement for the contributing municipality, User located within another municipality, or private utility to submit a revised User inventory on an annual basis or request from the Director and provide immediate access to the facilities of the Users identified on the inventory for the purposes of inspection, sampling and any duties deemed necessary by the Director;

(4) A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality, User located within another municipality, or private utility; which of these activities will be conducted by the Director; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality, User located within another municipality, or private utility and the Director;

(5) A requirement for the contributing municipality, User located within another municipality, or private utility to provide the Director with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities at no expense to the City;

(6) Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality, User located within another municipality, or private utility’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; and

(7) Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality, User located within another municipality, or private utility discharge.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


Article 12A-5: Reporting Requirements

Section

12A-5-1    Baseline Monitoring Reports

12A-5-2    Compliance Schedule Progress Reports

12A-5-3    Reports on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline

12A-5-4    Periodic Compliance Reports

12A-5-5    Reports of Changed Conditions

12A-5-6    Reports of Potential Problems

12A-5-7    Reports from Unpermitted Users

12A-5-8    Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting

12A-5-9    Discharge of Hazardous Waste

12A-5-10    Analytical Requirements

12A-5-11    Sample Collection

12A-5-12    Date of Receipt of Reports

12A-5-13    Record Keeping


12A-5-1 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.

(A) Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical Pretreatment Standard, or the ADEQ final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing Categorical Industrial Users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (B) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, New Sources, and sources that become Categorical Industrial Users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical Standard, shall submit to the Director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (B) of this section.

A New Source shall report to the City the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical Standards. A New Source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.

(B) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:

(1) Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator, owner, and NAICS/SIC number.

(2) Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.

(3) Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such User. This description will include a schematic process diagram in relation to a site plan which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.

(4) Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR § 403.6(e).

(5) Measurement of pollutants.

(C) The User shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.

(D) Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the User should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR § 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the Pretreatment Standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR § 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the Control Authority;

(1) Sampling and analysis shall be performed as provided in this chapter;

(2) The Director may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures;

(3) The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant Discharges to the POTW.

(E) Certification. A statement, reviewed by the User’s Authorized Representative as defined in this chapter and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether Pretreatment Standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.

(F) Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the Pretreatment Standards, the shortest schedule by which the User will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable Pretreatment Standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this Section must meet the requirements as provided in this chapter.

(G) Signature and Report Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be certified as provided in this chapter and signed by an Authorized Representative.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-5-2 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.

The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required in this chapter. The User shall submit a progress report to the Director no later than 14 calendar days following each increment date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the User to return to the established schedule.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-5-3 REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD DEADLINE.

Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in the case of a New Source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any User subject to such Pretreatment Standards and Requirements shall submit to the Director a report containing the information required by Section 12A-5-1. For Users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR § 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the User’s long term production rate. For all other Users subject to categorical Pretreatment Standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the User’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified as true and correct, and include copies of the sample taken as provided in Section 12A-5-10.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-5-4 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.

(A) All SIUs and other Users as may be designated by the Director in the permit shall, at a frequency determined by the Director but in no case less than twice per year (June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards, such other information as required by the Director and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified as provided in this chapter.

(B) All wastewater samples must be representative of the User’s discharge and obtained and analyzed as provided in this chapter. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a User to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the User to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.

(C) If a User subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the permit, using the procedures provided in Section 12A-5-10, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-5-5 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.

(A) Each User must notify the Director in writing of any significant changes, as defined in this chapter, to the User’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 45 days before the change.

(1) The Director may require the User to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application.

(2) The Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-5-6 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.

(A) In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, a Slug Discharge or Slug Load, that might cause potential problems for the POTW, the User shall immediately telephone and notify the Director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the User.

(B) Within five calendar days following discharge described in subsection (A) of this section, the User shall, unless waived by the Director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the User to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the User of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the User of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.

(C) A notice and emergency contact information for the City shall be permanently posted on the User’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising who the User shall call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (A) of this section. Users shall ensure that all staff is advised of the emergency notification procedure.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-5-7 REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.

All Users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall comply with this chapter and all reporting as required by the Director.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-5-8 NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.

If sampling performed by a User indicates a violation of their permit, the User shall notify the Director in writing within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation and provide the Director with the test results, if available. The User shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Director within 30 calendar days after becoming aware of the violation. Re-sampling by the User is not required if the City performs sampling at the User’s facility at least once a month, or if the City performs sampling at the User between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the User or the City received the results of this sampling, or if the City has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the User.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-5-9 DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.

The discharge of hazardous waste is prohibited as provided in 40 CFR Part  261.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-5-10 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.

(A) All samples collected for purposes of analysis to determine compliance with this chapter must be obtained using sampling techniques/procedures as published by the EPA in 40 CFR § 136.

(B) The analysis of all samples in order to be considered for compliance with the requirements of this chapter must be conducted pursuant to the techniques and procedures published by the EPA in 40 CFR § 136 by a laboratory licensed by the state of Arizona as an environmental laboratory (A.R.S. § 36-495, et seq.) or such other approval authority deemed acceptable by the Director.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-5-11 SAMPLE COLLECTION.

(A) Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, the User must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the Director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the User demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.

(B) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, sulfides, and those pollutants and limits, as provided in this chapter, must be obtained using grab collection techniques unless otherwise specified in the wastewater discharge permit.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-5-12 DATE OF RECEIPT OF REPORTS.

Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-5-13 RECORD KEEPING.

Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available to the City for inspection and copying at no charge to the City, all records created, gathered and obtained pursuant to any monitoring activity, and Best Management Practices. All monitoring shall include the sample date, exact place and time sample taken, method used, name of person taking sample, date analyzed, name of person conducting analysis, analytical techniques and methods used; and the results of the analysis. These records shall remain available to the City for inspection and copying to the City for three years from the date of sample. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the User or the City, or where the User has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Director.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


Article 12A-6: COMPLIANCE MONITORING

Section

12A-6-1    Right of Entry; Inspection and Sampling

12A-6-2    Search Warrants


12A-6-1 RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.

(A) The Director, upon presentation of credentials, shall have the right of entry to, upon, or through the facilities of any User to determine whether the User is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any individual wastewater discharge permit, other permit or order. Users shall allow the Director ready access to all parts of the facilities for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.

(B) Where a User has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its facilities, the User shall make necessary arrangements with its staff so that, upon presentation of credentials, the Director shall be permitted to enter for the purposes for exercising all inspection and review authorities under this chapter.

(C) The Director shall have the right to set up on the User’s property, and/or require the User to permit installation of the City equipment at the User’s expense, of such devices as determined necessary by the Director to conduct sampling and/or metering of the User’s operations.

(D) The Director may require the User to install monitoring equipment on the User’s property as determined necessary by the Director, at the User’s expense. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition as specified by the manufacturer. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated per manufacturer specifications to ensure their accuracy. Proof of the most recent calibrations shall be maintained by the User and provided to the City when requested.

(E) User shall maintain their facilities to ensure the City staff have safe and easy access and ample room in or near the monitoring facility to perform independent monitoring activities and allow for accurate sampling and preparation of samples and inspection. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the User at the written or verbal request of the Director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the User.

(F) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director access to the User’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-6-2 SEARCH WARRANTS.

(A) If Director has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the City designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, the Director may seek issuance of an administrative search warrant from the Goodyear Municipal Court or other court of competent jurisdiction.

(B) Nothing in this section is intended to preclude the issuance of a criminal warrant in lieu of or in addition to a civil administrative warrant to conduct a criminal investigation of a violation of this chapter or any other lawful purpose.

(C) A warrant shall be executed and returned to the magistrate/judge who issued it within 10 days after its date. After the expiration of that time, the warrant shall unless executed be void.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


Article 12A-7: Release Of Information

Section

12A-7-1    Confidential Information

12A-7-2    Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance


12A-7-1 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.

Information and data regarding a User obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the City’s inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction and are subject to release pursuant to public records requests. When obtaining a permit, it is the responsibility of the User to clearly identify in writing to the Director those items the User believes would qualify as a trade secret or propriety information. The City will use reasonable efforts to inform the User of public records requests, for information the User has previously identified in writing to the Director as data involving trade secrets or propriety information, prior to the City releasing that information. It will then be the responsibility of the User to seek a court order to preclude disclosure. The City will not be legally responsible for the disclosure of information pursuant to federal or state law.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-7-2 PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.

(A) The Director shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, a list of the Users which, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in Significant Noncompliance with applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements. The cost of publication shall be paid for by the User according to their proportionate share among the Users.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


Article 12A-8: Enforcement Response Plan

Section

12A-8-1    Enforcement Authority and Responsibilities

12A-8-2    Types of Violations

12A-8-3    Determining Enforcement Response

12A-8-4    Enforcement Actions

12A-8-5    Issuance of Notice of Violation

12A-8-6    Compliance Meetings

12A-8-7    Notice to Show Cause

12A-8-8    Administrative Orders

12A-8-9    Administrative Fines

12A-8-10    Termination or Suspension of Permit

12A-8-11    Revocation of Permit

12A-8-12    User Appeal

12A-8-13    Civil Actions

12A-8-14    Criminal Actions

12A-8-15    Liability of User

12A-8-16    Judicial Proceedings

12A-8-17    Levels of Action

12A-8-18    Enforcement Response Actions

12A-8-19    Notices

12A-8-20    Emergency Suspensions

12A-8-21    Performance Bonds; Liability Insurance; Contract Award


12A-8-1 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES.

(A) The Enforcement Response Plan (ERP) outlines the procedures followed by City staff to identify, document, and respond to discharge violations in a manner appropriate to the nature of the violation. In addition, the ERP describes the responsibilities of the City’s Pretreatment Program staff and procedures.

(B) The Director shall enforce and provide consistency in the implementation, application, regulation and enforcement of this chapter; approve enforcement actions; oversee proceedings; assess administrative fines and approve termination of water and wastewater services when appropriate.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-2 TYPES OF VIOLATIONS.

(A) Determination of the appropriate enforcement response to noncompliance will vary based on the type and nature of the violation. User violations of monitoring, reporting, and treatment requirements may range from "relatively" minor violations (e.g., report submitted a week late but having no effluent violations) to significant violations. Each instance of noncompliance is a separate violation which will be reviewed and appropriately addressed.

(B) Types of violation include but are not limited to the following:

(1) Random Violation means any violation that exceeds a federal, Arizona, or local discharge limitation or compliance schedule. Random violations may include the first, second, or third offense and may not be severe or frequent enough to be classified as a Significant Violation or a Pattern Violation.

(2) Pattern Violation means any series of random violations (four or more) that is not severe or frequent enough to be classified as a Significant Violation, but which contribute to a pattern of noncompliance when viewed over a moving 12-month period. Four random violations occurring during a moving 12-month period would constitute a Pattern Violation.

(3) Significant Noncompliance (SNC) Violation means any violation, which by its impact, severity, or frequency of occurrence presents a hazard or nuisance to the POTW, general public, or the environment. A User is considered to be in significant noncompliance if one or more of the following has occurred in the previous 12 months:

(a) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;

(b) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations which means 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria to determine exceedance. Value for biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), oil and grease is 1.4, value for other parameters except pH is 1.2;

(c) Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the Control Authority determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);

(d) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Director’s exercise of emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;

(e) Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a Compliance Schedule deadline contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;

(f) Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;

(g) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or

(h) Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of Best Management Practices, which the Public Works Director, in his sole discretion, determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the Pretreatment Program.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-3 DETERMINING ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE.

(A) The appropriate enforcement response for violations and noncompliance with wastewater discharge City requirement will depend upon the severity and duration of the violation, compliance history, good faith efforts of the User to comply, harm caused by the violation, and whether the noncompliance resulted in a violation of the City POTW permit(s).

(B) The following sections describe factors that are evaluated as part of the process to determine the appropriate level of enforcement response:

(1) Severity and Duration of Violation: The City will evaluate the duration of the violation to determine the possible effects that may have occurred in the POTW. The assessment of each specific violation should take into account the volume and strength or concentration of the discharge. Depending on the severity, even an isolated violation could threaten public health and the environment, damage public and private property, or threaten the operational integrity of the POTW.

(2) Compliance History of User: The compliance history of the facility is reviewed prior to selecting the appropriate level of enforcement response. More aggressive enforcement actions will be taken when a facility has frequent violations. Also considered is the effectiveness of previous enforcement actions.

(3) Good Faith Effort of User: The City will consider the actions of the User, before and after a noncompliance incident, on a case-by-case basis to assess whether the User is acting in good faith.

(4) Harm Caused by Violation: Violations that have negative impacts to the POTW are typically considered significant. For example, violations may result in significant increases in treatment costs; interfere with operations; harm POTW personnel or equipment, cause exceedances of the POTW permit limitations that result in fines from federal or Arizona agencies, or cause sludge contamination resulting in increased disposal costs. These violations may result in an administrative fine or civil fine and an Administrative Order to correct the violation, in addition to recovery of costs.

(5) Noncompliance Discharge: The Noncompliance that causes interference or pass-through of the POTW and results in a City permit violation will be addressed with formal enforcement actions and fines in order to ensure that adequate pretreatment and discharge compliance is achieved promptly. Enforcement actions may include injunctive measures in appropriate cases.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-4 ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.

(A) Determination of the appropriate enforcement response to noncompliance will vary based on the type, nature and severity of the violation as provided in the Enforcement Response Table. Each act and each day of noncompliance will constitute a separate violation. Once noncompliance is determined, the City will provide notice of the violation(s) to the User. The type of notification will vary depending on the severity of the violation.

(B) The City may take the enforcement action determined appropriate by the City. The Enforcement Response Table is a guidelines and in no way is intended to limit the City’s ability to pursue any and all action it deems appropriate and warranted based on the allegations and in whatever order is determined to be appropriate.

(1) Inspection and Monitoring

When permit or discharge violations occur, the City may perform an inspection of the facility to assess if the violation has been corrected and if the facility is operating normally. Inspections are typically not scheduled ahead of time. The User must allow the City access to the facility for sampling and inspection purposes within a reasonable timeframe from inspection notification.

(a) When the results of the User’s self-monitoring, as required by the User’s Permit, indicate that a violation has occurred, the User is required to repeat the sampling and analysis for the parameter in violation. The re-sampling must consist of a minimum of four consecutive days of monitoring with flow and discharge conditions consistent with the facility’s Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit. The analytical results of the re-sampling must be submitted to the City within 30 days of the User becoming aware of the violation.

(2) Informal Notification

(a) Verbal Warning Notice may be given for minor violations and involves the City notifying the User that a violation(s) has occurred, identifies the required corrective action(s) and the time frame in which the corrective action(s) must be completed. The City may also schedule additional inspections and/or sampling and/or any other action deemed appropriate by the City.

(b) Written Warning Notice may be given in writing for minor or moderate violations and involves the City notifying the User that a violation(s) has occurred, identifies the required corrective action(s) and the time frame in which the correction action(s) must be completed. The City may also schedule additional inspections and/or sampling and/or any other action deemed appropriate by the City.

(c) All enforcement actions will be documented in writing and placed in the Users pretreatment file.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-5 ISSUANCE OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.

(A) Notice of Violation (NOV):

(1) Whenever the ECS finds a User is in violation of any section of this Chapter, any provision and/or condition of the User’s permit, compliance or corrective action order, or any other pretreatment standard requirement, the ECS may serve, or cause to be served, an NOV to the User.

(2) The NOV shall be served on the User and identify the nature of the alleged violation, the specific time frame for follow-up and/or other corrective actions and include a statement that additional enforcement actions may be pursued by the City if corrective actions are not achieved as required.

(B) Response to Notification of Violation. The User shall respond in writing to the ECS within the specified time frame, but not later than 15 calendar days from receipt of the NOV by the User. The response shall provide an explanation of the violation and the corrective action taken. Submission of this response in no way relieves the User of criminal and civil liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the NOV.

(C) If the response to a NOV requires an order to show cause, the User shall respond by demonstrating why the Director should not ask the City Attorney to file a court action requesting injunctive relief and criminal and/or civil penalties.

(D) The ECS will determine the validity or appropriateness of the response. If the ECS finds the response to be appropriate and satisfactory, the NOV will be closed and recorded in the facility file as part of compliance history. Closure to the NOV will be documented in writing and provided to the User. Closure of the NOV does not preclude further enforcement action.

(E) Deficient Response to Notification of Violation. Upon review of a response to a notification of violation the ECS finds the response to be deficient, the ECS may require additional information, suspend or revoke the User’s permit, order the User to cease discharge, and/or seek appropriate injunctive relief and criminal and/or civil penalties.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-6 COMPLIANCE MEETINGS.

(A) Compliance Meetings are required when significant violations occur or when previous violations appear to remain uncorrected, as evidenced by repeated violations. Compliance Meetings between the User and City Pretreatment Program staff are scheduled as a last step to ensure compliance before pursuing a more stringent intervention, such as an order to cease further discharge. During a Compliance Meeting, a Compliance Schedule is developed and tracked by the ECS. Compliance Meetings may be scheduled when any one of the following occurs, and at such other times deemed appropriate by the City:

(1) Discharge concentration exceeds five times the applicable discharge limit, or six times the applicable discharge limit for oil and grease;

(2) Discharge has a pH violation of less than 5.5 or greater than 9 for duration of 30 minutes or more and/or a volume greater than 100 gallons; or

(3) The IU has demonstrated a pattern of noncompliance, defined as inconsistent compliance for two consecutive quarters for the same parameter; four or more NOVs within a six-month period; or failure to respond to an NOV within 30 days of the due date.

(B) Compliance Schedule. When the discharger is found to be in noncompliance, a compliance schedule may be made part of an enforcement order. The deadline dates in the compliance schedule will be subject to the same civil penalties and will be as enforceable as a discharge limit.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-7 NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE.

(A) The Director may issue a Notice to Show Cause to a User which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter; a wastewater discharge permit or compliance order; or any other pretreatment standard or requirement. A Notice to Show Cause meeting provides the User with the opportunity to present information to the Director about why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice will be served to the User specifying the time and place of the Show Cause meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the User show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.

(B) The notice will be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 calendar days prior to the meeting. A Show Cause meeting will not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User. The User may waive the right for a Show Cause meeting.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-8 ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS.

The City may issue an Administrative Order requiring a facility to achieve compliance with pretreatment standards or other requirements of the City Code. The Administrative Order will place a facility on an enforceable compliance schedule or require immediate compliance. The City may require a facility to install treatment devices and/or to operate and maintain treatment equipment correctly.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-9 ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.

(A) Administrative Fines for violations of any provision of this chapter; a wastewater discharge permit or compliance order; or any other pretreatment standard or requirement may be assessed by the Director. Each day that a violation continues may constitute a separate violation.

(B) When determining the amount of an Administrative Fine, other factors including, but not limited to, compliance history, good faith by the User, nature and type of violation, and history of the User may be taken into account, as well as any economic benefit resulting from the violation, the economic impact of the penalty on the violator, and the severity of the violation. Administrative fines are as provided in the Administrative Fine Table 7-2, which outlines the administrative fines that may be assessed based on the type and nature of the violation.

(C) In the event the User and the City agree on the amount of the Administrative Fines to be paid by the User, the User and the City may enter into a Pretreatment Settlement Agreement to be negotiated by the parties. In the event the User and the City are not able to so agree, the City may file a Civil Action against the User in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided in this chapter.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-10 TERMINATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.

(A) The Director may issue a Cease and Desist Order to a User that has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter; a wastewater discharge permit or compliance order; or any other pretreatment standard or requirement. The City has the authority to immediately halt any actual or threatened discharge to the POTW that may represent an endangerment to public health, the environment, or the POTW. The Cease and Desist Order may direct the User to immediately comply with pretreatment standards and requirements and to take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.

(B) The Cease and Desist Order will be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested). Issuance of a Cease and Desist Order will not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User.

(C) Termination or suspension of discharge may be an appropriate response to facilities that have not complied with previous enforcement actions. This action is an administrative response, which may be implemented by the Director without initiating civil and/or criminal proceedings.

(D) Circumstances warranting termination or suspension of discharges include any of the following:

(1) Unpermitted discharge which results in violation of POTW permit(s);

(2) Any dangerous situation threatening human health, the environment, or the POTW;

(3) Discharges that exceed local limits or categorical discharge limits and/or result in damage to the environment or the POTW;

(4) Slug loads that result in interference, pass-through, or which may cause any dangerous situation threatening human health, the environment, or the POTW;

(5) Failure of the facility to notify the City of effluent violations of slug load discharge, or recurring slug loads, that causes any dangerous situation threatening human health, the environment, or the POTW;

(6) Failure of the facility to install monitoring equipment as required by an Administrative Order; and/or

(7) Any major violation of permit conditions or administrative action accompanied by evidence of negligence or intentional violation.

(E) The process for terminating or suspending a User’s wastewater discharge permit is described below:

(1) The User will be provided written notification of the proposed termination or suspension, the basis for the proposed action and the date for the show cause meeting as provided in this chapter.

(2) If the User appears to have an actual or threatened discharge that may cause interference with the POTW or will present an imminent endangerment to the health, safety or welfare of any person or environment, or to the environment or pass-through interference, upset to, the POTW; the Director may immediately suspend any sewer service connection to the POTW without a Show Cause meeting. In such cases, the User will be entitled to a meeting within five calendar days of the suspension/termination.

(3) Service will be restored only after compliance has been achieved to the satisfaction of the Director.

(F) When notified of a permit suspension, the user shall cease discharge of all industrial wastewater to the POTW.

(G) Failure to Comply with Permit Suspension. In the event of a failure of the User to comply voluntarily with the notification of permit suspension, the Director shall take such steps as necessary to insure compliance up to and including termination of service by court order or physical barrier.

(H) Reinstatement of Suspended Permit. The Director shall, by written statement, reinstate the user’s permit upon proof of satisfactory compliance with all requirements of the notification of permit suspension/termination. Damages and costs incurred by the City, and administrative fee, in suspending the permit, disconnecting and/or reconnecting the User shall be paid for by the user before reinstatement of the permit.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-11 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.

(A) The Director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:

(1) Failure to notify the Director in writing of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the change as required by this chapter;

(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the Director of changed conditions as required by this chapter;

(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;

(4) Falsifying self monitoring reports and certification statements;

(5) Tampering with monitoring or sampling equipment or a pretreatment device;

(6) Refusing to allow the Director immediate access to the facility premises and records;

(7) Exceeding effluent limitations;

(8) Failure to pay fines, costs or fees;

(9) Failure to pay sewer charges;

(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules;

(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey; or

(12) Violation of any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.

(B) Any user whose permit has been revoked shall immediately cease all discharge of any industrial wastewater to the POTW.

(C) Failure to Comply with Permit Revocation. In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the notification of permit revocation, the Director shall take such steps as necessary to insure compliance.

(D) Resolution of Permit Revocation. Before any further discharge of industrial wastewater may be made by the User, the User must apply for and obtain a new permit for industrial wastewater discharge, pay all charges that would be required upon initial application, and pay all delinquent fees, charges and such other sums as the user may owe to the county. Administrative fee assessed by the City in revoking the permit and disconnecting/reconnecting the industrial sewer shall be paid for by the user before issuance of a new permit.

(E) Wastewater discharge permits shall be automatically revoked upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-12 USER APPEAL.

An appeal may be made to the City Manager by filing a request with the City Clerk in the event that satisfactory resolution of Sections 12A-8-1, 12A-8-2, and 12A-8-3 is not agreed upon.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-13 CIVIL ACTIONS.

(A) The City has the authority to file a Civil Action against Users for violations of applicable pretreatment standards and seek injunctive relief, compliance, civil fines, and/or damages. Civil fines may be assessed in an amount up to $25,000 per violation per day in accordance with A.R.S. § 49-391. Filing Civil Actions is an appropriate enforcement response in the following situations:

(1) An emergency situation where injunctive relief is necessary to halt or prevent discharges which threaten human health, or the environment, or interfere with the POTW;

(2) When efforts to restore compliance through cooperation with the IU has failed and action is necessary to enforce Pretreatment Program requirements;

(3) To seek fines and other remedies in law, or equity, or statutory for violations;

(4) Any other situation deemed reasonable by the City for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the community, POTW, or the environment.

(B) In instances that require filing a Civil Action, the ECS will collect all pertinent information sufficient to support the complaint, and provide the information to the City Attorney.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-14 CRIMINAL ACTIONS.

(A) Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter or a User Wastewater Discharge Permit condition or requirement shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,500 for an individual and not more than $20,000 for an enterprise or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense.

(B) The City Attorney is authorized to seek criminal punishment for any person who violates pretreatment standards or any person who knowingly makes false statements in any report, application, record, or other document required by pretreatment regulations and City Code.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-15 LIABILITY OF USER.

Any user who discharges, or causes the discharge of wastewaters which cause damage to the POTW, interference, pass-through, upset, or any other damages resulting in costs to the POTW shall be liable for all damages, costs, fees, fines and all other penalties resulting from or arising out of the user’s actions.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-16 JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS.

(A) Initiation of Legal Action. Whenever the Director finds that a user has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the Director may ask the City Attorney to take appropriate legal action. This legal action may include, among other things, the following:

(1) Prohibitive injunctions;

(2) Mandatory injunctions for corrective action and cleanup, or other equitable relief;

(3) Civil penalties in accordance with this chapter;

(4) Criminal penalties, including restitution. In addition to any other restitution deemed appropriate by the Court, the Court may order that the violator pay restitution to reimburse the City for the costs and expenses incurred by the City as a result of the violation, including but not limited to those resulting from the enforcement, testing, emergency response and cleanup activities;

(5) Recovery of civil damages, penalties, and costs to the POTW.

(B) Civil and Criminal Penalties for Violation.

(1) The civil penalties for violation of any provision of this chapter, any part of a permit written and issued in compliance with this chapter and/or any requirement of a notification of violation written and issued in compliance with this chapter, shall not exceed $25,000 for each violation. For continuing violations, each day may constitute a separate offense. In determining the amount of a civil penalty the following shall be taken into consideration:

(a) The seriousness of the violation.

(b) The economic benefit, if any, resulting from the violation.

(c) Any history of such violation.

(d) Any good faith efforts to comply with the applicable requirements.

(e) The economic impact of the penalty on the violator.

(f) Such other factors as justice may require.

(C) The civil penalties for non-submittal of reports, noncompliance with the reporting and/or application requirements required in this chapter or permit, or failure to complete an increment of progress of a compliance schedule, shall not exceed $1,000 for each day in which the requirements are not fulfilled.

(D) Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1% per month. A lien against the User’s property shall be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.

(E) Any person who attempts to deceive a government agency by submitting documents to the agency or by making statements to a representative of the agency which they know to be false, or by destroying or concealing or refusing to deliver papers or records required by the agency to be kept for its information, is subject to prosecution for tampering with a public record, or fraudulent schemes and practices. Tampering with a public record and fraudulent schemes and practices are both felony violations pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes.

(F) Any violation of any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, by any Person, are class 1 misdemeanors and may be pursued civilly and criminally subject to the penalties provided herein, Article 1-8, Chapter 18, A.R.S. § 49-391 and as provided by law. Each day any violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance incorporated herein, or the failure to perform any act or duty required by this code or ordinance incorporated herein, continues shall constitute a separate offense.

(G) The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The Director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant User. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the Chapter. However, the Director has the discretion to take other action against any User which the Director deems to be appropriate under the circumstances. Further, the Director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant User.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-17 LEVELS OF ACTION.

(A) Enforcement of Judicial Action. Participation in any communication concerning violations will not exempt a User from formal enforcement or judicial action.

(B) Written Permission Requirement. Any permission required by a User from the Director must be in writing.

(C) Separate Actions. Any judicial proceedings initiated because of a violation of any section of this chapter shall not exempt a User from any judicial proceedings initiated because of a violation of any other provision of this chapter.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-18 ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE ACTIONS.

(A) The following chart identifies violations and the general enforcement response options that may be taken by the City. The chart is intended to be a reference only, and is not intended to identify all possible violations or limit the City’s response to a violation. At all times the City retains the right to take any enforcement action, in response to an identified violation, which it deems appropriate including all civil and/or criminal actions available by law. All enforcement response options include the possible imposition of fees, fines, costs, reasonable attorney fees, court costs and any and all other expenses associated with inspection, and enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City.

(B) Enforcement Response Chart:

	Violation	Nature of Violation	Enforcement Response Option

	Un-Permitted Discharges

	Un-Permitted Discharge	User Aware Of Requirement; No Harm to the POTW Or Environment	Verbal Warning, Warning Notice, NOV With Permit Application Form, Resample Discharge, Unannounced Inspection, Unannounced City Monitoring

	 	User Aware Of Requirement; Discharge Causes Harm to the POTW Or Environment	NOV, Resample Discharge, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action

	 	Failure To Comply; Discharge Continues After Notice By City	NOV, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action, Terminate Sewer Connection, Revoke Permit

	Failure to Renew Permit	Permit Expired; No Application Submitted	NOV, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action, Terminate Sewer Connection

	Discharge Limit Violations

	Exceedance of Local Limit, Permit Limit or Federal Standard	Random Violation; No Harm to POTW or Environment	Verbal Warning, Warning Notice, NOV, Resample discharge, Unannounced inspection, Unannounced City monitoring

	 	Random violation; Discharge Caused Harm to POTW or Environment	NOV, Resample discharge, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action

	 	Pattern Violation; No Harm to POTW or Environment 	NOV, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action

	 	Pattern Violation; Discharge Caused Harm to POTW or Environment	NOV, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action, Terminate sewer connection, Revoke Permit

	 	Pattern Violation with Knowledge, Intent or Negligence	NOV, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action, Terminate sewer connection, Revoke Permit

	Monitoring and Reporting Violations

	Reporting Violation	Report Improperly Signed or Certified	Verbal Warning, Warning Notice, NOV

	 	Report Improperly Signed or Certified After Notification By City	NOV, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action

	 	Random Violation No Harm to POTW or Environment Report, Reported Less Than 30 Days Late	Verbal Warning, Warning Notice, NOV, Unannounced inspection

	 	Report late, 30 days or more	NOV, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Fees/Fines, Civil and/or Criminal Action

	 	Missing or Incomplete Information in Report	Verbal Warning, Warning Notice, NOV

	 	Failure to Correct Report with Missing or Incomplete Information After Notification by City	NOV, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action 

	 	Failure to Report Spill or Changed Discharge; No Harm to POTW or Environment	Verbal Warning, Warning Notice, NOV, Resample discharge, Unannounced inspection, Unannounced City monitoring

	 	Failure to Report Spill or Changed Discharge; Discharge Caused Harm to POTW or Environment	NOV, Resample discharge, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action

	 	Repeated Failure to Report Spills or Changed Discharge	NOV, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action, Terminate sewer connection, Revoke Permit

	 	Falsification of Information in Report	NOV, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Criminal and/or Civil Action, Terminate Sewer Connection, Revoke Permit

	Failure to Monitor Correctly	Failure to Monitor All Pollutants as Required by Permit	Verbal Warning, Warning Notice, NOV

	 	Pattern Violation or Evidence of Intent	NOV, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil Action, Terminate Sewer Connection, Revoke Permit

	Improper Sampling	Random Violation	Verbal Warning, Warning Notice, NOV, Resample Discharge, Unannounced Inspection, Unannounced City Monitoring

	 	Pattern violation or Evidence of Intent	NOV, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Criminal Action, Terminate Sewer Connection, Revoke Permit

	Failure to Install Monitoring Equipment	Delay of 30 days or more after notification by City	NOV, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action, Terminate Sewer Connection, Revoke Permit

	Compliance Schedules	Missed Compliance Deadline by Less Than 30 Days	Verbal Warning, Warning Notice, NOV

	 	Missed Compliance Deadline by More Than 30 Days; USER Has Good Cause For Delay	NOV, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order

	 	Missed Compliance Deadline by More Than 30 Days; USER Does Not Have Good Cause For Delay	NOV, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action, Terminate Sewer Connection, Revoke Permit

	 	Pattern Violation or Violation of Schedule in Administrative Order	NOV, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Fines, Civil and/or Criminal Action, Terminate Sewer Connection, Revoke Permit

	Other Permit Violations

	Water Streams Diluted in Lieu of Treatment	Random Violation	Verbal Warning, Warning Notice, NOV, Resample Discharge, Unannounced Inspection, Unannounced City Monitoring

	 	Pattern Violation	NOV, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Fees/Fines, Civil and/or Criminal Action, Terminate Sewer Connection, Revoke Permit

	Failure to Mitigate Noncompliance or Halt Production	Discharge Causes No Harm to POTW or Environment	Verbal Warning, Warning Notice, NOV, Resample Discharge, Unannounced Inspection, Unannounced City Monitoring

	 	Discharge Causes Harm to POTW or Environment	NOV, Resample Discharge, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action

	Failure to Properly Operate and Maintain Pretreatment Facility	Random Violation	Verbal Warning, Warning Notice, NOV, Resample Discharge, Unannounced Inspection, Unannounced City Monitoring

	 	Pattern Violation	NOV, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action, Terminate Sewer Connection, Revoke Permit

	Violations Observed During Site Visit/Inspection

	Entry Denial	Entry denied or Consent Withdrawn; Copies of Records Denied	Warning Notice, NOV, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action

	Illegal Discharge	Discharge Causes No Harm to POTW or Environment	Verbal Warning, Warning Notice, NOV, Resample Discharge, Unannounced Inspection, Unannounced City Monitoring

	 	Pattern Violation; No Harm to POTW or Environment	NOV, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order

	 	Discharge Causes Harm to POTW or Environment or There is Evidence of Intent or Negligence	NOV, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action, Terminate Sewer Connection, Revoke Permit

	Improper Sampling	Incorrect Location, Sample Type, or Collection Procedure	Verbal Warning, Warning Notice, NOV, Resample discharge

	Inadequate Record Keeping or Documentation 	Files incomplete or Missing Information; Initial Violation	Verbal Warning, Warning Notice, NOV

	 	Pattern Violation After Notice From City to Correct	NOV, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Civil and/or Criminal Action

	Failure to Report Additional Monitoring	Inspector Finds additional Files/Records; Initial Violation	Verbal Warning, Warning Notice, NOV

	 	Pattern Violation After Notice From City to Correct	NOV, Compliance Meeting, Show Cause Meeting, Administrative Order, Administrative Fines, Civil Action, Terminate Sewer Connection, Revoke Permit

	Administrative Fines

	Un-Permitted Discharge	USER Aware of Requirement; Discharge Causes Harm to POTW or Environment	Up to $10,000 per day per violation

	 	Failure to Comply; Discharge Continues After Notice by City	Up to $25,000 per day per violation

	Failure to Renew Permit 	Permit Expired; No Application Submitted	Up to $10,000 per day per violation

	Exceedance of Local Limit, Permit Limit or Federal Standard	Random Violation; Discharge Caused Harm to POTW or Environment	Up to $10,000 per day per violation

	 	Pattern Violation, 4 or More Violations Within Moving 12-Month Period; No Harm to POTW or Environment	Up to $10,000 per day per violation

	 	Pattern Violation, 2 or More Violations Within 90 Days; Discharge Causes Harm to POTW Or Environment	Up to $10,000 per day per violation

	 	Pattern Violation With Knowledge or Intent or Negligence	Up to $25,000 per day per violation

	Reporting Violations	Report is Improperly Signed or Certified After Notification by City	Up to $1,000 per day per violation

	 	Report Late by 30 Days or More	Up to $1,000 per day per violation

	 	Failure to Correct Report With Missing or Incomplete Information After Notification by City	Up to $5,000 per day per violation

	 	Failure to Report Spill or Changed Discharge; Discharge Caused Harm to POTW or Environment	Up to $10,000 per day per violation

	 	Pattern Violation; Failure to Report Spills or Changed Discharge	Up to $10,000 per day per violation

	 	Falsification of Information Presented In Report	Up to $1,000 per day per violation

	Failure to Monitor Correctly	Pattern Violation; Failure to Monitor Discharge	Up to $5,000 per day per violation

	Improper Sampling	Evidence of Intent	Up to $5,000 per day per violation

	Failure to Install Monitoring Equipment	Delay of 30 Days or More After Notification by City	Up to $1,000 per day per violation

	Compliance Schedule	Missed Compliance Deadline by More Than 30 Days; USER Has Good Cause For Delay	Up to $500 per day per violation

	 	Missed Compliance Deadline By More Than 30 Days; USER Does Not Have Good Cause For Delay	Up to $1,000 per day per violation

	 	Pattern Violation or Violation of Schedule in Administrative Order	Up to $5,000 per day per violation

	Waste Streams are Diluted in Lieu of Treatment	Pattern Violation	Up to $5,000 per day per violation 

	Failure to Mitigate Noncompliance or Halt Production	Discharge Causes Harm to POTW or Environment	Up to $10,000 per day per violation

	Entry Denial	Entry Denied or Consent Withdrawn; Copies of Records Denied	Up to $100 per day per violation

	Illegal Discharge	Pattern Violation; No Harm to POTW or Environment	Up to $1,000 per day per violation

	 	Discharge Causes Harm to POTW or Environment or There is Evidence of Intent or Negligence	Up to $10,000 per day per violation

	Inadequate Record Keeping or Documentation	Pattern Violation After Notice From City To Correct	Up to $5,000 per day per violation

	Failure to report Additional Monitoring	Pattern Violation After Notice From City To Correct	Up to $5,000 per day per violation

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-19 NOTICES.

Any notice required to be provided by any City staff under this chapter shall be in writing and served in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall be served upon an authorized representative, at the last address known to the director or the occupants or owners of record of property upon which the alleged violations occurred.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-20 EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.

(A) The Director may immediately suspend a User’s discharge, after informal notice to the User, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The Director may also immediately suspend a User’s discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.

(B) Any User notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a User’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Director may allow the User to recommence its discharge when the User has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the other proceeding initiated against the User preclude recommencing of the discharge.

(C) A User that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Director.

(D) Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as requiring a judicial proceeding or hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. For the purposes of this section, informal notice may mean either oral or written notice and does not mean actual notice.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-8-21 PERFORMANCE BONDS; LIABILITY INSURANCE; CONTRACT AWARD.

(A) The Director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any User who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other applicable federal, state, or local Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, unless such User first files a satisfactory bond, letter of credit, cash, or other security device, payable to the City, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the Director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.

(B) The Director may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any Person who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit, other permit or order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, unless the Person first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.

(C) Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the City. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the City held by a User found to be in Significant Noncompliance with Pretreatment Standards or Requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the Director.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


Article 12A-9: Affirmative Defenses for Discharge Violations

Section

12A-9-1    Upset

12A-9-2    Prohibited Discharge Standards

12A-9-3    Bypass


12A-9-1 UPSET.

(A) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical Pretreatment Standards if the requirements of subsection (B) of this section are met.

(B) A User who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence all of the following:

(1) An upset occurred and the User can identify the cause(s) of the upset;

(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and

(3) The User has submitted the following information to the Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset; if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days:

(a) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;

(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and

(c) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.

(C) In any enforcement proceeding, the User seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence.

(D) Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with a categorical Industrial User Pretreatment Standards.

(E) Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical Pretreatment Standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-9-2 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.

(A) User shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the prohibitions in Section 12A-2-1 of this chapter if the User can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause Pass Through or Interference and that either:

(1) A Local Limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the User was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the Pass Through or Interference; or

(2) No Local Limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the User’s prior discharge when the City was regularly in compliance with its AZPDES permit, and in the case of Interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-9-3 BYPASS.

(A) A User may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause Pretreatment Standards or Requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (C) and (D) of this section.

(B) Bypass Notifications.

(1) If a User knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the Director, at least 10 days before the date of the bypass, if possible.

(2) A User shall submit oral notice to the Director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable Pretreatment Standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the User becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Director may waive the written report on an individual basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.

(C) Bypass is prohibited, and the Director may take an enforcement action against a User for a bypass, unless all of the following exist:

(1) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;

(2) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and

(3) The User submitted notices as required under subsection (B) of this section.

(D) The Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the Director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (C)(1) of this section.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


Article 12A-10: Miscellaneous Provisions

Section

12A-10-1    Water and Sewer Service Severance

12A-10-2    Penalties for Late Reports

12A-10-3    Payment of Outstanding Fees and Penalties

12A-10-4    Public Nuisances

12A-10-5    Contractor Listing

12A-10-6    Pretreatment Charges and Fees


12A-10-1 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE SEVERANCE.

Whenever a User has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other applicable federal, state, or local Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, water service and/or sewer service to the User may be severed. Service will recommence, at the User’s expense, only after the User has satisfactorily demonstrated to the Director that it is able and will comply.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-10-2 PENALTIES FOR LATE REPORTS.

A penalty set by resolution of council shall be assessed to any User for each day that a report required by this chapter, a permit or order issued hereunder is late; beginning five days after the date the report is due. The daily penalty amount will be increased when the reports are more than 15 days late. Any actions taken by Director to collect late reporting penalties shall not limit the Director’s authority to initiate other enforcement actions that may include penalties for late reporting violations.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-10-3 PAYMENT OF OUTSTANDING FEES AND PENALTIES.

The Director may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit, or other permit to any User who has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this chapter, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or other permit or order issued hereunder.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-10-4 PUBLIC NUISANCES.

A violation of any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Director. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of City Code governing such nuisances, and shall be required to reimburse the City for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-10-5 CONTRACTOR LISTING.

Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the City. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the City held by a User found to be in Significant Noncompliance with Pretreatment Standards or Requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the Director.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


12A-10-6 PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.

(A) The City council by resolution may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the City’s Pretreatment Program, which may include:

(B) Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including but not limited to the following:

(1) Cost of processing applications;

(2) Initial application and annual permitting fees;

(3) Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a User’s discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by Users;

(4) Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures;

(5) Fees for reviewing plans and inspection for construction;

(6) Fees for filing appeals; and

(7) Other fees as the City may deem appropriate to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the City.

(Ord. 14-1290, passed 3-3-2014)


CHAPTER 13: Traffic

Article

13-1.    ADMINISTRATION

13-2.    TRAFFIC CONTROL

13-3.    STANDING AND PARKING

13-4.    REPEALED

13-5.    MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS


ARTICLE 13-1 Administration

Section

13-1-1    Duty of Police Chief

13-1-2    Records of traffic violations

13-1-3    Police Chief to investigate accidents


13-1-1 DUTY OF POLICE CHIEF.

(A) It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to provide for the enforcement of the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to assist in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out all duties specially imposed upon the Police Chief by this chapter.

(B) Any peace officer of the city may be authorized by the Police Chief to perform any of the duties of the Police Chief included in this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 13-1-1)


13-1-2 RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.

(A) The Police Chief shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic laws of the city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged. Such record shall be maintained in the manner required by state records management procedures.

(B) All forms for records of violations and notices shall be serially numbered.

(Prior Code, § 13-1-2)


13-1-3 POLICE CHIEF TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS.

It shall be the duty of the Police Chief to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents.

(Prior Code, § 13-1-3)


ARTICLE 13-2 Traffic Control

Section

13-2-1    Directing traffic

13-2-2    Obedience to traffic regulations

13-2-3    Traffic control devices

13-2-4    Authority to designate crosswalks, establish safety zones and mark traffic lanes

13-2-5    Authority to place and obedience to turning markers

13-2-6    Authority to place and obedience to restricted turn signs

13-2-7    Limitations on turning around

13-2-8    One way streets and alleys

13-2-9    Regulation of traffic at intersections

13-2-10    Drivers to obey signs

13-2-11    Processions

13-2-12    Repealed

13-2-13    Truck routes


13-2-1 DIRECTING TRAFFIC.

(A) The Police Chief is authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal.

(B) Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the Police Department in directing traffic in the immediate vicinity.

(Prior Code, § 13-2-1)


13-2-2 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.

It is unlawful, except as otherwise provided in this code, for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this chapter or willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the Police Chief or of any Fire Department official.

(Prior Code, § 13-2-2) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


13-2-3 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.

(A) The City Manager or his or her designee shall direct the placement and maintenance traffic control devices, signs and signals when and as required under the traffic regulations of the city to make effective the provisions of said regulations and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he or she may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic laws of the city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic.

(B) The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic regulations of the city unless otherwise directed by the Police Chief, subject to the exceptions granted in this chapter or by state law.

(Prior Code, § 13-2-3)


13-2-4 AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS, ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES AND MARK TRAFFIC LANES.

The City Manager or his or her designee is authorized:

(A) To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his or her opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as he or she may deem necessary;

(B) To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians;

(C) To mark lanes for traffic on street pavement at such places as he or she may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic laws of the city.

(Prior Code, § 13-2-4)


13-2-5 AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO TURNING MARKERS.

(A) The City Manager or his or her designee is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.

(B) When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications.

(Prior Code, § 13-2-5)


13-2-6 AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND OBEDIENCE TO RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.

(A) The City Manager or his or her designee is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U turn and shall have placed proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or such signs may be removed when such turns are permitted.

(B) Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign.

(Prior Code, § 13-2-6)


13-2-7 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.

The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.

(Prior Code, § 13-2-7)


13-2-8 ONE WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.

(A) The City Manager or his or her designee may designate any streets or alleys which are to be limited to one way traffic.

(B) Whenever the City Manager or his or her designee designates any one way street or alley, he or she shall have placed and maintained signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.

(Prior Code, § 13-2-8) (Am. Ord. 90-317, passed 9-25-1990)


13-2-9 REGULATION OF TRAFFIC AT INTERSECTIONS.

The City Manager or his or her designee shall designate through streets, intersections where stops are required and intersections where vehicles shall yield the right-of-way.

(Prior Code, § 13-2-9)


13-2-10 DRIVERS TO OBEY SIGNS.

Whenever traffic signs are erected as provided in this chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall obey such signs unless directed to proceed by the Police Chief or a traffic control signal. No driver shall drive upon or through any private property such as an oil station, vacant lot or similar property to avoid obedience to any regulation included in this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 13-2-10)


13-2-11 PROCESSIONS.

(A) No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be held without first securing a permit from the Police Chief, and all such requests for permits shall state the time, place of formation, proposed line of march, destination and such other regulations as the Police Chief may set forth therein.

(B) A funeral procession composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified by such methods as may be determined and designated by the Police Chief.

(C) No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or the Police Chief.

(D) Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.

(Prior Code, § 13-2-11)


13-2-12 OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON VACANT LOTS.

Repealed by Ord. 12-1259.

(Prior Code, § 13-2-12) (Am. Ord. 90-317, passed 9-29-1990)


13-2-13 TRUCK ROUTES.

(A) Definitions. In this section, unless the context otherwise requires:

LOCAL DELIVERY means the delivery and pick up of merchandise, materials or equipment to or from a specific location not located on a Truck Route.

LOCAL TRUCK TRAFFIC means use of the roads by non-regulated trucks and by Regulated Trucks that are making a Local Delivery.

REGULATED TRUCKS shall mean any of the following:

(1) Semi-trailer when used in combination with a Truck Tractor.

(2) A motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the carrying of property other than the effects of the driver or passenger and includes a motor vehicle to which has been added a box, a platform or other equipment for such carrying.

(3) Single unit multiple rear axle trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) or gross combination weight rating of 18,001 pounds or more including dump trucks and cement mixers.

(4) Vehicles used in the transportation of hazardous material in an amount requiring hazardous material warning placards under any federal, state or local law or regulation.

RESTRICTED ROUTE means a segment or connected segments of streets, within the City of Goodyear, upon which Regulated Truck traffic is restricted or prohibited by posted signage.

SEMI-TRAILER means a vehicle that is with or without motive power that is designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and that is constructed so that some part of its weight and that of its load rests on or is carried by another vehicle.

TRUCK ROUTE means a street or connected segments of streets, within the City of Goodyear, upon which Regulated Truck traffic is directed.

TRUCK TRACTOR means a motor vehicle that is designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and that is not constructed to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load drawn.

(B) Designated Truck Routes. For the purposes of this subsection, the following roadways within the Goodyear City limits are hereby designated as Truck Routes:

	Truck Routes

	Route	Designated Area

	Cotton Lane	From Van Buren Street to MC 85

	SR 303 (State)	Throughout Goodyear

	Interstate 10 (State)	Throughout Goodyear

	Litchfield Road	From Interstate 10 to MC 85

	MC 85 (County)	From Dysart Road to Perryville Road

	S. Bullard Avenue	From Interstate 10 to Estrella Parkway

	S. Estrella Parkway	From S. Bullard Ave/W. Elwood Street to MC 85

(C) Local Truck Traffic Route. All roads within the City of Goodyear not designated as a Truck Route are designated as Local Truck Traffic only.

(D) Except as expressly provided herein, Regulated Trucks are prohibited on all Restricted Routes within the Goodyear City limits except when making a Local Delivery. In making a local delivery, Regulated Trucks must use the shortest route from a Truck Route to the point of delivery or pick-up.

(E) Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency vehicles, garbage trucks, school busses, busses under the auspices of local or regional transit authorities, recreational vehicles, or to trucks operating under an emergency condition where alternative routes are not available.

(F) Violations. A violation of any of the provisions of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor and each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense.

(Ord. 02-832, passed 11-12-2002; Am. Ord. 19-1412, passed 1-14-2019)


ARTICLE 13-3 Standing and Parking

Section

13-3-1    Method of parking

13-3-2    Blocking traffic

13-3-3    Parking adjacent to schools

13-3-4    Authority to erect signs restricting parking

13-3-5    Parking on sidewalks

13-3-6    Restricted parking areas for the physically disabled

13-3-7    Stopping, standing or parking prohibitions

13-3-8    Parking prohibited for certain purposes

13-3-9    Residential no parking

13-3-10    Violation and initiation of civil action

13-3-11    Presumption of liability

13-3-12    Sanctions

13-3-13    Prohibition: commercial/recreational motor vehicles

13-3-14    Improper angle parking

13-3-15    Loads; unloading motor vehicles

13-3-16    Leaving unattended children in a vehicle

13-3-17    Temporary "no parking," special events, or emergency parking signs

13-3-18    Failure to respond or pay

13-3-19    Vehicle immobilization and impound

13-3-20    Application of article

13-3-21    Definitions


13-3-1 METHOD OF PARKING.

(A) No person who owns or has custody or control of a motor vehicle shall stand or park such vehicle, whether attended or unattended, other than in accordance with this article, authorized signs, pavement markings, or other official traffic control devices, upon a public road, roadway or alley.

(B) No person who owns or has custody or control of a motor vehicle shall stand or park such vehicle, whether attended or unattended, other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of the lawful traffic movement on that portion of the public road or roadway and with the wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within 18 inches of the right hand curb. 

(Prior Code, § 13-3-1) (Am. Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-6) 


13-3-2 BLOCKING TRAFFIC.

(A) No person shall stand or park any motor vehicle, trailer or travel trailer, whether attended or unattended, upon a public road or roadway in the City in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 20 feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a person may stop temporarily, in the actual loading or unloading of persons or property when necessary, in the observance of traffic signs or signals of public safety personnel.

(B) No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle, trailer or travel trailer within an alley except for the loading or unloading of persons or property and not then unless such loading or unloading can be accomplished without blocking the alley to the free movement of vehicular traffic. 

(Prior Code, § 13-3-2) (Am. Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-7)


13-3-3 PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.

When signs are erected indicating no parking on that side of the street adjacent to any school property, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in any such designated during the days and times posted by the City on such signs. 

(Prior Code, § 13-3-3) (Am. Ord. 08-1113, passed 4-28-2008; Am. Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-8)


13-3-4 AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS RESTRICTING PARKING.

The City Manager or designee may have erected signs requiring parking at an angle to the curb, allowing parking on the left hand curb on one-way streets, notifying drivers that parking is prohibited and restricting parking in any way that may be necessary. When such signs have been erected, no person shall act in disobedience to such parking restrictions. 

(Prior Code, § 13-3-4) (Am. Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-3)


13-3-5 PARKING ON SIDEWALKS.

No person shall stand or park any vehicle, whether in usable condition or not, nor shall an owner permit his or her vehicle to be parked, upon any sidewalk in the City. 

(Prior Code, § 13-3-5) (Am. Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-9)


13-3-6 RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS FOR THE PHYSICALLY DISABLED.

(A) No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in a parking space on either public or private property set aside and identified for use only by persons with physical disabilities, unless the vehicle has displayed thereon a distinguishing insignia or numbered plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol as provided in A.R.S. §§ 28-881 through 28-886.

(B) Subsection (A) of this section shall apply only to those parking spaces that are identified with standard signs or other markers, as approved by the City. 

(Prior Code, § 13-3-6) (Am. Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-12)


13-3-7 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITIONS.

(A) Except as necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or if in compliance with law or the directions of public safety personnel or official traffic control device, no person shall stand or park a motor vehicle, trailer, travel trailer, equipment or device (whether attended or unattended) in any of the following places:

(1) In front of a public or private driveway;

(2) Within 20 feet of an intersection;

(3) Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant;

(4) Within a designated crosswalk, bike lane or turn lane;

(5) Within 20 feet to any crosswalk at any intersection;

(6) Within a designated 15 miles per hour school crossing zone;

(7) Within 30 feet on the approach of any flashing beacon, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic control sign, or traffic control signal at the side of a street;

(8) Within 50 feet of the nearest railroad crossing or within eight feet, six inches of the center of the railroad track except while a motor vehicle within motive power attached is loading or unloading railroad cars;

(9) Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to a fire station and, on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of the entrance when properly posted;

(10) On a bridge or other elevated structure on a highway, public street, public right-of-way or tunnel;

(11) On a public road or roadway in the opposite direction of traffic flow;

(12) In any area designated by the City as a fire lane;

(13) At any place where prohibited by signs or rules;

(14) Within a designated bicycle or turn lane;

(15) When double parked on a public road or roadway; or

(16) In any other location which impedes, restricts or prevents travel over or across any public roadway.

(B) Exceptions: nothing within this article shall be interpreted as prohibiting:

(1) Public safety personnel or emergency vehicle parking; or

(2) Parking of commercial motor vehicles, as authorized in this article, as long as traffic flow is uninterrupted. 

(Ord. 08-1113, passed 4-28-2008; Am. Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-13)


13-3-8 PARKING PROHIBITED FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.

(A) No person shall park, or permit to be parked, a motor vehicle upon any public highway, road, roadway, right-of-way or other public property for the principal purpose of:

(1) Displaying such motor vehicle for sale. The display of any signs or other markings indicating that a motor vehicle is for sale shall be prima facie evidence that the motor vehicle has been parked for sale or permitted to be parked for sale;

(2) Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency;

(3) Displaying advertising;

(4) Displaying commercial exhibits; or

(5) Parking in residential areas designated and posted as no parking areas;

(B) It is unlawful for any person to have, erect, place, stand or park, wholly or partly upon any public road, roadway, right of way or other public property, any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, wagon, pushcart, stand, structure, or building for the purpose of selling, vending, displaying for sale, or offering for sale, therefrom or therein, any goods, wares, or merchandise, fruit, vegetables, produce, or any other article or thing of value, unless authorized by the City. 

(Ord. 08-1113, passed 4-28-2008; Am. Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-14)


13-3-9 RESIDENTIAL NO PARKING.

No person shall park a vehicle upon any road, roadway, right-of-way or other public property in residential areas if such road, roadway, right-of-way or public property has been designated and posted as no parking. 

(Ord. 08-1113, passed 4-28-2008; Am. Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-10) 


13-3-10 VIOLATION AND INITIATION OF CIVIL ACTION.

(A) Civil traffic violations of this article shall be initiated and enforced as provided in the provisions of Chapter 18 of the Goodyear City Code or as provided below.

(1) A citation/traffic ticket may be served by:

(a) Leaving the citation/traffic ticket under the windshield wiper or otherwise attached to the vehicle; or

(b) Handing the citation/traffic ticket to the operator or owner of the vehicle if the operator or owner is present; or

(c) If the operator or owner is not present, mailing citation/traffic ticket by first class or certified mail to the address of the registered owner of the motor vehicle as shown in the motor vehicle ownership records of the state of registration.

(2) A summons and complaint may be sent by first class or certified mail to the driver of the vehicle or the registered owner of the vehicle as provided in A.R.S. § 28-1591, as amended. Service of the summons and complaint is complete on mailing. 

(Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-19)


13-3-11 PRESUMPTION OF LIABILITY.

(A) Any violation of or failure or refusal to do or perform any act required by the provisions of this article may be prosecuted as a civil traffic violation and/or a criminal violation, subject to all penalties provided in City code and law.

(B) Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered or licensed shall be prima facie responsible for any parking or standing of the vehicle in violation of any provision of this article or any other City ordinance prohibiting or restricting the parking or standing of a vehicle shall be jointly and individually liable for the violation and for the civil sanction prescribed herein.

(C) No person shall cause or allow a vehicle to be parked in violation of any provision of this article regulating time, place or method of parking. Violations of any provision of this article regulating the time, place or method of parking which are continuous in nature shall constitute a separate and distinct violation for each full hour thereof.

(D) It shall be no defense that the vehicle was parked illegally by another unless proof is presented that the vehicle had been stolen and not returned to the registered owner by the date of the violation. This shall not apply to registered owners who transferred vehicle ownership prior to the violation date. 

(Ord. 09-1200, passed 12-7-09; Am. Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-18) 


13-3-12 SANCTIONS.

(A) If a person pleads responsible or is found to be responsible for any civil violation of this article, unless otherwise provided herein, the court shall impose the following civil penalties:

(1) A fine not less than $50 and not more than $500 plus costs and surcharges for a first violation;

(2) A fine of not less than $100 and not more than $800 plus costs and surcharges for a second violation within one year; and

(3) A fine not less than $200 and not more than $1,000 plus costs and surcharges for each additional violation within one year.

(B) If a person pleads responsible or is found responsible for a civil parking violation of an area restricted for the physically disabled, the court shall impose a civil sanction of not less than $50 plus costs and surcharges and not more than $300 plus costs and surcharges. The court may suspend or reduce the fine upon receipt of proof that the person cited possessed a valid special identification placard or plate at the time of the alleged violation.

(C) Violations of any section of this article are subject to all criminal penalties provided in Article 1-8. All violations may be pursued both civilly and criminally. Nothing in this article shall be construed to preclude the City from pursuing the matter civilly and/or criminally as well as any and all other remedies provided by law.

(D) The registered owner of the vehicle is responsible for a parking ticket issued for a violation of this title, whether or not the owner was the operator or otherwise in possession of the vehicle at the time of the violation and whether or not the owner actually received the citation/parking ticket. 

(Ord. 09-1200, passed 12-7-09; Am. Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-20) 


13-3-13 PROHIBITION: COMMERCIAL/RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES.

(A) It is unlawful for any person who owns or has custody or control of any commercial motor vehicle or recreational motor vehicle to park or store such vehicle, whether occupied or not, on any public or private road, roadway or right of way within the City, excepted as authorized herein.

(B) This section shall not prohibit the parking of commercial motor vehicles and recreational motor vehicles if they are at the time actively engaged in any of the following activities:

(1) Loading or unloading of persons or property; or

(2) Parked in connection with or in the aid of the immediate performance of a utility, emergency or construction service to or on a property in the immediate proximity in which such vehicle is parked while actively engaged in the performance of such service for a period not to exceed eight hours; or

(3) Parked or left standing as a result of a mechanical breakdown so as to allow for the performance of emergency repairs on the vehicle, or while waiting for a tow operator for a period not to exceed two hours; or

(4) Emergency vehicles of any political subdivision of the state of Arizona, United States government or of a public utility or emergency vehicle, while the driver of any such vehicle is actively engaged in the necessary performance of public emergency duties; or

(5) Parking of motor homes, trailer coaches, recreational trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, or boat trailers designed for personal use for less than 72 hours in a residential area. 

(Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-5)


13-3-14 IMPROPER ANGLE PARKING.

(A) No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle upon those roads or roadways which have been signed or marked by the City for angle parking, other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings, or unless otherwise marked.

(B) At no time shall any person stand or park a motor vehicle on a highway at an angle to the roadway except to comply with the directions of public safety personnel. 

(Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-15)


13-3-15 LOADS; UNLOADING MOTOR VEHICLES.

No person shall operate, or permit the operation of, any motor vehicle of such weight or in such condition, or so constructed or so loaded, as to cause delay in traffic or accident or injury to any person, property or to the road or roadway. No person shall load or unload, or permit the loading or unloading, of a motor vehicle in such manner as to produce damage to the surface of the road, roadway or public property. 

(Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-16) 


13-3-16 LEAVING UNATTENDED CHILDREN IN A VEHICLE.

(A) It is unlawful for any person, while operating or in charge of a motor vehicle, to stand or park a vehicle upon a public road, roadway, street, public way or in a public place open to the public, and leave a child or children under the age of eight years unattended therein.

(B) For the purposes of this section, "unattended" means where no responsible person over 12 years of age is physically present in the vehicle and has immediate control over such child or children or the person operating or in charge of the vehicle is not in the immediate vicinity where the child or children can be seen or heard by such person.

(C) A violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor subject to all penalties provided in Article 1-8. 

(Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-17)


13-3-17 TEMPORARY "NO PARKING," SPECIAL EVENTS, OR EMERGENCY PARKING SIGNS.

(A) Whenever the City Traffic Engineer or the Chief of Police determines that in a special situation, traffic congestion is likely to result on any highway, road, roadway and/or alley from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the City Traffic Engineer or the Chief of Police shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such highway, road, roadway and/or alleys. The signs shall remain in place only during the existence of the special situation and the City Traffic Engineer or Chief of Police shall cause the sign(s) to be removed promptly thereafter.

(B) When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place, no person shall operate, park or stand any motor vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of the signs. 

(Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-4)


13-3-18 FAILURE TO RESPOND OR PAY.

(A) All civil penalties shall be paid within 30 days from entry of judgment or issuance of the citation/parking ticket, except that if payment within 30 days will place an undue economic burden on a person, the court may extend the time for payment or may provide for installment payments. If the civil penalty plus surcharges are not paid or an installment payment is not made when due, the court may declare the entire civil penalty/surcharged immediately due and impose additional penalties as provided by law.

(B) Failure to pay the full amount due as provided in subsection (A) of this section, more than 90 days after the payment is due or ordered, will result in the imposition of an additional penalty of 75% of the original fine plus collection fees and surcharges as provided by law and Article 1-8. 

(Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-21) 


13-3-19 VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION AND IMPOUND.

(A) All civil penalties shall be paid within 30 days from entry of judgment or issuance of the citation/parking ticket, except that if payment within 30 days will place an undue economic burden on a person, the court may extend the time for payment or may provide for installment payments. If the civil penalty plus surcharges are not paid or an installment payment is not made when due, the court may declare the entire civil penalty/surcharged immediately due and impose additional penalties as provided by law.

(B) Failure to pay the full amount due as provided in Section 13-3-18(A), more than 90 days after the payment is due or ordered, will result in the imposition of an additional penalty of 75% of the original fine plus collection fees and surcharges as provided by law and Article 1-8.

(Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-22)


13-3-20 APPLICATION OF ARTICLE.

(A) The provisions of this article restricting or prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times; as provided herein, or as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of public safety personnel or official traffic control device, or as permitted herein.

(B) The provisions of this article imposing restrictions on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of law prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.

(C) The provisions of this article do not apply to vehicles used by public safety personnel or other emergency vehicles while in service, whether or not they are responding to an emergency. 

(Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-1) 


13-3-21 DEFINITIONS.

Whenever any words or phrases used in this article are not defined in this article but are defined in Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended, such definitions shall apply to the words and phrases used herein.

ALLEY and ALLEYWAYS mean lanes or passageways for use as a means of access to the rear of lots or buildings.

C.F.R. means the Code of Federal Regulations.

CHIEF OF POLICE means the City of Goodyear Police Department Chief of Police or designee.

CITY means the City of Goodyear.

CITY MANAGER means the City Manager of the City of Goodyear or designee.

CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER means the City of Goodyear Traffic Engineer or designee.

COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE and RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE mean any commercial motor vehicle as defined by Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended, and all motorized and non-motorized tractors, trailers, semi-trailers, vans, trucks, open bed or flatbed pickups, mobile equipment, machinery, motor homes, campers, or other vehicles which meet one or more of the following criteria:

• Vehicle or load height exceeds seven feet; or

• Vehicle or load width exceeds seven and one-half feet, as measured from the widest portion of the vehicle or load, but not including mirrors; or

• Vehicle or load length exceeds 20 feet (in combination with any attached trailers); or

• A commercial motor vehicle containing hazardous material, hazardous waste or hazardous substances; or

• Manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating exceeds 10,000 pounds; or

• Any non-motorized vehicle regardless of its height, width, length or weight when it has been detached from a motor vehicle that is capable of towing such vehicle; or

• Vehicles transporting hazardous materials and required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. § 49.172, as amended, operators of such vehicles shall have in their possession at all times documentation verifying their deliveries or pick-ups.

CROSSWALK means that part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the roadway, measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the edge of the traversable roadway. Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 

DRIVER means an occupant of a motor vehicle who is in actual physical control of that vehicle, or for an out of control vehicle, an occupant who was in control prior to losing control.

DRIVEWAY means every entrance or exit authorized pursuant to applicable law and used by vehicular traffic to or from lands or buildings abutting a roadway.

EMERGENCY VEHICLES means authorized emergency vehicles as defined by Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended, including private ambulances, private escort vehicles of funeral and other processions, emergency vehicles of public service corporations, and such others as may be designated by the City Council. All traffic laws and ordinances are applicable to such emergency vehicles when they are not proceeding under an emergency situation.

FIRE CHIEF means the City of Goodyear Fire Department Fire Chief or designee.

FIRE LANE means any area within any public right-of-way, public or private easement, or public or private property designated by the City for fire trucks or other firefighting equipment.

HAZARDOUS MATERIALS means a substance identified in 49 C.F.R. § 172, as amended, to be capable of posing an unreasonable risk to health, safety and property if transported in commerce.

HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE means a material and its mixtures or solutions that has been identified in 49 C.F.R. § 172, as amended, to be capable of posing an unreasonable risk to health, safety and property if transported in commerce.

HAZARDOUS WASTE means a material that is subject to the hazardous waste manifest requirements of the Department of Environmental Quality or the United States Environmental Protection Agency.

INTERSECTION means when two or more roadways cross or connect, the area contained within the extension of curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral roadway boundary lines. Driveway accesses are not classified as intersections.

MOTOR VEHICLE and VEHICLE mean any device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported or drawn, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer of a type subject to registration under Title 28 of Arizona Revised Statutes as amended; including but not limited to commercial motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, off-road vehicles; all-terrain vehicles; off-road motorcycles; and watercraft of any kind.

OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE means all signs, signals, parking meters, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this article, placed or erected by authority of the City for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 

PARKED and PARKING mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers.

PERSON means any individual, enterprise, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, trust, estate, governmental entity, municipality, state or federal agency or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, property managers, agents, assigns, or employee thereof.

PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL means law enforcement officers and/or fire fighters acting in their official capacity.

RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE – see the definition of COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.

ROAD means the part of a trafficway which includes the roadway and the shoulder alongside the roadway.

ROADWAY means that portion of a road that is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.

SHOULDER means that portion of the road contiguous to the roadway for accommodation of stopped vehicles, for emergency use, and for lateral support of the roadway structure. The line between the roadway and the shoulder may be a painted edge line, a curb, or a change of surface color or material.

SIDEWALK means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians.

STAND and STANDING - see the definition of PARKED.

STREET means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way if a part of the way is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

TRAFFICWAY means any land way open to the public as a matter of right or custom for moving persons or property from one place to another.

TRAILER means any vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or property on its own structure and to be drawn by a vehicle with motor power. The term TRAILER includes trailer coach, semitrailer, boat trailer, or utility trailer.

TRAVEL TRAILER means a trailer built on a single chassis transportable upon the public streets and highways that is designed to be used as a temporary dwelling without a permanent foundation and may be used without being connected to utilities.

(Ord. 14-1304, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-1312, passed 9-22-2014. Formerly 13-3-2) 




ARTICLE 13-4 Bicycles

(Repealed by Ord. 12-1259)




ARTICLE 13-5 Motorized Skateboards

Section

13-5-1    Purpose and definition

13-5-2    Prohibited operation

13-5-3    Operating restrictions

13-5-4    Required safety equipment

13-5-5    Parental responsibility

13-5-6    Violations

13-5-7    Merchant disclosure requirements


13-5-1 PURPOSE AND DEFINITION.

(A) Purpose. To provide for the regulation of motorized skateboards, establish safety guidelines for protective equipment to minimize injury, and develop safety education for the operation of motorized skateboards.

(B) Definition. MOTORIZED SKATEBOARD. A self propelled device that has a motor, gas or electric, a deck on which a person may ride and at least two tandem wheels in contact with the ground, and is not otherwise defined in A.R.S. Title 28, as a "motor vehicle", "motorcycle", "motor driven cycle", "motorized wheelchair," or "electric personal assistive mobility device".

(Ord. 05-936, passed 2-28-2005)


13-5-2 PROHIBITED OPERATION.

No person shall operate a motorized skateboard:

(A) On any sidewalk in the city, except in crossing a sidewalk by the most direct route to gain access to a road or driveway.

(B) In any city parking structure or city park, except on public roadways within the park.

(C) On any public property that has been posted as an area prohibiting skateboards.

(D) On any street, roadway, or highway with a posted speed limit of greater than 25 miles per hour.

(E) On any public property which is not held open to the public for vehicular use.

(F) On any private property of another without the written permission of the owner, the person entitled to immediate possession of the property, or any authorized agent of either.

(G) On a public right-of-way, including streets, roadways, and alleyways, except during the hours of dusk to dawn.

(H) Who is under the age of 14.

(I) Who is under the age of 18 on any public property or right-of-way unless the person has in their possession written consent signed by their parent or legal guardian, whose signature shall be notarized, and such consent shall contain the following:

(1) Name and date of birth of the operator;

(2) Home address of the operator and the parent of guardian;

(3) Home and work telephone number of the parent or guardian; and

(4) The following statement:

I am the parent (or legal guardian) of (insert name of operator) and authorize him/her to operate a motorized skateboard in the City of Goodyear. I have read and discussed with him/her the regulations regarding the operation of motorized skateboards in Goodyear (Goodyear City Code Article 13-5) and have assured myself that the operator understands these regulations.

(Ord. 05-936, passed 2-28-2005)


13-5-3 OPERATING RESTRICTIONS.

(A) No person shall operate a motorized skateboard in excess of the posted speed limit or at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the circumstances then existing and in no event greater than 25 miles per hour.

(B) The operator of a motorized skateboard crossing a sidewalk or bicycle path or lane shall yield the right-of-way to all other users.

(C) Motorized skateboards may be operated on a path or lane designated as a bicycle path or lane. However, motorized skateboard operations shall yield at all times to other users.

(D) No motorized skateboard shall be used to carry passengers when it is in operation or motion.

(E) No person operating a motorized skateboard shall attach themselves in any manner to any other vehicle or person.

(F) No person shall operate a motorized skateboard while carrying any package, bundle or article which prevents the operator from keeping both hands on the steering mechanism at all times.

(G) No person shall operate a motorized skateboard that has been structurally or mechanically altered from the original manufacturer’s design unless such alteration reduces the noise level emitted from the motorized play vehicle or motorized skateboard below the noise level emitted by the original manufacturer’s design.

(H) No person shall operate a motorized skateboard in a crosswalk.

(I) No operator of a motorized skateboard shall transport extra fuel in a separate container or alter the fuel reservoir from the original manufacturer’s design.

(J) Persons operating motorized skateboards on a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast.

(K) A motorized skateboard shall ride as close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway except when passing other vehicles, preparing for a left turn, or when reasonably necessary to avoid hazardous conditions.

(L) It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized skateboard upon any street or highway within the city while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage or drug. A person by operating such vehicle upon the street or highway within the city is deemed to have impliedly consented to the administration of a chemical test of the person’s blood or breath for the purpose of determining the alcoholic or drug content of that person’s blood, and upon request of the arresting officer shall be punished by a fine according to § 18-1-2 of this code.

(Ord. 05-936, passed 2-28-2005)


13-5-4 REQUIRED SAFETY EQUIPMENT.

(A) No person shall operate a motorized skateboard unless it is equipped with a brake that enables the operator to make a braked wheel(s) skid on a dry pavement.

(B) Any person under the age of 18 operating a motorized skateboard on a roadway shall at all times wear a protective helmet in an appropriate and safely secured manner. The helmet shall meet minimum standards of testing and safety inspection by the bicycle industry.

(C) No person shall operate a motorized skateboard without wearing footwear. The footwear must have a sole and completely cover the feet and toes.

(D) The operator of a motorized skateboard shall wear at all times protective glasses, goggles or a transparent face shield.

(Ord. 05-936, passed 2-28-2005)


13-5-5 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.

No person shall, if a parent, guardian or custodian of a child under 18 years of age, authorize or knowingly permit the child to violate this article.

(Ord. 05-936, passed 2-28-2005)


13-5-6 VIOLATIONS.

Violations of this article are designated civil traffic violations per Article 1-8 of this code and shall be prosecuted and punished in the same manner as provided by law for other civil traffic violations.

(Ord. 05-936, passed 2-28-2005)


13-5-7 MERCHANT DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.

(A) It is unlawful for a merchant to sell motorized skateboards without making the disclosures required by this section.

(B) Any merchant who sells motorized skateboards or motorized play vehicle within the city limits shall:

(1) Post, in a prominent place at each location where motorized skateboards or motorized play vehicles are on display, a notice to the effect that operation of motorized skateboards and motorized play vehicles is prohibited:

(a) On any public sidewalk, roadway with a posted speed exceeding 25 miles per hour or any other part of a highway or on any bikeway, bicycle path or trail, equestrian trail, or shared use path in the city limits; and

(b) On any private property of another without the written permission of the owner, the person entitled to immediate possession of the property, or the authorized agent of either.

(2) Provide a copy of such notice to each purchaser of a motorized skateboard or motorized play vehicle, either before or in connection with the purchase.

(3) The definition of "motorized skateboard" contained in § 13-5-1 of this code shall also apply to this section.

(4) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this article, any violation of this section is punishable as a civil infraction violation pursuant to § 18-1-2 of this code.

(Ord. 05-936, passed 2-28-2005)


CHAPTER 14: Water

Article

14-1.    DEFINITIONS

14-2.    SERVICE AND BILLING

14-3.    DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE

14-4.    METERS

14-5.    CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITIES

14-6.    MAIN EXTENSIONS

14-7.    LIABILITY

14-8.    SECTIONS AS PART OF CONTRACT

14-9.    SPECIAL AGREEMENTS

14-10.    ENFORCEMENT

14-11.    BACKFLOW CONTROL AND CROSS-CONNECTION PROGRAM


ARTICLE 14-1 Definitions

Section

14-1-1    Definitions


14-1-1 DEFINITIONS.

For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

AIR GAP means a physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel. An approved air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel — in no case less than one inch.

APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY means an assembly of the size and type approved by the City that has been manufactured in full conformance with the American Water Works Association standards for reduced pressure principle assembly devices, as modified from time to time, and have met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the foundation for cross-connection control and hydraulic research of the University of Southern California as exist from time to time and, where on a fire system, have underwriters laboratory and factory mutual approval, or as otherwise described, limited or provided in this chapter.

BACKFLOW means the reversal of flow of water or mixture of water and other liquids, gasses or other substances into municipal distribution pipes or the potable supply of municipal water.

CERTIFIED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TESTER means a person who is certified to test backflow prevention assembly by either the American Backflow Prevention Association or other recognized certifying body.

CITY MANAGER means the City of Goodyear City Manager or his/her designee.

COMMERCIAL ACCOUNT means an account for a profit or nonprofit business, and multi-family residential dwelling units excluding single family residences.

COMMUNITY WELL means any well that is not part of a public water system.

CONTAMINANT means the same meaning as found in A.R.S. §§ 49-171 and 49-201.

CROSS-CONNECTION means a cross-connection as defined in § 104-M of the Plumbing Code as amended and as adopted by the City from time to time.

CUSTOMER means the property owner or any person, renter, lessee, occupant, government agency, nonprofit or entity responsible for payment of utility service(s) provided by the City.

DIRECTOR means the person or his/her designee authorized by the City Manager to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter.

ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES DIVISION means the Environmental Services Division Manager or designee, or any entity with which the City contracts to provide the specific service(s) identified in this chapter on behalf of the City.

HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE means the definition provided in 40 CFR Part 261.3.

INHABIT means to live or dwell in any structure required to have a utility account on a temporary or permanent basis.

KNOWINGLY means with respect to conduct or to a circumstance described by an ordinance defining an offense, that a person or enterprise is aware or believes that his/her/its conduct is of that nature or that the circumstance exists. It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of the act or omission.

MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ACCOUNT means an account for a multi-family residential dwelling unit which has requested and receives utility service(s) from the City.

MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNITS means any residential property comprised of two or more dwelling units, including duplexes, apartments and condominiums.

OCCUPANT means a person, persons or legal entity that, through rights of ownership, tenancy or other legal means has possession or the use of the subject real property.

PERSON means any enterprise, individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, trust, estate, governmental entity, municipality, State or Federal agency or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, assigns or employee thereof.

POTABLE WATER means water that meets the standards for drinking purposes as defined by State and Federal law.

PRIVATE PROPERTY means any real or personal property which is privately owned.

PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM means a water system that consists of an exempt well, as defined in A.R.S. § 45-402, installed at, or in proximity to, a site or an alternative, engineered system installed at a site to supply potable water for use at the site. A private water system does not include water systems that are classified as a community water system, as defined in A.R.S. § 45-341, or a public water system, as defined in A.R.S. § 49-341.

PROPERTY means buildings, ground, lots, tracts of land, or other real property whether publicly or privately owned.

PROPERTY OWNER means any person, with reference to real property, that holds or has any of the following: (A) fee title, (B) equitable title, (C) any possessory right, (D) the right to occupy the premises, or (E) the right to lease, sublease or authorize another to occupy the premises for real property located in the City of Goodyear. A person is presumed to be a property owner if identified as such on any of the following: a deed, contract, lease agreement, sales agreement, the Maricopa County Recorder’s Office, Maricopa County Assessor’s Office and/or any other public record system wherein these records may be located.

PUBLIC PLACE means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, buildings, facilities or other real or personal property which are publicly owned.

PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM means a system for the provision to the public of water for human consumption through pipes or other constructed conveyances or as defined in the Safe Water Drinking Act of 1996, as amended.

SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE means a single family detached dwelling.

SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ACCOUNT means an account for a single family detached dwelling which receives utility services from the City.

UNDUE HARDSHIP means an undue or unreasonable burden or requiring extreme difficulty or expense, as determined on a case-by-case basis.

UTILITY ACCOUNT means all accounts with the City of Goodyear for sanitation, sewer and/or water when provided by the City.

UTILITY SERVICE(S) means sewer, sanitation and/or water service provided by or on behalf of the City of Goodyear.

WATER MAIN means a water supply pipe for public or community use.

WATER METER means a device used to measure the quantity or rate of water flowing through a pipe.

WATER UTILITY means any public service corporation engaged in the generation, transmission or delivery of water, including the State or any political subdivision or agency of the State. For purposes of this section only, water utility shall also include an irrigation district.

(Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014)


ARTICLE 14-2 Service and Billing

Section

14-2-1    Water connection required

14-2-2    Private water systems

14-2-3    Application for service

14-2-4    Grounds for rejection of application

14-2-5    Security deposit

14-2-6    Water rates

14-2-7    Assessment and levy of additional tax

14-2-8    Customer service fees and payment

14-2-9    Construction water

Prior legislation: Ord. 09-1176.


14-2-1 WATER CONNECTION REQUIRED.

(A) Connection Required. All real properties located in the City’s water service area where water is used, and which lie adjacent to streets or alleyways, or rights-of-way in which water mains are or have been extended within 100 feet of any portion of the property, shall be serviced by such City water mains. Properties may be exempt from this requirement if: 1) the water is solely used for farming irrigation purposes; or 2) as provided by A.R.S. § 45-454 or 3) with the prior written consent of the City Manager.

(B) All persons in the City must sign up and maintain an account with the City to receive water service, when such service is provided by the City at the time the person purchases, owns, leases, uses or occupies, whichever occurs first, property within the City, regardless of whether water is used, unless otherwise provided herein. For purposes of this subsection, maintain an account means to open an account with the City for water service and make all payments due on that account.

(C) All persons outside the City must sign up and pay monthly for water services at the time their residence is purchased, owned, leased, used or occupied, whichever occurs first, when the property is connected to the City of Goodyear water system.

(D) All property owners shall provide the City with the names of all tenants occupying the property owner’s property within 30 days of occupancy.

(E) Base fees and any charges for water service shall apply even if a building is unoccupied.

(F) No person within the City shall be permitted to avoid or refuse to accept water service if available to be provided by the City. The failure of any person to accept water service shall not exempt that person from the payment of the charges for the service and any fine or penalty for noncompliance.

(G) Failure to Subscribe. Any person that is required to receive water service from the City who fails to activate a water account with the City as required in this section shall be subject to penalties, which include but are not limited to the total monthly fees they would have been assessed and an activation fee. This shall be in addition to any other penalties provided in this chapter.

(H) It is unlawful for any property owner to allow any person to lease, rent, or inhabit the property owner’s property if that person leasing, renting, occupying or inhabiting the property owner’s property does not maintain all utility services available and provided by the City.

(I) It is unlawful for any person to lease, rent, or inhabit any property if that person does not maintain all utility services available and provided by the City.

(J) It is unlawful for any person to lease, rent, or inhabit any property if that person receives, takes or uses water from the public water system connected to that property if that person does not maintain a utility account with the City for water services when such services are provided by the City.

(K) For purposes of this section, it is presumed that any person who leases, rents, or inhabits any property connected to the public water system is receiving, taking or using water from the public water system if any of the following:

(1) The water meter assigned to that property is removed or replaced by anyone other than the City; or

(2) The water meter assigned to that property registers usage; or

(3) The curbstop connected to the water meter assigned to that property is turned on without the prior consent of the City.

(L) For purposes of this section, maintain a utility account means to open and keep open an active account with the City for all utility services available and provided by the City and to make all payments when due on that account.

(Ord. 09-1186, passed 6-22-2009; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014)


14-2-2 PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS.

(A) Where water service by a public water system is not available as provided in Section 14-2-1, a private water system or an existing community well may be used to provide potable water to the site. The use of an individual on-site potable water storage system using hauled water may only be accepted as the source of potable water for the site when a sworn signed statement from the Arizona Department of Water Resources or a professional hydrologist and/or geologist registered with the State of Arizona stating that water is not available to the site by way of an individual well is submitted to the City Engineer or designee, for review and approval.

(B) New Buildings. Before issuance of a building permit for any building to be served by a private water system, the applicant must demonstrate that the following requirements have been met:

(1) The water system for the building has been designed so that a private water system service line stub is located in the front of the building to facilitate future connection to the public water system; and

(2) The property owner(s) have signed and recorded with the Maricopa County Recorder’s Office an affidavit of disclosure stating that the property owner(s) agree not to object to any application by the City to drill a public well for the public water system that is intended to provide water service to the property.

(C) Existing Buildings. Where an existing building is served by a private water system, the use of the private water system may continue after a public water service is available. However, if the property owner chooses to connect to the public water system, the private water system shall be discontinued and abandoned in accordance with the standards and requirements of the Arizona Department of Water Resources, Arizona Department of Environmental Quality and the Maricopa County Environmental Services Department. The City Manager shall be authorized to allow the continued use of a private water system in those situations where discontinuance of the private water system will create an undue hardship on the property owner(s) and continuance of the private water system will not adversely affect the operation of, or water supply for, the City’s public water system.

(Ord. 09-1186, passed 6-22-2009; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014)


14-2-3 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.

(A) Application for Utility Service. Service applications are required of all persons requesting activation of utility service(s). Application information must be submitted for each service address. An application must also be submitted when requesting any transfer of service. An activation fee will be charged for the activation of any utility service. The activation fee will be due any time an application is submitted. No more than one activation fee will be required when a person is signing up for multiple utility services with the City at one location. Once the application for water service has been approved, activation of water service will occur on the next business day. Same business day activation and request for activations outside of business hours will result in the assessment of an additional fee.

(B) Required Information. Applicants shall provide the following information when activating an account:

(1) Single Family Residential Accounts.

(a) Legal names of all responsible parties, entity or individual, must include all persons identified on the rental or lease agreement;

(b) Social security number and/or Federal tax identification number for commercial entities;

(c) Service address;

(d) Mailing address, if different;

(e) If property owner, provide proof of ownership;

(f) If tenant, provide landlord’s name and address and copy of occupancy agreement (rental or lease agreement);

(g) If agent, provide proof of agency;

(h) Applicant’s employer’s name, address and phone number;

(i) Requested start date;

(j) A photocopy of a valid driver’s license/identification card or other official government identification; and

(k) Any other information deemed relevant by the Director.

(2) Commercial and Multi-Family Residential Accounts.

(a) Legal name(s) of all responsible parties/entities;

(b) Federal tax identification number and/or social security number;

(c) Service address;

(d) Mailing address, if different;

(e) Name and address of property owner(s);

(f) If property owner, provide proof of ownership;

(g) If tenant, provide:

1. Landlord’s name and address and copy of rental or lease agreement.

2. Names of all persons identified on the rental or lease agreement;

(h) If agent, provide proof of agency;

(i) Requested start date;

(j) A photocopy of a valid driver’s license/identification card, or other official government identification; and

(k) Any other information deemed relevant by the Director.

(C) All applications for any and all utility service(s) submitted by any person or entity shall be signed by the person who will be responsible for payment of the utility services to be provided by the City, or a person legally authorized to act on their behalf. When submitting an application electronically, the named applicant(s) on the application will be deemed to have signed the applications.

(D) It is the responsibility of the customer to ensure that the customer’s contact and billing information on file with the City remains current at all times.

(Ord. 08-1101, passed 2-25-2008; Am. Ord. 09-1176, passed 5-18-2009; Am. Ord. 09-1186, passed 6-22-2009; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-2-1)


14-2-4 GROUNDS FOR REJECTION OF APPLICATION.

The City reserves, at all times, the right to reject an application or terminate any utility service should any person provide false or misleading information on their application; fails or refuses to provide all information requested on the application; water service is not available under a standard rate; providing water service involves excessive service expense; or until the applicant requesting sanitation service pays in full any and all outstanding utility balance(s) for all utility accounts of the named applicant(s).

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 09-1186, passed 6-22-2009; Am. Ord. 11-1238, passed 5-9-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-2-2)


14-2-5 SECURITY DEPOSIT.

(A) Assessment of a Security Deposit for Water Services. A refundable security deposit in an amount to be set by resolution of Council shall be charged for the activation of water services. The deposit may be paid in two monthly installments at the discretion of the City Manager. Upon receipt of a written request from the customer, the City Manager may waive the deposit required under this section if during the preceding 18 months the applicant’s payment history with any public utility or government entity evidences that the applicant has timely paid their bills for 12 consecutive months. All deposits shall be retained by the City as security for payment of future utility service charges until all utility services are terminated and the account is closed with the outstanding balance on all utility accounts paid in full. The customer’s deposit may be returned to the customer if there have been no late utility payments during the prior 12 months on the customer’s account.

(B) In the event a customer’s deposit has been refunded or waived as herein provided, the Finance Customer Service Supervisor may require a new deposit as a condition of continued service in the event the customer fails to pay the charges required under Chapter 10, 12 or 14, when each bill is due and payable for any three billing periods within the prior 12 month period. The three billing periods need not be consecutive.

(C) No more than one deposit shall be required and retained when multiple services are received on the same account.

(D) Owner Guarantee. A property owner may pay the deposit required for utility services on behalf of a tenant, or the deposit may be waived on behalf of a tenant, if the property owner meets the waiver requirement set forth in subsection (A) of this section, and if, in either situation, the property owner agrees to be financially responsible for the payment of any and all unpaid amounts due for utility services provided to the tenant and the tenant consents to the City’s disclosure of the tenant’s utility account information to the property owner.

(Ord. 08-1101, passed 2-25-2008; Am. Ord. 11-1238, passed 5-9-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-3-1)


14-2-6 WATER RATES.

The Council shall by resolution adopt a rate schedule setting forth the rates to be charged for water services provided by the City. The Council, in establishing rates, shall establish different rates based on whether the service location is within the City limits, outside the City limits but within the incorporated limits of another municipality, or outside the City limits and outside the incorporated limits of another municipality. Service shall be charged at a prorated monthly rate. The City shall commence service charges for a customer when the water meter is installed and/or activated.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-5-1)


14-2-7 ASSESSMENT AND LEVY OF ADDITIONAL TAX.

In addition to all other taxes which may be levied or assessed against customers of the City’s public water system, a tax shall be assessed and levied per 1,000 gallons of water delivered to a customer of the City’s public water system. The Council shall set the amount of this tax by resolution. The tax collected hereunder shall be used to pay the tax levied and assessed by the State of Arizona on the business of operating a municipal water system under the provisions of A.R.S. §§ 42-5301 and 42-5302.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-5-2)


14-2-8 CUSTOMER SERVICE FEES AND PAYMENT.

(A) The customer shall be required to pay monthly service fees and additional fees which include but are not limited to security deposits, account activation fees, field visit fees, after hours fees, non-sufficient funds fees, delinquent account fees, late fees, interest, collection fees or such other fees as authorized by City Code. All such fees shall be established by Council by way of resolution.

(B) Billing, Payment, Delinquency and Discontinuance of Service. All fees and service charges are due and payable when rendered. Payment must be received by the due date identified on the bill. If the total amount of the bill is not paid by the due date, a notice of delinquency and intent to disconnect service will be mailed to the customer indicating the scheduled disconnect date. If the total amount due on the bill is not paid prior to the scheduled disconnect date, the notice of delinquency and intent to disconnect having been given, service will be disconnected.

(C) Payment Plan. The Customer may enter into a payment plan agreement with the Finance Customer Service Supervisor for the payment of any delinquent amount. Failure to comply with the payment plan agreement will result in the imposition of fees and penalties relating back to the original date of the outstanding debt and may result in the imposition of additional fees and costs as provided by the City Code and discontinuance of utility service.

(D) Hearing Provided. A customer that disputes the account balance, or termination of service for nonpayment of amounts due, may submit an appeal in writing to the City Manager within 14 calendar days after the notice has been mailed, or emailed, to the customer’s address on file with the Finance Department. The written request must set forth fully the facts supporting the appeal and the relief requested. A separate appeal must be filed for each dispute. The City Manager shall issue a written decision within 14 working days from the City Manager’s receipt of the appeal. The decision and order of the City Manager on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. The request for hearing shall not waive or stay the collection of any fees or charges that may be due.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 11-1238, passed 5-9-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-5-4)


14-2-9 CONSTRUCTION WATER.

All City water supplied for construction use shall be metered, and from a water source approved by the Director and in compliance with City Code. The amount to be charged shall be set by resolution of Council. The use of water that is not metered is prohibited for construction use.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-5-6)


ARTICLE 14-3 Discontinuance of Service

Section

14-3-1    Discontinuance of water service

14-3-2    Notice of termination of service

14-3-3    Termination under certain conditions


14-3-1 DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE.

(A) All requests for discontinuance of water service must be made in writing by the customer or their authorized agent. When discontinuance of water service is requested, a final meter reading will be obtained and the service will be shut off at the meter on the date requested by the customer or the next business day, whichever is later. All charges for services supplied to the premises shall be calculated and due on the date specified on the bill. The customer requesting discontinuance of service must provide a change of address with their request to discontinue service.

(B) Until the customer provides a written request to terminate to the City, the premises shall be deemed occupied, and services charges will continue to accrue.

(C) In the event that the customer shall have made a deposit and the deposit is still being retained, the deposit amount will be applied to the balance owing on all utility accounts. Any credit remaining on the account after the account has been paid will be mailed to the customer at the address provided in their request to discontinue service.

(D) Any outstanding balances due on the utility account(s) shall be collected as provided by law.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-4-1)


14-3-2 NOTICE OF TERMINATION OF SERVICE.

(A) It is the policy of the City to terminate utility service to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills.

(1) All bills are due and payable on the date set forth on the bill; and

(2) If the total amount of the outstanding bill is not paid by the due date, a service termination notice will be mailed to the customer indicating the scheduled disconnect date, and customer will be assessed an administrative penalty fee set by resolution of Council. If the total amount due is not paid by the due date on the disconnect notice, service will be disconnected for nonpayment and fees may be assessed; and additional fees and charges will be assessed and continue to accrue until the past due balance is paid in full.

(3) A customer that disputes the account balance, meter reading, or termination of service for nonpayment of amounts due, may submit an appeal in writing to the City Manager within 14 calendar days after the notice has been mailed, or emailed, to the customer’s address on file with the Finance Department. The written request must set forth fully the facts supporting the appeal and the relief requested. A separate appeal must be filed for each dispute. The City Manager shall have authority to compromise disputed billings or establish payment arrangements. The City Manager shall issue a written decision within 14 working days from the City Manager’s receipt of the appeal. The decision and order of the City Manager on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. Utility services will not be terminated until after the expiration of the appeal period and/or the decision from the City Manager.

(B) When it becomes necessary for the City to discontinue utility service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after all outstanding utility fees and charges have been paid. Reconnection of service will be completed during the next business day unless the customer requests otherwise. Same day connection will result in the assessment of an additional fee.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-4-3)


14-3-3 TERMINATION UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS.

(A) The City may terminate water service under any of the following conditions:

(1) To prevent fraud or abuse, or unauthorized use of water;

(2) For the violation of this chapter or of any Federal, State, or local laws applicable to water service or environmental issues;

(3) Insufficient supply caused by factors outside the control of the City;

(4) Legal process;

(5) Direction of public authorities;

(6) Local emergency requiring emergency measures, or for emergency repairs;

(7) Tampering with meter by the customer or someone on their behalf;

(8) Nonpayment of any utility charges or deposit(s); or

(9) False information provided in the application or in the application process.

(B) The City will use reasonable efforts to notify customers prior to the termination of services due to emergency circumstances. In the event the City has determined it necessary to discontinue services for reasons listed in subsection (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(7) of this section, the City is authorized to terminate services without prior notice to the customer. Prior to terminating service for reasons listed in subsection (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5), or (A)(8) of this section, the City will give written notice to the customer. All customers will be provided an opportunity for a hearing with the City Manager to address any complaints that may arise with the termination of service. All hearings will be held in accordance with Section 14-2-8(D).

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-4-2)


ARTICLE 14-4 Meters

Section

14-4-1    General provisions

14-4-2    Water service and meter installation fees

14-4-3    Water meter readings

14-4-4    Water meter tests


14-4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.

(A) All water sold by the City shall be metered by water meters which shall be owned and maintained by the City. The City in its sole discretion reserves the right to change water meters used at any location at any time when deemed reasonably appropriate by City.

(B) All water meters to be used within the City’s service area shall be in compliance with the City’s approved materials list(s) and approved by the Director.

(C) All water meters shall be placed on public property, right-of-way or easement adjacent to customer property.

(D) Service line(s) and equipment belonging to the customer shall be arranged to permit the placing of a single water meter for that property and be in compliance with the City Engineering Design Standards. A separate service line is required for each additional water meter. A monthly service charge will be assessed for each meter.

(E) When two or more water meters are installed on the same premises for different customers, they shall be closely grouped and each water meter shall have a separate service line.

(F) Water meters shall not be placed in driveways or roadways and shall be unobstructed so as to allow for access for maintenance and repair by the City.

(G) The property owner shall be responsible for ensuring that a three-foot radius around the water meter box, water main valve, water meter reading structure/device, water appurtenances and fire hydrants remains free of any obstructions, including but not limited to, trees, shrubs, plants, or other obstructions. Failure to comply with this provision may result in the City removing and/or clearing the obstruction(s) at the sole expense of the property owner.

(H) City employees, its representatives and agents shall have the right to enter the customer’s property to access all City infrastructure and appurtenances located on the customer’s property.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-6-1)


14-4-2 WATER SERVICE AND METER INSTALLATION FEES.

(A) Fees for water service, water meters and water meter installations shall be established by resolution of Council and installations shall be made in accordance with the following considerations.

(1) City of Goodyear will supply, deliver, and install water meters under three inches in size. City will schedule and complete water meter installations only after receipt of payment of all fees by the customer. The customer/contractor will install all lines to and from the water meter, including the meter box.

(2) For three inch water meters and larger, the City will supply and deliver the water meters, and the customer will be responsible for installation of the water meters in accordance with City Engineering Design Standards. All installation will be inspected by the City.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-6-2)


14-4-3 WATER METER READINGS.

(A) Failure to Operate. If a water meter fails to operate and a reading cannot be taken, a bill may be issued by the City in an amount based on the average consumption rates for that customer or based upon average consumption rates for that location. An average will be established based on the customer’s usage during the prior three years for the corresponding time period or, if unavailable, based on the City class average for the corresponding time period.

(B) Failure to Register. If a water meter fails to register correctly, or if the City is unable to take readings for a cycle due to inclement weather or other conditions not attributable to the customer, a bill will be issued by the City as stated in subsection (A) of this section. To the extent the actual charges differ from the estimate, the next bill will reflect the increase due or the credit amount.

(C) Inaccessible Reading. If a water meter is otherwise made inaccessible for a manual reading by the customer or property owner, a bill will be issued by the City for an amount that is twice the average consumption rates for that customer or that location.

(D) Any authorized person seeking verification of water meter reading may request and have the City perform a special reading of a water meter upon the payment of a fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the Council. If the special reading indicates that the regular water meter reading was incorrect, then the fee shall be returned to the customer.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-6-3)


14-4-4 WATER METER TESTS.

Each customer may request in writing a water meter test for the water meter supplying water to their premises. A testing fee, set by resolution of Council, shall be paid by the customer prior to testing. If the water meter proves to be faster than the acceptable limits set forth by the American Water Works Association (AWWA), a credit will be applied to the customer’s utility account for the billing cycle preceding the City’s receipt of the written request to test the water meter. If the water meter proves to be within, or slower than the acceptable limits set forth by AWWA, the water meter testing fee will be retained as revenue for the Environmental Services Division.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-6-4)


ARTICLE 14-5 Customer Responsibilities

Section

14-5-1    Customer water facilities

14-5-2    Customer negligence

14-5-3    Right-of-way

14-5-4    Installation of lines

14-5-5    Violations; penalties

14-5-6    Water use restrictions

14-5-7    Waste of water prohibition

14-5-8    Inspections

14-5-9    Connections for fire prevention systems


14-5-1 CUSTOMER WATER FACILITIES.

(A) The customer shall have complete responsibility for the installation, inspection and maintenance of the water lines and all associated attachments used to convey and distribute water to the customer beyond the point of the water meter service connection on the outlet side of the water meter. The City shall not in any way be responsible for the installation, maintenance, inspection or damage of water facilities or damage caused by any defect in the customer’s water meter or associated water loss.

(B) When no water meter has been installed, the service connection point is the outlet side of the inline water valve from the public potable water system at its point of delivery to the customer’s water facility. Non-metered lines are only available for fire lines, unless otherwise provided by City Code and/or Engineering Design Standards.

(C) All water facilities shall be maintained by the customer in full compliance with any and all rules and regulations of the City in addition to applicable State statutes.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 11-1238, passed 5-9-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-7-1)


14-5-2 CUSTOMER NEGLIGENCE.

(A) It is unlawful to recklessly cause damage to the public water system.

(B) Any person causing damage to the public water system or injury to City employees, directly or indirectly, shall be responsible for the payment of the cost of any repairs, replacements or damages which may be billed to the responsible party and/or added to the customer’s utility bill, and if such charges are not paid, utility services may be discontinued and the outstanding amount due sent to collections and a lien filed against the property, if applicable.

(C) Upon payment of costs for repair and the reconnection fee, water services will be reinstated within three business days of receipt of payment.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-7-2)


14-5-3 RIGHT-OF-WAY.

The land owner shall provide the City easements and rights-of-way as is necessary to provide water service. All gated or private communities must provide 24 hour access for emergency or City service vehicles.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-7-3)


14-5-4 INSTALLATION OF LINES.

All property owners shall install and maintain the water services lines and piping on their property in a manner which shall prevent cross-connections or backflow. Failure to comply with this provision will preclude the property from being connected to the City water system or immediate disconnection from the water system.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-7-4)


14-5-5 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.

(A) It is unlawful to use or take water from, or misuse any component of a public or private water system located in the City, or to do any of the following:

(1) Directly or indirectly connecting to any part of the public water system without the express written consent from the City Manager.

(2) Failing to strictly adhere to the terms, conditions, limitations, and restrictions contained in the written consent issued by the City Manager granting water use.

(3) Negligently or knowingly tampering with, removing or otherwise not using a water meter as required by this chapter.

(4) Negligently or knowingly breaking or removing a seal on a water meter; or damaging or removing a water meter; or replacing water meter; or perform accuracy tests on a water meter, without prior authorization from the City.

(5) Negligently or knowingly modifying a water meter so as to cause an inaccurate consumption rate or water meter reading.

(6) Negligently or knowingly diverting another’s water supply without that customer’s permission.

(7) Negligently or knowingly introducing a contaminant or hazardous substance into the water system.

(8) Violating the mandatory provisions of a stage 4 (water emergency) curtailment.

(9) Using water that is not metered, whether potable, effluent or otherwise; this subsection does not apply to fire lines approved by the City and used only for fire suppression or testing of the fire suppression system.

(10) Violating any provisions of this chapter.

(B) Any person who solicits or commands another to engage in the conduct causing a violation of this section, or who aids, counsels, agrees to aid or attempts to aid another in planning or engaging in the conduct causing a violation of this section shall be guilty of the offense of the unauthorized use of water.

(C) Any violation of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor as contemplated by Section 1-8-1, and is subject to the application of that provision.

(D) Each day that the unauthorized connection or use is made will be considered a separate violation for the purposes of this section.

(E) Any persons convicted of the offense of the unauthorized use of water may be disconnected from the City’s water system or refused water services.

(F) Upon a conviction, the court shall require the convicted person to make restitution to the City or water utility that is the victim of this crime, in the full amount of the economic loss as determined by the Goodyear Municipal Court and in the manner as determined by the Goodyear City Court pursuant to A.R.S. Chapter 8 of Title 13.

(Ord. 08-1142, passed 10-20-2008; Am. Ord. 08-1152, passed 12-15-2008; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-7-6)


14-5-6 WATER USE RESTRICTIONS.

(A) Conservation and Curtailment Plan. The City Manager shall establish a conservation and curtailment plan containing measures to reduce demand at various stages of water shortages. The City Manager may update these measures from time to time.

(B) Implementation. The City Manager is authorized to declare a water shortage and authorize implementation of the conservation and curtailment plan water restrictions ("curtailment") subject to other applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations, in response to events including but not limited to: natural disaster; disruption of supply lines or the disruption of the operation of any water facilities; contamination of water resources; reductions in water resources from Central Arizona Water Conservation District; or when an insufficient supply is imminent due to water system limitations, excessive demand, or structural failure and as determined by the City Manager. Such a declaration may designate the entire area served by the City, or a portion of the service area if the shortage is not system-wide.

(C) Declaration of Stages. The City Manager shall direct the Environmental Services Division to implement water use restrictions in stages, depending on the severity of the water shortage as determined by the following criteria:

(1) Stage 1 (water watch) may be declared when the seven-day average daily demand reaches or exceeds 90% of total production capacity or the City Manager reasonably determines that this limit will be reached within the next seven days.

(2) Stage 2 (water alert) may be declared when the seven-day average daily demand reaches 95% of total production capacity or the City Manager reasonably determines that this limit will be reached within the next seven days, or stage 1 has been in effect for at least 14 days.

(3) Stage 3 (water warning) may be declared when the seven-day average daily demand exceeds total production capacity or the City Manager reasonably determines that this limit will be reached within the next seven days, or stage 2 has been in effect for at least 14 days.

(4) Stage 4 (water emergency) may be declared by the City Manager when a severe disruption of distribution capability, storage, or supply occurs in a portion or all of the City’s water service area. The City Manager will report specific restrictions that may be tailored to the location, anticipated duration, and severity of the emergency to Mayor and Council at their next regular meeting.

(D) Notification.

(1) A copy of the conservation and curtailment plan shall be available for inspection at the City Clerk’s Office and the Environmental Services Division administrative office during normal business hours and on the City website.

(2) The City will provide extensive public education on provisions of the conservation and curtailment plan to assure that customers who may be impacted by any future shortages will understand the curtailment provisions and the need for compliance in reducing demand. The City will intensify educational efforts should average daily demand approach the threshold for stage 1 and upon declaration of any stage.

(3) Notice of the declaration of a curtailment shall be given by publication on the City website, press releases to area media, and other appropriate media. The most recent available water supply and demand will be posted on the City website.

(4) The notice shall describe all mandatory restrictions on water use in accordance with the conservation and curtailment plan.

(E) Termination. The City Manager may terminate curtailment when the Director or the City Manager advises that the conditions that triggered the water shortage no longer exist.

(F) Penalties. During stage 1, 2, or 3, violations of mandatory restrictions shall be treated as waste of water violations as provided in this chapter. During stage 4 (water emergency), violations of mandatory restrictions shall be treated as unauthorized use of water as provided in this chapter.

(G) Enforcement. The City Manager shall have authority to take necessary and proper actions to enforce any mandatory elements that are part of the conservation and curtailment plan.

(Ord. 08-1152, passed 12-15-2008; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-7-7)


14-5-7 WASTE OF WATER PROHIBITION.

(A) Waste of Water. For the purposes of this section, WASTE OF WATER shall mean to use, consume or expend water at such a rate that it overflows the basin or object into which it flows, including the landscaped areas of any premises, or sprays from a permanently installed irrigation system with a broken head or emitter, or sprays more than 10% of the total spray from a misdirected emitter, onto the surrounding basin or object, onto public property or into the rights-of-way including gutters, storm drains, ditches or other drainage conveyances. All persons and customers shall prevent waste of water and keep all water outlets closed when not in use. All water outlets, including those used in conjunction with hydrants, urinals, water closets, bathtubs and other fixtures shall not be left running while unattended. The washing of motor vehicles, automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats and other types of mobile equipment shall be done only with a hand held hose equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle that completely shuts off the flow of water, even if left unattended.

(B) Exceptions. WASTE OF WATER shall not include:

(1) Flow resulting from fire fighting or routine inspections of fire hydrants or from fire training activities.

(2) Water applied to abate spills of flammable or otherwise hazardous materials.

(3) Water applied to prevent or abate health, safety, or accident hazards when alternative methods are not available.

(4) Water that reaches or flows onto adjacent property, public rights-of-way or easements, including private easements when caused by vandalism, wind, rain, emergencies, electrical outages, natural disasters or acts of terrorism.

(5) Flows resulting from a routine inspection or maintenance of the following:

(a) The City’s water utility system;

(b) A private water utility system;

(c) An irrigation district; or

(d) A Homeowners Association.

(6) Water used by the City, a private water utility or an irrigation district in installation, maintenance, repair or replacement of public facilities and structures including, but not limited to, traffic control devices, storm and sanitary sewer structures, and road and street improvements.

(7) Water used by the City, a private utility, or their respective contractors and/or subcontractors for saw cutting of pavement, dust control, compaction or other uses identified under the terms of applicable contracts.

(8) Storm water run-off.

(9) Flows resulting from system failures or malfunctions of the City, a private water utility or an irrigation district’s water or wastewater system.

(10) The uses of water which are necessary to protect public health and safety for essential government services such as police, fire, public works and other similar emergencies.

(C) Violations.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or negligently:

(a) Operate and maintain any irrigation structure, delivery ditch, waste ditch, or any irrigation structure in which said person has a vested right or interest to accept flood irrigation water, so as to permit or cause the escape or flow of flood irrigation water in such quantity as to cause waste of water;

(b) Cause the waste of water such that the overflow or spray:

1. Causes damage to public property or public rights-of-way;

2. Interferes with pedestrian or automobile traffic;

3. Ponds over a cumulative surface area greater than 150 square feet; or

4. Discharges with a depth greater than one-quarter of an inch into a gutter, storm drain, ditch or other drainage conveyance.

(c) Violate the mandatory water use restrictions of a stage 1 (water watch), 2 (water alert) or 3 (water warning curtailment).

(2) It shall be unlawful for any residential, commercial or industrial facility or operation that is within the City’s jurisdiction, or is served flood irrigation waters by an irrigation district, to cause or permit to occur, any waste of water.

(D) Enforcement. The City is authorized to make inspections in the normal course of business or when the City has reason to believe that a violation of this section has been or is being committed, or the City may respond to a complaint of a possible violation. A written notice and/or civil citation may be issued for a violation of this ordinance by the Code Compliance Manager, a Code Compliance Officer, the Director, the Water Conservation Specialist, Prosecutor, or the City Attorney or the City Manager. Service of the written notice or citation may be accomplished and will be deemed proper and complete if a copy thereof is personally served upon the owner, occupant, lessee, agent, or manager of the property; any person of a responsible age present on the property; or is posted in a conspicuous place on or about the property affected by such notice. The authorized issuance official may order, at the discretion of the City Manager, or his or her designee, the installation of flow restriction or reduction devices, or discontinuation of water service if the violator has a previous citation.

(1) Written Notice. A written notice shall contain at a minimum:

(a) The date and location of the alleged violation;

(b) A reference to the City Code provision or ordinance violated;

(c) Recommendations as to how the waste of water can be abated and the time frame within which the waste of water must be abated. The time provided to cease waste of water may range from a requirement of immediate compliance to 30 days, at the discretion of the authorized enforcement official, depending upon the facts and the circumstances of the case;

(d) A warning that civil action may be initiated unless the waste of water ceases within the time frame required for corrective action;

(e) The name, address, telephone number and email address of the authorized enforcement official who issued the written notice;

(f) Any previous citation against the person or property in question; and

(g) The procedure for compliance with the written notice including a re-inspection by the issuing official.

(2) The time period for compliance may be extended if the official issuing the written notice determines that the owner, occupant, lessee, agent, or manager of the property or any person of a responsible age present on the property is making reasonable progress towards compliance. All extensions must be in writing. If, upon re-inspection of the site of the violation by the issuing official, the official is satisfied that the activity previously found to be in violation of this section has been abated, the waste of water case will be closed and no further action will be required of the recipient of the written notice.

(3) Civil Citation. After receipt of a written notice, any person who remains in violation of any provision of this section after the time provided to cease waste of water may also be subject to a civil citation. The civil citation shall be issued and processed in accordance with Article 18-1 of this Code.

(4) Nothing in the section prohibits the City from issuing criminal citations for violations of any provision in this chapter in accordance with Article 1-8.

(Ord. 07-1079, passed 8-27-2007; Am. Ord. 08-1142, passed 10-20-2008; Am. Ord. 08-1152, passed 12-15-2008; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-7-8) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


14-5-8 INSPECTIONS.

Whenever the Director deems reasonably necessary, the City may inspect the premises and buildings of any water consumer or customer for the purpose of examining the condition of all pipes, motors, meters and water fixtures or the manner and method in which the water is used.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-7-9)


14-5-9 CONNECTIONS FOR FIRE PREVENTION SYSTEMS.

(A) Any person desiring to install a separate fire prevention service line, building standpipe, Fire Department Connection (FDC) and/or sprinkler system, where such service line or systems will not be connected to or supplied through a water meter, shall file an application with the City’s Department for a fire line tap and standby fire flow service. Fees for this service shall be established by Council by way of resolution. All fire prevention systems shall be installed in accordance with Federal, State and local law, City Standards and the Fire Code. This subsection does not apply to a single-family residential home connected to a water meter.

(B) All fire suppression systems, including sprinkler systems, connected to a water meter shall install a backflow prevention assembly in a location determined to be appropriate by the City.

(C) A double check-valve backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure principle assembly shall be installed on the first prevention service line ahead of the first point of water use based on the degree of hazard as assessed by the City.

(D) A detector check-valve assembly and bypass meter is required, to be installed on all fire prevention service lines, buildings standpipe(s), fire department connection or sprinkler systems, which are not connected to a water meter. The detector check-valve assembly shall allow for the installation of a bypass meter. The bypass meter shall be furnished by the City, and a charge assessed to the applicant. All other materials and equipment shall be furnished and installed by the applicant. The detector check-valve assembly and bypass meter shall be properly protected in a manner acceptable to the City. Should the bypass meter show consumption without a fire having occurred and without prior notice to the Director, a charge assessed for water use at the highest rate for potable water and other costs as established by Council will be invoked during the month when such water use is indicated, and the domestic water service line shall be shut off unless such charge is paid, except in matters of an emergency nature.

(E) Every outlet valve on a sprinkler system shall be sealed, excluding Inspector Test Valves. Seals may be removed for authorized purposes only, such as testing of the system. The owner or tenant may test the fire prevention apparatus at any time by notifying the City Fire Department, Finance Department and Environmental Services Division that such a test is desired. A mutually agreeable time shall be set for the test to be made. All outlet valves shall be sealed immediately after completion of any test, excluding Inspector Test Valves. A charge shall be established and imposed in case any sealed valve is opened without prior notification to the City Fire Department, Finance Department and Environmental Services Division and the domestic water line shall be turned off and remain off until such charge is paid.

(F) In no case shall any tap be made upon any pipe or tank used for fire purposes, nor shall the use of any water be permitted through any fire service, nor through any pipes, tank or fixtures for any purpose other than the extinguishing of fire on the premises.

(G) The premises upon which any such fire protection service is installed shall be open to the inspection of any authorized City representative at all times and the owner or tenant shall give such representative all reasonable facilities for making the inspection and any information he may require.

(H) An inside City and outside City charge shall be established by Council for standby fire prevention service provided by the City.

(Ord. 08-1101, passed 2-25-2008; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-7-11)


ARTICLE 14-6 Main Extensions

Section

14-6-1    Minimum standards

14-6-2    Costs

14-6-3    Inspection

14-6-4    Replacement or repair


14-6-1 MINIMUM STANDARDS.

The standards as set forth by the American Water Works Association ("AWWA") and the City’s Engineering Design Standards shall be adopted as the minimum performance standards.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 2-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-8-1)


14-6-2 COSTS.

(A) The developer or property owner causing an extension of water mains shall pay in full for the rights-of-way, the construction and installation of the lines, pipes and mains and all other appurtenances necessary for the extension.

(B) Any necessary increase in size of the water main extension pipe as determined by the City Engineer or Director, pursuant to City of Goodyear design and construction standards, and its proportionate cost may be paid by the City in accordance with City procedures unless such increase in size results solely from the exclusive use of any subdivision or tract development.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 2-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-8-2)


14-6-3 INSPECTION.

Any water main extension that has been conveyed to the City free and clear of any and all encumbrances and has passed inspection by the City Engineer for compliance with AWWA standards and the City’s Design Guidelines may be submitted for the City’s approval. The City, if satisfied that the extension is in the public interest and suitable and compatible with the existing system may accept and approve the extension and authorize the use thereof.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 2-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-8-3)


14-6-4 REPLACEMENT OR REPAIR.

All persons who create, cause to be built or build any extensions of any public or private water system shall also pay for any and all replacements of street surfacing, sidewalk, curbing and the like as become necessary as a direct or indirect result of the creation, building or construction of such extensions.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 2-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-8-4)


ARTICLE 14-7 Liability

Section

14-7-1    Interruption of water service

14-7-2    Liability limited


14-7-1 INTERRUPTION OF WATER SERVICE.

The City shall use reasonable efforts to notify the customer in advance of any anticipated interruption of water service when such advance notice is required by this chapter. The City shall not be responsible for any interruption of water service caused by forces beyond its control.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-9-1)


14-7-2 LIABILITY LIMITED.

No liability shall attach to the City for any injury or damages that may result from turning on or shutting off the water, or the failure to turn on or shut off the water by a date certain, in any main, service connection or pipe or the restriction of use or discontinuance of any water service or any failure of the water supply, regardless of any notice or lack of notice thereof. The City shall not be held liable, in any respect, for the condition, defects, failure or use of any pipe, connection, fixture or appurtenance not belonging to the City on any premises or for loss or damage resulting therefrom.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-9-2)


ARTICLE 14-8 Sections as Part of Contract

Section

14-8-1    Sections as part of contract


14-8-1 SECTIONS AS PART OF CONTRACT.

All sections contained in this chapter shall be considered a part of the contract of every person taking or using water from the public water system, and every person taking or using water shall be considered as having expressly consented to be bound thereby. All persons outside the City limits who accept water service from the City shall be deemed to have agreed to be bound by and shall comply with all sections of this chapter.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-10-1)


ARTICLE 14-9 Special Agreements

Section

14-9-1    Special agreements


14-9-1 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.

No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any large user of water whereby such user may enter into negotiations with the City for special rates or requirements as are in the best interests of the City.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-11-1)


ARTICLE 14-10 Enforcement

Section

14-10-1    Enforcement, penalties

14-10-2    Liens


14-10-1 ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES

(A) Enforcement Official. Law Enforcement, Code Enforcement, Water Quality Technicians, the Environmental Services Operation Supervisors and the Water Superintendent shall have the authority and responsibility for enforcement and compliance with this chapter.

(B) No oversight or dereliction of duties by any person assigned to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall legalize, allow, or excuse a violation of this chapter.

(C) All violations of this chapter are subject to criminal and civil penalties and enforcement provisions, including abatement, collections, and liens, pursuant to Article 1-8 and Article 18-1.

(D) If a person pleads responsible or is found to be responsible for a civil violation of Section 14-2-1 the court shall impose a civil sanction in accordance with the following guidelines: for a first time offense, the civil sanction shall be in an amount not less than $500 nor more than $750; for a second offense, the civil sanction shall be in a sum not less than $750 nor more than $1,000, and for a third offense or subsequent offense, the civil sanction shall be in an amount not less than $1,000. Any violation of Section 14-2-1 may be dismissed or the fines may be reduced or suspended when proof is filed and accepted by the court which shows that the property owner or tenant has signed up for utility service with the City and paid, or reached an agreement with the City for a payment plan, for the outstanding balance due on the account.

(E) Each day any violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance incorporated herein, or the failure to perform any act or duty required by this code or ordinance incorporated herein, continues shall constitute a separate offense.

(F) The City may obtain an administrative warrant from the Goodyear Municipal Court authorizing the City to enter the property located in the City at reasonable times to inspect the property to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter or when there is probable cause to believe a condition, object, activity or circumstance exists on the property that justifies the inspection.

(Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014)


14-10-2 LIENS.

(A) In the event a property owner fails to pay any sum due the City under the provisions of this chapter, for which the property owner is responsible, the City may record a lien on the real property to which the service is and/or has been provided for the amount of any unpaid amount due. Any and all unpaid amounts due may result in a lien placed against the property from the date of recording in the office of the County Recorder in Maricopa County, Arizona, until the fees and all costs are paid. The lien is subject and inferior to the lien for general taxes and to all prior recorded mortgages and encumbrances of record. A sale of the property to satisfy a lien assessed pursuant to this section shall be made on a judgment of foreclosure and order of sale in accordance with the rules and procedures applicable thereto. The City shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney’s fees and costs incurred in the foreclosure of any such lien.

(B) The City will provide the property owner with written notice of intent to file the lien at least 30 days prior to the filing thereof, which shall include an advisement of the opportunity for a hearing with the City Manager as provided in Section 14-2-8(D). If the sum due for which the lien is claimed is paid prior to the expiration of the 30 day period, no such lien shall be filed for the amount paid.

(C) Notice of intent to file the lien shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the property owner, at the last known address, or to the address to which the tax bill for the property was last mailed. If the owner does not reside on the property, the notice shall be sent to the last known address. Upon payment of the lien, the City Manager is authorized to release the lien on behalf of the City.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 11-1238, passed 5-9-2011; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-12-1)


ARTICLE 14-11 Backflow Control and Cross-Connection Program

Section

14-11-1    Cross connection: backflow prevention

14-11-2    Installation of and responsibilities for approved backflow prevention assemblies

14-11-3    Testing and inspections

14-11-4    Backflow prevention assembly installation

14-11-5    Fees

14-11-6    Exceptions

14-11-7    Compliance with fire code


14-11-1 CROSS CONNECTION: BACKFLOW PREVENTION.

(A) Cross-connection shall be prevented and eliminated from plumbing systems, wherever found, and adequate back flow prevention devices shall be used to prevent contamination of the water supply.

(B) No person shall do any of the following:

(1) Allow cross-connection to the public water system;

(2) Fail to install an approved backflow prevention assembly as required by City Code, guidelines and standards;

(3) Fail to properly use, maintain, test and certify a backflow prevention assembly; or

(4) Alter, remove, or bypass a backflow prevention assembly.

(C) Violation of this section may result in the disconnection from the City water system and the imposition of all criminal and civil penalties available by law and restitution which would include but is not limited to the costs and fees associated with flushing the line(s), laboratory testing and bringing the public water system back in compliance with all Federal, State and county law and guidelines.

(Ord. 08-1101, passed 2-25-2008; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-13-2)


14-11-2 INSTALLATION OF AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES.

(A) All existing, new or replacement service connections to a public water system shall be fitted with backflow prevention assemblies, hereinafter referred to as assemblies. Assemblies shall be installed and continuously maintained at the customer’s expense to prevent the entry of any substance whatsoever into the public water system, whether by backpressure (overpressure) on the customer side of the meter or by back-siphonage (vacuum) on the public side. These assemblies shall be maintained, tested and certified as provided in this chapter.

(B) Maintenance, testing and certification of assemblies or other devices on the customer’s side of the meter box, be it for containment (water system protection), or for isolation (irrigation systems, fire systems, water softeners, and the like) is the responsibility of the property owner and/or the person occupying or using the property. Presence of an assembly in a service connection shall not modify or reduce any other requirement of the Plumbing Code adopted by the City and Arizona Administrative Code.

(C) Temporary or construction service connections shall meet the same backflow prevention requirements as permanent connections.

(Ord. 08-1101, passed 2-25-2008; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-13-3)


14-11-3 TESTING AND INSPECTIONS.

All connections to a public water system and assemblies which are required by applicable Federal, State, county, local or other regulation to be tested annually shall be the responsibility of the property owner and/or the person occupying or using the property each calendar year. In instances where such connections or assemblies could pose hazard to the public water system, shall be subject to more frequent treating at the sole discretion of the Environmental Services Division.

(A) The testing required under this section shall be carried out by a person who is currently certified as a general tester by the American Backflow Prevention Association.

(B) The inspections required under this section shall be conducted to determine whether cross-connection or other sanitary hazards or violations of this article or other provisions of this chapter exist. Such Inspections shall be conducted by the City.

(C) In the case where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it will be impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant inspection, the public water system shall be protected by an air-gap or reduced pressure principle assembly approved by the Environmental Services Division.

(D) In the case where, because of the complexity of the piping system serving the premises, it will be difficult or impractical to make a complete inspection or to ascertain whether any cross-connections exist which affect the public water system, an air-gap or reduced pressure principle assembly shall be used.

(E) The City shall maintain records on the certification status of commercial assemblies and shall immediately notify the customer or responsible party in writing if an assembly is due for a recertification test.

(F) If the inspection or testing reveals the assembly or the method of backflow protection to be defective or in unsatisfactory operating condition or otherwise in a non-permitted condition under this chapter, the tester/inspector shall notify the customer or responsible party and the Environmental Services Division in writing. Any necessary repairs, including replacement or overhaul of the assembly, which will return the assembly to satisfactory operating condition shall be performed by the customer or responsible party within 10 days, at the customer’s expense. After completion of repairs, the property owner shall have the assembly retested and provide the test and repair results to the Environmental Services Division within a reasonable time period, not to exceed 10 days.

(1) It shall be the duty of the person doing the repair, replacement or overhaul to notify the Environmental Services Division verbally or in writing that said work is completed. Such notification shall be given not less than 24 hours before the work is to be inspected and shall be given only if there is reason to believe that all work shall comply with current University of Southern California Standards as referenced in the Manual of Cross-Connection Control.

(2) The customer shall maintain records, on forms approved by the Environmental Services Division, of the results of all tests, services, repairs, overhauls or replacements of assemblies or permitted methods of backflow prevention. Within 10 days of test completion, a copy of the test results, tester certification and verification that the tester’s instrument was properly calibrated shall be provided to and kept on file by the Environmental Services Division after completion of the activity for which the record was made until destruction thereof can be made in connection with the City’s policy on record retention.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-13-4)


14-11-4 BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY INSTALLATION.

(A) A backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on the customer side and adjacent to the meter. Where construction or equipment location presents siting problems for the assembly, a location variance may be granted by the City through its Environmental Services Division, provided such request is made in writing and approval is granted prior to the installation of the assembly; in all cases the assembly must be installed before the first branch line leading off the service line. The type of assembly required regardless of the degree of hazard shall be an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, unless otherwise provided in City guidelines.

(1) Contamination. In the case of any premises where any condition, device, practice or material may create an actual or potential introduction of water or substance which would be hazardous to the public health into a public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection to the premises.

(2) Plumbing. In the case of any premises where there are conditions as defined in this chapter, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap method or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection.

(3) Auxiliary Water Supply. In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply, whether or not directly connected with a municipal water distribution system, the municipal water distribution system shall be protected by an approved air-gap method or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.

(B) Assemblies and methods shall be installed by the consumer, at the consumer’s expense.

(1) Installation permits for the installation of all assemblies or standard details required by the City shall be obtained from the Engineering Department prior to installation. A separate permit shall be obtained for each assembly or methods to be installed, including replacement.

(2) It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by the permit to notify the Engineering Department in writing that work is ready for inspection. Such notification shall be given not less than 24 hours before the work is to be inspected and shall be given only if there is reason to believe that the work done will meet current Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California University Standards, as referred to in the Manual of Cross-Connection Control.

(C) The City shall maintain a list of backflow prevention assemblies by type and manufacturer. The list shall be available to any customer required to install a backflow prevention assembly, together with instructions for proper installation.

(Ord. 08-1101, passed 2-25-2008; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-13-5)


14-11-5 FEES.

In order to defray the City’s costs in establishing, supervising and implementing the policies, inspections and the terms and conditions contained in this article, a monthly fee shall be charged to each customer connected into a public water system. All fees pursuant to this section shall be established by resolution of Council.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-13-6)


14-11-6 EXCEPTIONS.

No bypassing of required assemblies or methods of backflow prevention shall be allowed under any circumstances excepting fire emergency.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-13-7)


14-11-7 COMPLIANCE WITH FIRE CODE.

The Goodyear Municipal Code, the City of Goodyear’s Fire Code, Federal, State and local law may contain requirements that must be met in addition to the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 06-1012, passed 6-26-2006; Am. Ord. 14-1299, passed 8-18-2014. Formerly 14-1-3)


CHAPTER 15: Subdivision Regulations

Article

15-1.    GENERAL PROVISIONS

15-2.    PLATTING PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS

15-3.    SUBDIVISION DESIGN PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS

15-4.    STREET AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS

15-5.    MODIFICATIONS

15-6.    PROHIBITION AGAINST CIRCUMVENTION

15-7.    VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES

15-8.    SPECIAL AGREEMENTS

15-9.    MINOR LAND DIVISIONS


ARTICLE 15-1 General Provisions

Section

15-1-1    Purpose and intent

15-1-2    Definitions

15-1-3    Conditions of Approval

15-1-4    General Requirements Applicable to Division of Land


15-1-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.

(A) The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the City of Goodyear; to insure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions and public facilities; to achieve individual property lots of reasonable utility and livability; to secure adequate provisions for water supply, drainage, sanitary sewerage and other health requirements; to insure consideration for adequate sites for schools, recreation areas and other public facilities; to promote the conveyance of land by accurate legal description; and to provide logical procedures for the achievement of this purpose.

(B) In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter are intended to provide a common ground of understanding and equitable working relationship between public and private interests to the end that both independent and mutual objectives can be achieved in the subdivision of land.

(Prior Code, § 15-1-1)


15-1-2 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS MANUAL. The City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as adopted and amended from time to time by the City Council.

ALLEY. A public or private way not more than 25 feet wide, which affords only secondary vehicular access to adjacent properties otherwise abutting upon a street.

APPROVED LENDING INSTITUTION. Any title insurance company, title insurance agent, bank, savings and loan association or mortgage lending company currently approved by the Federal Housing Administration to act as a mortgagee qualified to transact business in the State of Arizona and having a business office within the valley area and any other lending institution approved by the City Attorney.

BLOCK. A piece or parcel of land or a group of lots entirely surrounded by public streets, streams, railroads or parks or a combination thereof.

BOARD. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Goodyear.

CLASSIFICATION PLAN, STREET. A plan which provides for the development of a system of major streets and highways, including the location, width and alignment of existing and proposed thoroughfares as adopted as the Roadway Functional Classification Plan in the City of Goodyear General Plan.

COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. Director of Development Services or his/her designee.

CONDITIONAL APPROVAL. An affirmative action by the Board or the Council indicating that approval will be forthcoming upon satisfaction of certain specified stipulations.

CONDOMINIUM. The improvement of land with one or more separate buildings with one or more floors in accordance with City standards, in which an undivided interest in common, in all or a portion of the land, is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any unit of airspace thereon. A CONDOMINIUM may include an undivided interest in common in a portion of the building or buildings; a separate interest in a building or portion of a building with a separate interest in a portion of the land, together with an undivided interest in common in a portion of the land.

COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Goodyear.

DEPARTMENT. The Director of the Development Services Department or designee.

DEVELOPMENT. The utilization of land for public or private purposes.

DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. An agreement between the City and the current or former owner or authorized agent of the owner related to the development of the property being platted.

DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN (DMP). A preliminary master plan for the development of a large or complicated land area, the platting of which is expected in progressive stages. A DEVELOPMENT MASTER PLAN may be designed by the subdivider or by the Department and shall be subject to Board and Council approval.

EASEMENT. A grant by the owner of the use of land by the public, a corporation or persons for specific uses and purposes and so designated.

ENGINEERING PLANS. Plans, profiles, cross sections and other required details for the construction of public improvements, prepared by a registered civil engineer in accordance with the approved Preliminary Plat and in compliance with standards of design and construction approved by the Council.

ENGINEERING STANDARDS. The City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual as adopted and amended from time to time by the City Council.

EXCEPTION. Any parcel of land which is within the boundaries of the subdivision which is not owned by the subdivider, to be designated on the Final Plat as not a part of this subdivision.

FINAL APPROVAL. Approval of the Final Plat by the Council as evidenced by certification on the plat by the City Engineer and signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk, which constitutes authorization to record a plat.

FLOOD PREVENTION REGULATIONS. Chapter 16 of the Goodyear City Code as adopted and amended from time to time by the City Council.

GENERAL PLAN. A comprehensive plan, or parts thereof, providing for the future growth and improvement of the City and for the general location and coordination of streets and highways, schools and recreation areas, public building sites and other physical development. (Sometimes referred to as the MASTER PLAN.)

GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM (GIS). A data base system incorporating spatial (map) data and tabular data.

IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS. A set of regulations setting forth the details, specifications and instructions to be followed in the planning, design and construction of certain required improvements to property formulated by the City Engineer, concerned state and county departments and other City departments.

IMPROVEMENTS. Installations that are required pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations; the Zoning Ordinance; the Engineering Standards; Flood Prevention Regulations; applicable Zoning Conditions; applicable Development Agreements; applicable Development Master Plans; and/or any other applicable federal, state and/or local law, ordinance, code, rule, regulation, policy and/or guideline, including, but not limited to, grading, drainage, water, wastewater, reclaimed water, irrigation, streets, alleys, street lights, underground utilities, traffic control devices, landscaping, dry utilities, circuits and conduits.

IRRIGATION FACILITIES. Canals, laterals, ditches, conduits, gates, pumps and allied equipment necessary for the supply, delivery and drainage of irrigation water and the construction, operation and maintenance of such.

LAND SPLIT. The division of improved or unimproved land whose area is two and one half acres or less into two or three tracts or parcels of land or lots for the purpose of sale, lease or financing. See MINOR LAND DIVISION definition.

LOT. A parcel of land within a single block, which, by reason of ownership, recording or use, is separate and distinct from other such parcels and which has frontage on a public street or an approved private access way.

(1) CORNER LOT. A lot at the junction of two or more intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does not exceed 135 degrees. A lot abutting a curved street shall be deemed a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lines with street lines intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. A corner lot shall be considered to be in that block in which the lot fronts.

(2) CORNER LOT, REVERSED. A corner lot, the side line of which is substantially a continuation of the front property line of the first lot to its rear.

(3) INTERIOR LOT. A lot having but one side abutting on a street.

(4) KEY LOT. An interior lot, one side of which is contiguous to the rear line of a corner lot.

(5) THROUGH LOT. A lot abutting two parallel or approximately parallel streets.

LOT AREA. The area, in square feet, lying within the lines of the lot, not including any part of any abutting public or private street or alley, and not including any part of certain easements on lots with less than 24,000 square feet of area.

LOT DEPTH.

(1) If the front and rear lines are parallel, the shortest distance between such lines.

(2) If the front and rear lines are not parallel, the distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line.

(3) If the lot is triangular, the shortest distance between the front lot line and a line parallel to the front lot line, not less than 10 feet long, lying wholly within the lot.

LOT LINE.

(1) FRONT. The front property line of a lot as follows:

(a) CORNER LOT. The front property line of a corner lot shall be the shorter of the two lines adjacent to the streets as platted, subdivided or laid out. Where the lines are equal, the front line shall be that line which is obviously the front by reason of the prevailing custom of the other buildings in the block. If such front is not evident, then either may be considered the front of the lot, but not both;

(b) INTERIOR LOT. The front property line of an interior lot shall be the line bounding the street frontage;

(c) THROUGH LOT. The front property line of a through lot shall be that line which is obviously the front by reason of the prevailing custom of the other buildings in the block. Where such front property line is not obviously evident, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the front property line. Such a lot over 200 feet deep shall be considered, for the purposes of this chapter, as two lots, each with its own frontage.

(2) REAR. The rear property line of a lot that is opposite to the front property line. Where the side property lines of a lot meet in a point, the rear property line shall be assumed to be a line not less than 10 feet long, lying within the lot and parallel to the front property line. In the event that the front property line is a curved line, then the rear property line shall be assumed to be a line not less than 10 feet long, lying within the lot and parallel to a line tangent to the front property line at its midpoint.

(3) SIDE. The side property lines of a lot which connect the front and rear property lines of a lot.

LOT SPLIT. See MINOR LAND DIVISION definition.

LOT WIDTH. The width of a lot measured as follows:

(1) If the side property lines are parallel, the shortest distance between these side lines;

(2) If the side property lines are not parallel, the length of a line at right angles to the axis of the lot at a distance equal to the front setback required for the zoning district in which the lot is located. The axis of a lot shall be a line joining the midpoints of the front and rear property lines.

MAP OF DEDICATION. A map used to separate land being dedicated to a public entity.

MINOR LAND DIVISION. Any division of improved or unimproved land or lands for the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, for which a subdivision plat is not required. A land split, lot split, lot line adjustment, and a map of dedication shall be considered MINOR LAND DIVISIONS.

NEIGHBORHOOD PLAN. A plan designed to guide the platting of remaining vacant parcels in a partially built up neighborhood so as to make reasonable use of all land, correlate street patterns, provide adequate drainage and achieve the best possible land use relationships.

OPEN SPACE LANDS or OPEN AREA. Any space of area characterized by great natural scenic beauty or whose existing openness, natural condition or present state of use, if retained, would maintain or enhance the conservation of natural or scenic resources or the production of food and fiber.

OWNER. The person or persons holding title by deed to land or holding title as vendees under land contract or holding any other title of record.

PEDESTRIAN WAY. A public walk dedicated entirely through a block from street to street or providing access to a school, park, recreation area or shopping center.

PLANNING DIRECTOR. Director of Development Services or his/her designee.

PLAT. A map of a subdivision.

(1) PRE PRELIMINARY or CONCEPTUAL PLAT means a design submitted for review and comments at a presubmittal conference, not to be considered a Preliminary Plat submittal. Designed to show: public streets or private access ways; methods of handling drainage; locations of buildings for condominium developments.

(2) PRELIMINARY PLAT means a preliminary map, including supporting data, indicating a proposed subdivision development. A preliminary site plan for a condominium development shall be considered a Preliminary Plat.

(3) FINAL PLAT means a map of all or part of a subdivision that substantially conforms to an approved Preliminary Plat that is prepared by a registered civil engineer or a registered land surveyor.

(4) RECORDED PLAT means a Final Plat bearing all of the certificates of approval required by this chapter and the statutes of the State of Arizona and duly recorded in the Maricopa County Recorder’s office.

PRELIMINARY APPROVAL. Approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council, which constitutes authorization to proceed with final engineering plans and reports and with Final Plat preparation.

PRIVATE ACCESS WAY. Any private street or private way of access to one or more lots or airspaces which is owned and maintained by an individual or group of individuals and has been improved in accordance with City standards and plans approved by the City Engineer. A PRIVATE ACCESS WAY is intended to apply where its use is logically consistent with a desire for neighborhood identification and control of access and where special design concepts may be involved, such as within planned area developments, mobile home developments, sub lot developments, hillside areas and condominiums.

RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any public or private access way required for ingress or egress and includes any area required for public use pursuant to any general or specific plan as provided for in this chapter; RIGHT-OF-WAY may consist of fee title dedications or easements.

SECRETARY OF THE BOARD. The Chair of the Planning and Zoning Commission or designee.

STREET. Any existing or proposed street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, place, viaduct, easement for access or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; a street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official action; or a street or way in a plat duly filed and recorded in the County Recorder’s office. A STREET includes the land between the right of way lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas, bridges, viaducts and lawns.

(1) FREEWAY OR EXPRESSWAY. A street providing for the expeditious movement of large volumes of through traffic between areas or across, around or through the City or urban area or a divided arterial highway with full control of access and not intended to provide direct access to abutting land. In urban areas both will normally be a portion of a system or network of freeways.

(2) ARTERIAL. A street providing for traffic movement between areas and across portions of the City, direct service to principal generators and connections to the freeway or expressway system and secondarily for direct access to abutting land. They are subject to necessary regulation and control of parking, directional controls, turning movements, entrances, exits and curb use. Arterials are often divided roadways and will have some control of access. The individual arterial streets combine to make a system for City-wide traffic movement. Arterial streets are divided into two types – major and minor.

(3) COLLECTOR. A street providing direct service to residential areas from arterial streets and highways, for traffic movement within neighborhoods of the City and for direct access to abutting property. It collects local traffic from the neighborhoods and delivers the same to the nearest arterial or highway.

(4) FRONTAGE ROAD. A collector street located within a freeway or expressway right-of-way and parallel to the freeway or expressway traffic lanes.

(5) LOCAL. A street providing for direct access to residential, commercial, industrial or other abutting land for local traffic movements and connecting to collector or major streets.

(6) MARGINAL ACCESS ROAD. A local street, located within the arterial or highway right-of-way, parallel and adjacent to major traffic lanes, providing direct access to abutting property, intercepting local streets and controlling access to arterials.

(7) CUL-DE-SAC. A short local street having one end permanently terminated in a vehicular turnaround or an equally convenient form of turning and backing areas as may be recommended by the City Engineer.

(8) PARKWAY. A street providing for traffic movement between areas and across portions of the City, direct service to principal generators and connections to the freeway or expressway system and secondarily for direct access to abutting land. They are subject to necessary regulation and control of parking, directional controls, turning movements, entrances, exits and curb use, and typically are divided roadways with large medians that can accommodate indirect left turns.

SUBDIVIDER. The individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, syndication, trust or other legal entity that files the application and initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and statutes of the State of Arizona. An individual who is serving as agent of a legal entity that files the application and initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land is not a subdivider. Subdivider shall be the Owner or an agent of the Owner authorized to pursue the subdivision of the Owner’s property on behalf of the Owner.

SUBDIVISION. Improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into four or more lots, tracts or parcels of land, or, if a new street is involved, any such property which is divided into two or more lots, tracts or parcels of land, or, any such property, the boundaries of which have been fixed by a recorded plat, which is divided into more than two parts. SUBDIVISION also includes any condominium, cooperative, community apartment, townhouse or similar project containing four or more parcels in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon, but plats of such projects need not show the buildings or the manner in which the buildings or airspace above the property shown on the plat are to be divided. Subdivision does not include the following:

(1) The sale or exchange of parcels of land to or between adjoining property owners if such sale or exchange does not create additional lots;

(2) The partitioning of land in accordance with other statutes regulating the partitioning of land held in common ownership;

(3) The leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within a building or trailer park, nor to mineral, oil or gas leases;

(4) Land splits;

(5) Minor land divisions.

SUBDIVISION DESIGN. Street alignment, grades and widths, alignment and widths of easements and right of way for drainage, sanitary sewers and public utilities, the arrangement and orientation of lots and locations of buildings, together with refuse collection and maintenance easements in condominium developments.

SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS. Chapter 15 of the Goodyear City Code as adopted and amended from time to time by the City Council.

USABLE LOT AREA. That portion of a lot usable for or adaptable to the normal uses made of residential property, excluding any areas which may be covered by water, excessively steep or included in certain types of easements.

UTILITY. Installations or facilities, underground or overhead, furnished for the use of the public, electricity, gas, steam, communications, water, television, cable, sewage disposal, water or sewer treatment, effluent treatment or disposal, owned or operated by any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board, duly authorized by state or municipal regulations. UTILITIES as used herein may also refer to such persons, firms, corporations, departments or boards as applicable herein. Installations or facilities includes, but is not limited to, treatment facilities, transportation pipelines, distribution centers and storage facilities.

ZONING CONDITIONS. Conditions and/or stipulations imposed by the City Council as a condition of approval of a zoning amendment.

ZONING ORDINANCE. The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Goodyear as adopted and amended from time to time by the City Council.

(Prior Code, § 15-1-2) (Am. Ord. 94-493, passed 4-12-1994; Am. Ord. 06-1024, passed 9-11-2006; Am. Ord. 12-1272, passed 12-10-2012)


15-1-3 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.

(A) Imposition of Conditions. The decision making body may impose conditions on any approval as deemed necessary to implement the requirements of any federal, state, and/or local law, ordinance, code, rule, regulation, policy and/or guideline; to protect the public from potential adverse impacts from the proposed development; or to fulfill an identified need for public services.

(B) Time Limits on Conditions. Conditions shall be fulfilled within the time limitations set forth or within a reasonable time if no time limitations are specified. The failure to fulfill a condition within said time may result in the initiation or revocation of the approval, citation and/or such other enforcement action as the City deems appropriate.

(C) Failure to Fulfill Conditions. The decision making body may withhold a requested approval if it determines that previous conditions or requirements from a previous approval for the subject property have not been fulfilled, and withholding the permit would encourage compliance or is necessary to protect the public from future noncompliance.

(Ord. 12-1272, passed 12-10-2012)


15-1-4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO DIVISION OF LAND.

The division of land, whether by subdivision plat, minor land division, and/or lot split, shall comply with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Goodyear; any Zoning Conditions attached to the property being divided; the goals and objectives of the City’s adopted General Plan; the Engineering Standards; requirements set forth in the City of Goodyear Code of Ordinances; and all other applicable Federal, State, and/or local laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, policies and/or guidelines.

(Ord. 12-1272, passed 12-10-2012)


ARTICLE 15-2  Platting Procedures and Requirements

Section

15-2-1    Outline of procedures

15-2-2    Stage I - Pre-application conference

15-2-3    Stage II - Preliminary Plat

15-2-4    (Reserved)

15-2-5    Stage III - Final Plat

15-2-6    (Reserved)


15-2-1 OUTLINE OF PROCEDURES.

The preparation, submittal, review and approval of all subdivision plats located inside the limits of the city shall proceed through the following progressive stages:

(A) Stage I - Pre-application conference;

(B) Stage II - Preliminary Plat;

(C) Stage III - Final Plat.

(Prior Code, § 15-2-1)


15-2-2 STAGE I - PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.

(A) Actions by the subdivider. The subdivider shall meet informally with the Department to present a general outline of his or her proposal, including, but not limited to:

(1) Sketch plans and ideas regarding land use, street and lot arrangements, tentative lot sizes;

(2) Tentative proposals regarding water supply, sewage disposal, surface drainage and street improvements.

(B) Actions by the Department. The Department shall discuss the proposal with the subdivider and advise him or her of procedural steps, design and improvement standards and general plat requirements. Then, depending upon the scope of the proposed development, the Department shall proceed with the following investigations:

(1) Check existing zoning of the tract;

(2) Determine the adequacy of existing or proposed schools, parks and other public spaces;

(3) Inspect the site or otherwise determine its relationship to major streets, utility systems and adjacent land uses and to determine any unusual problems such as topography, utilities, flooding and the like;

(4) Determine the need for preparation and review of a Development Master Plan prior to subsequent consideration of a Preliminary Plat and advise the subdivider if a Development Master Plan is required and to what extent it shall be prepared by the developer and by the Department.

(C) Filing fee. Fees to help offset costs of reviewing development plan reports for water, sewer, drainage, retention, transportation facilities, open space, landscaping and other development plans shall be paid by the subdivider, at the time of filing such plan, in such amount as established by resolution adopted from time to time by the Mayor and Council.

(D) Development Master Plan. The Department shall use the following guidelines in establishing the need for a Development Master Plan: whether the tract is sufficiently large to comprise an entire neighborhood; and whether the tract initially proposed for platting is only a portion of a larger land area, the development of which is complicated by unusual topographic, utility, land use, land ownership or other conditions. The entire land area need not in this case be under the subdivider’s control.

(1) Preparation. The DMP shall be prepared to scale and accuracy, commensurate with its purpose, and shall include:

(a) General street pattern with particular attention to collector streets and future circulation throughout the neighborhood;

(b) General location and size of school sites, parks or other public areas;

(c) Location of shopping centers, multi family residential or other proposed land uses;

(d) Methods proposed for sewage disposal, water supply and storm drainage;

(e) Location of buildings and circulation for condominium developments on all land owned by the subdivider.

(2) Approval. Upon acceptance of general design approach by the Department, the DMP may be submitted to the Board and Council for their consideration. If general approval is given, notice to that effect shall be recorded in the minutes of both bodies and a copy of said minutes transmitted to the subdivider and his or her engineer. If development is to take place in several parts, the DMP shall be submitted as supporting data for each part and shall be kept up to date by the subdivider and the Department as modifications take place.

(Prior Code, § 15-2-2) (Am. Ord. 89-829, passed 9-12-1989; Am. Ord. 94-493, passed 4-12-1994)


15-2-3 STAGE II - PRELIMINARY PLAT.

The preliminary plat stage of land and airspace subdivision includes detailed subdivision planning, submittal, review and approval of the preliminary plat. The preliminary plat will be processed and reviewed in accordance with the procedures generally described herein and more particularly described in the Administrative Process Manual and Engineering Standards.

(A) Zoning. The subdivision shall be designed to meet the specific requirements for the zoning district in which it is located, and to comply with all zoning conditions and/or stipulations attached to the property.

(1) Concurrent Processing. If a proposed preliminary plat is inconsistent with the requirements for the zoning district in which the property is located and/or any zoning conditions or stipulations attached to the property ("zoning"), the City will concurrently process the application for the proposed preliminary plat and an application to amend the zoning as generally described herein and as further described in the Administrative Process Manual adopted by the City Council as amended from time to time. The Department shall not accept the submission of the preliminary plat until an application to amend the zoning on the property being platted has been submitted by the property owner or an authorized agent of the property owner. If the ordinance amending the zoning on the property has not been enacted or taken effect prior to the expiration of the substantive review time frame adopted for the review of preliminary plat applications, the application shall either be denied prior to the expiration of the substantive review time frame or, at the discretion of City Council, conditionally approved subject to the ordinance amending the zoning on the property being enacted and taking effect. No pre-development activity for a subdivision that occurs while an application for zoning amendment is pending, including, but not limited to, the processing of and/or conditional approval of a preliminary plat, shall be construed as having been undertaken in reliance on a favorable determination of such zoning application.

(B) Additional Requirements. The preliminary plat and the proposed development reflected therein shall comply with the requirements set forth in:

(1) the Subdivision Regulations;

(2) the Engineering Standards;

(3) the Flood Prevention Regulations;

(4) the City of Goodyear General Plan;

(5) the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Goodyear;

(6) any applicable Zoning Conditions;

(7) any applicable Development Agreement;

(8) any applicable Development Master Plan; and

(9) all other applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, policies, and guidelines, including by way of example, but not limitation:

(a) regulations established by the Maricopa County Flood Control District relating to the construction or prevention of construction of streets in lands established as being subject to periodic inundation;

(b) regulations established by the State of Arizona Department of Transportation relating to provisions for safety of entrance upon and departure from abutting state highways;

(c) regulations established by the State of Arizona Department of Health Services and Maricopa County Health Department relating to the provision of domestic water supply and sanitary sewage disposal;

(d) regulations established by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, Arizona Department of Water Resources, and the Maricopa County Department of Environmental Quality governing development in Maricopa County.

(C) Water and Wastewater. As a prerequisite of preliminary plat review by the Department, the subdivider shall have informed the applicable state and county agencies and the City, or other applicable utility provider, of the tentative subdivision plans and learned the general requirements for potable water supply, distribution, and fire protection and for wastewater treatment and transmission for the property being platted. The preliminary plat and development reflected in the preliminary plat shall comply with applicable requirements for potable water supply, distribution, and fire protection; for wastewater treatment and transmission; and for the transport and use of reclaimed water for the property being platted. A statement as to the proposed source of water supplies for the development and proposed wastewater disposal facilities shall be included on the preliminary plat.

(D) Preliminary Plat Submission.

(1) Applications for preliminary plats shall be made on form(s) established by the Department and shall include all of the information identified in the: application form(s), in the section of the Administrative Process Manual related to preliminary plats; in the Subdivision Regulations, and in the Engineering Standards. Except as provided herein, the application shall be signed by the property owner or an authorized agent of the property owner and all applicable fees shall be paid when the application is submitted. The City shall be entitled to initiate an application for a preliminary plat filed for the purpose of reverting to acreage land previously subdivided as needed to revoke a previously approved final plat.

(2) The Department may request additional information, and may, during the administrative completeness review process, modify or waive submission requirements as deemed appropriate to the size or nature of the subdivision.

(3) The formatting, content and information to be provided in and in support of the preliminary plat and the formatting, content and information to be provided in and in support of the preliminary engineering plans and reports that are to be submitted in connection with an application for a preliminary plat shall comply with the requirements set forth in the Subdivision Regulations, the Flood Prevention Regulations, the Engineering Standards, the Administrative Process Manual, and any other applicable federal, state, and/or local law, ordinance, code, rule, regulation, policy, and/or guideline.

(4) Subdivisions containing hillside areas shall provide all applicable information as specified in Section 15-3-9.

(5) Residential subdivisions near existing or proposed freeways shall provide all applicable information as specified in Section 15-4-4(P).

(E) Preliminary Plat Review. The Department shall review the preliminary plat and supporting documentation for compliance with the applicable requirements.

(1) Once the submission has been deemed complete, the Department shall conduct a review of the preliminary plat.

(2) The preliminary plat shall be distributed to other City departments, City staff and outside agencies for review and comment. The Department shall compile the comments and provide them in writing to the subdivider.

(3) The Department’s comments shall identify areas in which the preliminary plat submission, which includes the preliminary plat and all required supporting documentation, requires revision in order to comply with applicable requirements.

(4) The subdivider shall be responsible for revising the preliminary plat submission in accordance with the comments provided by the Department. The response to the Department’s comments shall be in writing and in the manner and format requested by the Department.

(F) Preliminary Plat Approval. The Department will schedule the preliminary plat for consideration for approval generally as follows:

(1) Upon completion of the Department’s review, the preliminary plat will be scheduled for public meetings before by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. The Department will provide a recommendation of approval, approval with conditions, or denial to the Commission and Council.

(2) The Commission shall make a recommendation to the Council. The Commission may vote to forward a recommendation of approval, approval with conditions, or denial to the Council.

(3) The Council shall consider the preliminary plat and the Department and Commission recommendations and may take action to approve, conditionally approve or deny the preliminary plat.

(4) If the preliminary plat is generally acceptable, but requires minor revision before proceeding with the preparation of the final plat, the Council may find conditional approval and the required conditions noted in the minutes of the meeting and in written correspondence provided to the subdivider. At the direction of the Council, the preliminary plat may be given approval subject to the revisions in accordance with the stated conditions and review by the Department.

(5) Council may impose conditions on the approval of the preliminary plat and/or on the approval of any extension of a preliminary plat approval as Council deems necessary to implement the requirements of any federal, state, and/or local law, ordinance, code, rule, regulation, policy and/or guideline; to protect the public from potential adverse impacts from the proposed development; or to fulfill an identified need for public services. The conditions of approval shall be noted in the Council meeting minutes and in a written correspondence provided to the subdivider.

(6) If the Council finds the preliminary plat does not meet the requirements of this chapter or other applicable plans, codes, ordinances or design guidelines, the Council shall take action to deny the preliminary plat. The Department will provide a written notice to the subdivider indicating the reasons for the denial.

(G) Significance of Preliminary Plat Approval. Preliminary plat approval constitutes authorization for the subdivider to proceed with preparation of the final plat and the engineering plans and specifications for public improvements. Preliminary plat approval is subject to the following conditions:

(1) The basic conditions under which approval of the preliminary plat was granted will not be changed prior to the expiration date.

(2) An approved preliminary plat shall expire 12 months from the date of Council approval unless either a final plat has been submitted for all or part of the property included in the preliminary plat or an extension has been obtained, as provided herein, prior to the expiration date.

(3) Prior to the expiration of the preliminary plat, and at subdivider’s request, Council may grant a 12-month extension of preliminary plat approval if the subdivider demonstrates that there has been no significant substantive change in the Engineering Standards, that the approved preliminary plat, including the supporting documents, continue to comply with all applicable requirements; and that the subdivider has expended substantial effort to create a final plat and engineering plans.

(4) Preliminary plat approval does not assure final acceptance of streets for dedication.

(5) Preliminary plat approval does not assure that subdivider will receive a certificate of assured water supply or a written commitment of water service for the proposed subdivision from the City or private water company designated as having an assured water supply as required under Arizona law as a requirement for final plat approval.

(H) Appeals. The decision of the Council to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the preliminary plat shall be final. Persons with standing who are aggrieved by a decision of the Council hereunder may, within thirty (30) days after Council rendered its decision, file a complaint for special action in the superior court of Maricopa County to review the Council’s decision.

(Prior Code, § 15-2-3) (Am. Ord. 94-493, passed 4-12-1994; Am. Ord. 12-1272, passed 12-10-2012)


15-2-4 (RESERVED).

(Prior Code, § 15-2-4) (Am. Ord. 06-1025, passed 9-25-2006; Am. Ord. 12-1272, passed 12-10-2012)


15-2-5 STAGE III - FINAL PLAT.

This stage includes the final design of the subdivision, the engineering of improvements and the submittal of the final plat, reports, and plans by the subdivider for review and action by the Department and City Council. The final plat will be processed in accordance with the procedures generally described herein and more particularly described in the Administrative Process Manual and the Engineering Standards.

(A) Zoning. The zoning of the property to be subdivided shall permit the use intended for the subdivision, and any zoning amendment necessary to allow the intended use shall have been adopted by the Council prior to the filing of the application for final plat. The subdivision shall be designed to meet the specific requirements for the zoning district in which it is located and to comply with all Zoning Conditions attached to the property.

(B) Streets, Rights-of-Way and Easements. All proposed streets, rights-of-way and utility and drainage easements shall be identified on the final plat. A dedication statement for all rights-of-way and easements shall be placed on the final plat in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations and Engineering Standards.

(C) Final Plat. The final plat shall substantially conform to the approved preliminary plat. In addition, the final plat and the proposed development reflected therein shall comply with the requirements for the zoning district in which the property is located and shall comply with the requirements set forth in:

(1) the Subdivision Regulations;

(2) the Engineering Standards;

(3) the Flood Prevention Regulations;

(4) the City of Goodyear General Plan;

(5) the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Goodyear;

(6) any applicable Zoning Conditions;

(7) any stipulations and/or conditions imposed with the approval of the preliminary plat;

(8) any applicable Development Agreement;

(9) any applicable Development Master Plan; and

(10) all other applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, policies, and guidelines, including by way of example, but not limitation:

(a) regulations established by the Maricopa County Flood Control District relating to the construction or prevention of construction of streets in lands established as being subject to periodic inundation as applicable;

(b) regulations established by the State of Arizona Department of Transportation relating to provisions for safety of entrance upon and departure from abutting state highways as applicable;

(c) regulations established by the State of Arizona Department of Health Services and Maricopa County Health Department relating to the provision of domestic water supply and sanitary sewage disposal as applicable;

(d) regulations established by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, Arizona Department of Water Resources, and the Maricopa County Department of Environmental Quality governing development in Maricopa County.

(D) Final Plat Submission.

(1) Applications for final plats shall be made on form(s) established by the Department and shall include all information identified in the: application form(s); in the section of the Administrative Process Manual related to final plats; in the Subdivision Regulations; and in the Engineering Standards. The application shall be signed by the property owner or an authorized agent of the property owner and all applicable fees shall be paid when the application is submitted. The City shall be entitled to initiate an application for a final plat filed for the purpose of reverting to acreage land previously subdivided as needed to revoke a previously approved final plat.

(2) The Department may request additional information, and may, during the administrative completeness review process, modify or waive submission requirements as deemed appropriate to the size or nature of the subdivision.

(3) The required formatting, content and information to be provided on and in support of the final plat, and the formatting, content and information to be provided in and in support of final engineering plans and reports that are to be submitted in connection with an application for a final plat shall comply with the requirements set forth in the Subdivision Regulations, the Flood Prevention Regulations, the Engineering Standards, the Administrative Process Manual, and any other applicable federal, state, and/or local law, ordinance, code, rule, regulation, policy and/or guideline.

(4) Subdivisions containing hillside areas shall provide all applicable information as specified in Section 15-3-9.

(5) Residential subdivisions near existing or proposed freeways shall provide all applicable information as specified in Section 15-4-4(P).

(E) Final Plat Review. The Department shall review the final plat and supporting documentation for compliance with all applicable requirements.

(1) Once the submission has been deemed complete, the Department shall conduct a review of the final plat.

(2) The final plat shall be distributed to other City departments, City staff and outside agencies for review and comment. The Department shall compile the comments and provide them in writing to the subdivider.

(3) The Department’s comments shall identify areas in which the final plat submission, which includes the final plat and all required supporting documentation, requires revision in order to comply with applicable requirements.

(4) The subdivider shall be responsible for revising the final plat submission in accordance with the comments provided by the Department. The response to the Department’s comments shall be in writing and in the manner and format requested by the Department.

(F) Final Plat Approval.

(1) Upon completion of the Department’s review, the final plat will be scheduled for a public meeting before the City Council. The Department will forward a recommendation of approval, approval with conditions or denial to the Council.

(2) The Council shall consider the final plat and the Department’s recommendations and may take action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the final plat.

(3) If the final plat is generally acceptable but requires minor revision before recordation, the Council may approve the final plat subject to conditions. The conditions of approval shall be noted in the Council meeting minutes and in a written correspondence provided to the subdivider.

(4) Council may impose conditions on the approval of the final plat and/or on the approval of any extension of a final plat approval as Council deems necessary to implement the requirements of any federal, state, and/or local law, ordinance, code, rule, regulation, policy and/or guideline; to protect the public from potential adverse impacts from the proposed development; or to fulfill an identified need for public services. The conditions of approval shall be noted in the Council meeting minutes and in a written correspondence provided to the subdivider.

(5) If the Council finds the final plat does not meet the applicable requirements of the City, the Council shall take action to deny the final plat. The Department will provide written notice to the subdivider indicating the reasons for the denial.

(6) The decision of the Council to approve, approve with conditions or deny the final plat shall be final.

(G) Final Plat Expiration. Final plat approval shall be valid for a period of 90 calendar days from the date Council approved the final plat. The final plat shall expire if it is not recorded with the Maricopa County Recorder within 90 calendar days of the date Council approved the final plat unless an extension has been obtained prior to the expiration of the plat as provided below.

(H) Final Plat Recordation.

(1) The subdivider shall be responsible for submitting final plats to the Department for recordation purposes. The format, contents, and information to be included in the final plat and any attachments to be attached to the final plat that is submitted for recordation shall be in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations, the Engineering Standards, the Administrative Process Manual, and any stipulations and/or conditions of approval.

(2) The final plat shall not be recorded until the City Engineer has approved the engineering construction plans for the subdivision improvements and certified that all necessary financial assurances are in place.

(3) Once all applicable approvals and signatures have been obtained, the Department will be responsible for recording the final plat with the Maricopa County Recorder.

(I) Final Plat Extension. Final Plat approval shall expire if the final plat is not recorded with the Maricopa County Recorder within 90 calendar days from the date Council approved the final plat except as provided below.

(1) Prior to the expiration of the final plat approval, subdivider may request an extension of the final plat approval. If a request for extension is filed prior to the expiration of the final plat approval, the final plat approval shall continue in effect until Council acts on the request. Council may grant a 90 day extension of the final plat approval if subdivider demonstrates that there has been no significant substantive change in the Engineering Standards; that the final plat, including the supporting documents, continue to comply with all applicable requirements; and that the subdivider has expended substantial effort and made substantial progress towards the completion of the engineering construction plans for the subdivision improvements.

(2) If the extension is granted, the final plat approval shall be valid for 90 days from the date Council approved the request for an extension, and the final plat approval shall expire if the final plat is not recorded with the Maricopa County Recorder within 90 days from the date the Council approved the request for an extension of the final plat approval. If the request for extension is denied, the final plat shall expire upon the date the Council denied the request for an extension or 90 calendar days from the date Council approved the final plat, whichever is later.

(J) Appeals. The decision of the Council to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a final plat and to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a request to extend a final plat approval shall be final. Persons with standing who are aggrieved by a decision of the Council hereunder may, within 30 days after Council rendered its decision, file a complaint for special action in the superior court of Maricopa County to review the Council’s decision.

(Prior Code, § 15-2-5) (Am. Ord. 94-493, passed 4-12-1994; Am. Ord. 12-1272, passed 12-10-2012)


15-2-6 (RESERVED).

(Prior Code, § 15-2-6) (Am. Ord. 06-1025, passed 9-25-2006; Am. Ord. 12-1272, passed 12-10-2012)


ARTICLE 15-3 Subdivision Design Principles and Standards

Section

15-3-1    In general

15-3-2    Street location and arrangement

15-3-3    Street design

15-3-4    Block design

15-3-5    Lot planning

15-3-6    Condominium developments airspace planning

15-3-7    Easement planning

15-3-8    Street naming

15-3-9    Hillside Development Area


15-3-1 IN GENERAL.

(A) Every subdivision shall conform to the requirements and objectives of the General Plan, or any parts thereof, as adopted by the Board and the Council, to the Zoning Code, to the design guidelines of the City and to other ordinances and regulations of the City and to the Arizona Revised Statutes. All public works infrastructure construction or repair shall be accomplished in accordance with the Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction and the Uniform Standard Details for Public Works Construction as sponsored and distributed by the Maricopa Association of Governments, as amended thereby from time to time, except as modified by the adoption of the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual and Supplemental Standard Details for Public Works Construction. When any portions thereof disagree with the requirements as described in the City code, the City code shall govern.

(B) Land areas within a subdivision shall be reserved for parks, recreational facilities, school sites and other public facilities, including fire stations, open space lands or open areas and flood control facilities, subject to the following conditions:

(1) The requirements may only be made upon Preliminary Plats filed at least 30 days after the adoption of a general or specific plan affecting the land area to be reserved;

(2) The required reservations are in accordance with definite principles and standards adopted by the City Council;

(3) The land area reserved shall be of such a size and shape as to permit the remainder of the land area of the subdivision within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner;

(4) The land area reserved shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period;

(5) The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall have a period of one year after recording the final subdivision plat to enter into an agreement to acquire such reserved land area. The purchase price shall be the fair market value thereof at the time of the filing of the preliminary subdivision plat plus the taxes against such reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest cost incurred on any loan covering such reserved area;

(6) If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not exercise the reservation agreement set forth in this article within such one year period or such extended period as may be mutually agreed upon by such public agency and the subdivider, the reservation of such area shall terminate.

(C) Land which is subject to periodic flooding, land which cannot be properly drained or other land which, in the opinion of the Board, is unsuitable for subdivision use, shall not be subdivided, except that the Board may approve subdivision of such land upon receipt of evidence from the County Health Department or City Engineer that the construction of specific improvements can be expected to render the land suitable; thereafter, construction upon such land shall be prohibited until the specified improvements have been planned and construction guaranteed.

(Prior Code, § 15-3-1) (Am. Ord. 90-319, passed 9-25-1990; Am. Ord. 12-1272, passed 12-10-2012)


15-3-2 STREET LOCATION AND ARRANGEMENT.

(A) Whenever a tract to be subdivided embraces any part of a street designated in an adopted Street Classification Plan, such street shall be platted in conformance therewith.

(B) Street layout shall provide for the continuation of such streets as the Department may designate.

(C) Whenever a tract to be subdivided is located within an area for which a neighborhood plan has been approved by the Board, the street arrangement shall conform substantially to said plan.

(D) Certain proposed streets, as designated by the Department, shall be extended to the tract boundary to provide future connection with adjoining unplatted lands.

(E) Local streets shall be so arranged as to discourage their use by through traffic.

(F) Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the Department may require marginal access roads or reverse frontage with non access easements along the major street or such other treatment as may be justified for protection of residential properties from the nuisance and hazard of high volume traffic and to preserve the traffic function of the major street in other types of developments.

(G) Where a subdivision abuts or contains the right of way of a railroad, drainageway, a limited access highway or an irrigation canal or abuts a commercial or industrial land use, the Department may require the location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right of way at a distance suitable for appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distance shall be determined with due regard for approach grades, drainage, bridges or future grade separations.

(H) Streets shall be so arranged in relation to existing topography as to produce desirable lots of maximum utility and streets of reasonable gradient and to facilitate adequate drainage.

(I) Alleys may be required in residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions where needed to provide access to development due to topography, lot sizes or other circumstances.

(J) Half streets shall be discouraged except where necessary to provide right of way required by the city streets and highways plan, to complete a street pattern already begun or to insure reasonable development of a number of adjoining parcels. Where there exists a platted half street abutting the tract to be subdivided, the remaining half shall usually be platted within the tract.

(Prior Code, § 15-3-2) (Am. Ord. 12-1272, passed 12-10-2012)


15-3-3 STREET DESIGN.

(A) Minimum required right of way widths.

(1) Major streets and highways, as required by current approved city, county or state standards.

(2) Collector streets as indicated by current approved city standards.

(3) Local streets as indicated by current approved city standards; 60 feet full street right of way may be required adjacent to park and school sites.

(a) Cul de sac streets shall terminate in a circular right of way 45 feet in radius with a three foot utility easement around the turnaround. The Department may approve an equally convenient form of turning and backing areas where extreme conditions justify.

(b) Dead end streets will not be approved except in locations designated by the Department as necessary to future extension in development of adjacent lands. In any case, a dead end street extending 200 feet or more shall provide by easement a temporary turning circle with a 40 foot radius or other acceptable design to accomplish adequate access.

(4) Marginal access or frontage streets as required by city standards.

(5) Alleys 16 feet wide, if single family residential on both sides; 20 feet wide, if abutting, multiple family, commercial or industrial districts. Alley intersection and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off 15 feet on each side to permit safe vehicular movement. Dead end alleys shall be prohibited. All half alleys shall have a minimum width of 12 feet.

(6) Private access ways as required by city standards.

(B) Grades.

(1) Maximum. Major streets as determined by the City Engineer.

	(a)	Collector streets:	7%.

	(b)	Local residential streets:	15%; all over 12% have a maximum length of 600 feet.

(2) Minimum. Concrete or asphalt streets with concrete gutters:

	(a)	Desirable 0.40%;	Minimum 0.15%;

	(b)	Concrete or asphalt streets without gutters:	Minimum 0.35%.

(3) Exceptions. Where rigid adherence to these standards causes unreasonable or unwarranted hardship in design or cost without commensurate public benefit, exceptions may be made by the Board upon review and recommendation of the City Engineer.

(C) Vertical curves.

(1) Major streets as determined by the City Engineer.

(2) Collector and local streets: minimum length, 100 feet, except in cases approved by the City Engineer.

(D) Horizontal alignment.

(1) Major streets as determined by the City Engineer.

(2) When tangent centerlines deflect from each other more than ten degrees and less than 90 degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a minimum centerline radius of 500 feet for collector streets or 100 feet for local streets.

(3) Between reverse curves there shall be a tangent section of centerline not less than 100 feet long for a local street, as required by the City Engineer for collector and major streets.

(4) Streets intersecting a major street shall do so at a 90 degree angle; intersections of local streets shall not vary from 90 degrees by more than 15 degrees.

(5) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be prohibited except when approved by the City Engineer. Under special circumstances where local streets intersect major streets, the City Engineer may require minimum centerline offsets of 400 feet.

(6) Local streets intersecting a collector street or major street shall have a tangent section of centerline at least 150 feet in length measured from the right of way line of the major street; except that no such tangent is required when the local street curve has a centerline radius greater than 400 feet with the center located on the major street right of way line. Where topographic conditions make necessary other treatment to secure the best overall design, these standards may be relaxed by the Board upon the recommendation of the City Engineer.

(7) Street intersections with more than four legs and Y type intersections where legs meet at acute angles shall be avoided; provision of T type intersections for local streets shall be encouraged.

(8) At local street intersections, property line corners shall be rounded by circular arc, said arc having a minimum tangent length and/or radius of 12 feet. A 16 foot by 16 foot triangle shall be provided at each corner of the intersection of two major streets; a 14 foot by 11 foot triangle at each corner of the intersection of two collector streets or as approved by the City Engineer.

(9) Collector streets shall intersect the major streets at the midsection corners or as otherwise approved.

(10) Local streets which are primary access to a subdivision shall intersect major streets at the quarter mile corners or as otherwise approved.

(11) Marginal access road openings to major streets, at a local street intersection, shall have a minimum 30 foot wide separation island between the major street traffic lanes and marginal access road, which shall be provided within the major street right of way.

(12) Marginal access roads shall not intersect a major street nor a collector street.

(Prior Code, § 15-3-3)


15-3-4 BLOCK DESIGN.

(A) Maximum length of blocks, measured along the centerline of the street, and between intersecting street centerlines, 1500 feet; except that in development with lot areas averaging one half acre or more or where extreme topographic conditions warrant, this maximum may be exceeded by 500 feet. Blocks shall be as long as reasonably possible under the circumstances within the above maximum in order to achieve depth and possible street economy and to reduce the expense and safety hazard arising from excessive street intersections.

(B) Maximum length of cul de sac streets, 325 feet, measured from the intersection of right of way lines to the extreme depth of the turning circle along the street centerline. Exceptions may be made where topography justifies but shall not be made merely because the tract has restrictive boundary dimensions, wherein provision should be made for extension of street pattern to the adjoining unplatted parcel and a temporary turn around installed.

(C) Pedestrian, bicycle and equestrian ways: a minimum right of way width of ten feet may be required where essential for circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. Pedestrian ways may be used for utility purposes.

(Prior Code, § 15-3-4)


15-3-5 LOT PLANNING.

(A) Lot width, depth and area shall comply with the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance and shall be appropriate for the location and character of development proposed and for the type and extent of street and utility improvements being installed. Where steep topography, unusual soil conditions or drainage problems exist or prevail, the Board may require special lot width, depth and area requirements which exceed the minimum requirements of the particular zoning district.

(B) Where steep topography, unusual soil conditions, drainage problems, abrupt changes in land use or heavy traffic on adjacent streets prevail, the Board may make special lot width, depth and area requirements which exceed the minimum requirements of the particular zoning district.

(C) The depth to width ratio of single family residential lots shall not be greater than three to one.

(D) Minimum front building lines shall conform to the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance.

(E) Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines, except where other treatment may be justified in the opinion of the Department.

(F) Every residential lot shall abut upon a public street or private access way furnishing satisfactory access thereto.

(G) Residential lots extending through the block and having frontage on two parallel streets which are both local streets or one of which is a local street and the other is a collector street shall not be permitted, except when there are commercial or industrial zoning districts on the opposite side of the street and except as permitted in this chapter. Backing of lots to major streets and freeways shall be prohibited except where justified by the Board.

(Prior Code, § 15-3-5)


15-3-6 CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENTS AIRSPACE PLANNING.

(A) The processing of subdivision plats for condominium developments shall follow the procedures set forth in this chapter for the processing of land subdivision plats. All sections of this chapter shall be applicable to condominium subdivisions. A preliminary site plan shall be considered a Preliminary Plat and a final site plan, a Final Plat.

(B) The final condominium subdivision plat shall be certified by a registered architect or engineer that the plat accurately depicts the development as constructed and shall be recorded prior to the sale of the first unit.

(1) Conversions of conventional apartment developments. Preliminary Plats shall show, in addition to all information required by the Department checklist for site plans, the following:

(a) Firewall construction, if required by the Fire Code;

(b) Additional parking, if required;

(c) Additional open space, if required;

(d) Locations of individual utility lines and meters, if needed.

(2) Final Plats shall show:

(a) All buildings;

(b) Private drives and parking areas;

(c) Required easements;

(d) Designation of commonly owned property;

(e) Necessary dedication statement;

(f) Statement concerning the formation of a homeowner’s association for the maintenance of the commonly owned property;

(g) Necessary certifications and approvals.

(3) New developments:

(a) Preliminary Plats shall show all of the information required by the Department site plan checklist;

(b) Final Plats shall show all of the information required in subsection (2) above;

(c) Building permits shall be issued in accordance with Final Plats approved by the Department, prior to recordation of the plat;

(d) Final Plats to be approved by the City Council and recorded after construction has been completed and final inspection made.

(Prior Code, § 15-3-6)


15-3-7 EASEMENT PLANNING.

(A) Easements for utilities shall be provided as follows:

(1) Where alleys are provided: four feet for aerial overhang on each side of alley shall be provided by dedication but need not be delineated on the plat, if utility lines are overhead;

(2) Along side lot lines: six feet on each side of lot lines for distribution facilities and one foot on each side of lot lines for street lighting as may be designated;

(3) Guy and anchor easements: one foot wide on each side of lot line and approximately 35 feet in length measured from the rear lot line as designated, if utility lines are overhead.

(B) For lots facing on curvilinear streets, utility easements or alleys may consist of a series of straight lines with points of deflection not less than 120 feet apart. Points of deflection should always occur at the junction of side and rear lot lines on the side of the exterior angle.

(C) Where a stream or important surface drainage course abuts or crosses the tract, dedication of a public drainage easement of a width sufficient to permit widening, deepening, relocating, protecting or maintaining said watercourse shall be required.

(D) Land within a public street or drain easement or land within a utility easement for major power transmission (tower) lines or pipelines shall not be considered a part of the minimum required lot area except where lots exceed one half acre in area. This shall not be construed as applicable to land involved in utility easements for distribution or service purposes.

(E) Except where alleys are provided, lots arranged to back up to major streets, railroads, canals or commercial or industrial districts, as required in this chapter, shall have a minimum depth of 110 feet, the rear one foot of which shall be recorded as a vehicular non-access easement.

(Prior Code, § 15-3-7) (Am. Ord. 12-1272, passed 12-10-2012)


15-3-8 STREET NAMING.

(A) The Department shall propose the street names at the Preliminary Plat stage, and the names shall be approved by the Board and Council.

(B) Street assignment will follow the Maricopa Association of Governments (MAG) Address and Street Assignment Policy. The present major streets (Van Buren, McDowell, Roosevelt, Litchfield, Yuma, Dysart) will remain as named.

(C) The City of Goodyear Local Street Name and Address System shall be used in the following area:

(1) All land within the present city limits east of Litchfield Road, south of Van Buren and north of MC 85, except non-residentially zoned or developed property fronting on or addressed as fronting on Litchfield Road, La Mar Boulevard and Van Buren Street, and all land within the present city limits east of Central Avenue, south of Interstate 10, north of Van Buren and west of Dysart Road, except non-residentially zoned or developed property fronting on or addressed as fronting on Van Buren Street and Dysart Road.

(2) For the City of Goodyear Local Street Name and Address System, the north and south dividing line (zero block) shall be Western Avenue. The east and west dividing line (zero block) shall be Litchfield Road.

(D) All street names within those areas described in subsection (C) of this section will continue with the present city name. All street addresses outside the area described in subsection (C) of this section will carry the county address and numbering system with La Canada Boulevard being the dividing line between the north and south (zero block).

(E) New street signs will indicate the hundred block and direction for easy identification.

(F) Street name changes can only be approved by action of the City Council.

(Prior Code, § 15-3-8) (Am. Ord. 95-538, passed 10-10-1995; Am. Ord. 97-579, passed 7-8-1997; Am. Ord. 05-962, passed 9-26-2005; Am Ord. 12-1272, passed 12-10-2012)


15-3-9 HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT AREA.

Because of the unique and peculiar problems inherent in the development of hillside areas, special standards and conditions for hillside development areas must be considered. The provisions of this article shall be applicable to the division of all land in a hillside development area whether or not the parcels are 36 acres or more in area.

(A) Subdivisions.

(1) Special preliminary plat requirements.

(a) A topographic map of existing terrain with contour intervals adequate to show the nature and variations in the terrain; two foot intervals for grades less than 15%; five foot intervals for grades greater than 15%; elevations of critical spots, rock outcrops and special characteristics.

(b) Where necessary to determine that lots will be usable, the Department may recommend and the Board may require plan for each lot, in conformance with the grading and drainage regulations required by the city, showing the natural topography of the total parcel to be platted, the location and size of all structures, the finished grade at all improvement locations and the depth and extent of all cuts and fills.

(c) A report of a proper soil investigation by a licensed geologist or engineer to determine any geological hazard and soil bearing quality.

(d) The location of existing and proposed conservation easements.

(2) Special final plat requirements.

(a) A final grading plan which conforms to the requirements of the grading and drainage regulations in this chapter and required by the city.



(b) A detailed topographic map at larger scale and closer contour interval or suitable cross sections or profiles of area where streets, driveways, buildings, utility or grading construction is proposed.

(c) Road profiles and cross sections at all significant changes in the cross slopes; the cross section to show proposed and natural grade at the centerline of the road, edge of roadway, the right of way line and the proposed building setback lines.

(d) Locations of all building sites and proposed driveways.

(3) Special design standards.

(a) Street and private access way grades shall conform as closely as possible to natural topography, but shall not exceed 15%.

(b) Street grades exceeding 12% shall have a maximum length of 600 feet.

(c) Upon approval of the City Engineer, horizontal alignments may provide curves with less than 100 feet centerline radius.

(d) Upon the recommendation of the City Engineer and approval of the Board, alternate methods of turning and backing areas may be substituted for turnarounds.

(e) Upon approval of the City Engineer, required paving width of the traffic lanes may be modified when off street parking bays are provided, developed and paved in the public right of way.

(f) The centerline of the paving may be offset from the centerline of the right of way to provide parking bays in the right of way.

(g) Where bridle trails are approved, sidewalks may be replaced by the trails on the upgrade side of the right of way.

(h) Vertical curbs shall be required on the downhill side of streets having grades of 6% or greater; concrete U or V gutters may be installed in lieu of conventional rolled or vertical curbs elsewhere.

(i) On a corner lot, no grading shall be allowed which results in the ground level being raised so as to obstruct the vision more than a height of three feet above the grade of either street within an area formed by the lot lines on the street sides of such lot and a line joining points on such lot lines located a distance of 33 feet from the point of their intersection.

(j) Transverse street cross sections with the gutter on the uphill side may be used where approved by the City Engineer.

(k) All cut and fill slopes shall be within the roadway right of way or roadway easement; slope maintenance easements for roadway cuts and fills may be required by the City Engineer.

(l) All excavated material shall be removed from lots and roadways or contained behind retaining walls or otherwise placed so that the slopes of any fill material will not be visible from any public street.

(m) Panhandle, double frontage and other unorthodox lots, including lots which have a width to depth ratio greater than one to three, shall be permitted if it can be adequately demonstrated that their design will eliminate excessive cuts and will not adversely affect any other lot so arranged.

(n) Private access ways may be permitted to provide access to lots in lieu of the required street frontage. Each private access way serving one lot shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide with a minimum paved surface of 12 feet in width, and each private access way serving more than one lot shall have a minimum paved surface of 24 feet in width or as may be otherwise required by city standards and specifications. Where needed, additional easements for drainage or utilities shall be provided.

(o) Maximum driveway grades shall be 20%.

(p) Building sites shall be free of geological hazards.

(B) Grading standards for lots, parcels and P.A.D. sites.

(1) Not more than 5% of a lot, parcel or P.A.D. site shall be left with a cross slope steeper than the natural grade of the ground or steeper than 20%, whichever is greater.

(2) All driveway and garage cuts shall be made at the time of street grading and before street improvements are installed.

(3) The total area of all cuts and fills other than the enclosed floor area of the dwelling shall not exceed 10% of the lot, parcel or P.A.D. site area.

(4) Cut or fill slopes shall be entirely contained within the downhill lot.

(5) All excavated material shall be removed from the premises, contained behind retaining walls or otherwise placed so that the slopes of any fill material will not be visible from any public street.

(C) Utilities. All utilities shall be installed underground in the streets or private access ways. Water and public sewer service shall be provided to each lot.

(Prior Code, § 15-3-9)


ARTICLE 15-4 Street and Utility Improvement Requirements

Section

15-4-1    Purpose

15-4-2    Engineering plans

15-4-3    Construction and inspection

15-4-4    Required improvements subdivisions

15-4-5    Submittal, review and approval of engineering plans

15-4-6    Schedule of improvement requirements

15-4-7    Fees


15-4-1 PURPOSE.

(A) It is the purpose of this article to establish in outline the minimum acceptable standards for improvement of streets and utilities, to define the responsibility of the subdivider in the planning, constructing and financing of improvements and to establish procedures for review and approval of engineering plans.

(B) All improvements in streets, alleys or easements which are required as a condition to plat approval shall be the responsibility of the subdivider.

(Prior Code, § 15-4-1)


15-4-2 ENGINEERING PLANS.

(A) It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to have prepared by a registered civil engineer, registered in the State of Arizona, a complete set of engineering plans for construction of water and public sanitary sewer facilities and all other required improvements. Such plans shall be based on the approved Preliminary Plat and be prepared in conjunction with the Final Plat.

(B) Final construction plans for all improvements shall be approved and signed by the City Engineer prior to recordation of the Final Plat.

(Prior Code, § 15-4-2)


15-4-3 CONSTRUCTION AND INSPECTION.

(A) All relocation, tiling and reconstruction of irrigation facilities shall be done to standards of the owning utility and City Engineer.

(B) All improvements in the public right of way shall be constructed under the inspection and approval of the city department having jurisdiction. All construction in public rights of way and private access ways shall require a city permit. Construction shall not be commenced until a permit has been issued for such construction, and if work has been discontinued for any reason, it shall not be recontinued until after notifying the Department having jurisdiction.

(C) The locations of all utilities to be installed in public rights of way or in private access ways shall be approved by the City Engineer.

(D) All underground utilities to be installed in streets, private access ways and alleys shall be constructed under city permit prior to the surfacing of such street, private access way or alley. Service stubs to platted lots within the subdivision for underground utilities shall be placed to such length as not to necessitate disturbance of street improvements when service connections are made: underground utilities shall be extended to the boundaries of the plat to provide service connections to abutting unsubdivided land.

(Prior Code, § 15-4-3)


15-4-4 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS SUBDIVISIONS.

(A) Streets, private access ways and alleys. All streets, private access ways and alleys within the boundary lines of the subdivision shall be improved to cross sections, grades and standards approved by the City Engineer. Alleys used for primary vehicular access shall be paved. Where there are existing streets adjacent to the subdivision, subdivision streets shall be improved to the intercepting paving line of such existing streets or to a matching line determined by the City Engineer. Transition paving shall be installed as required by the City Engineer. When a subdivision includes a major street which is not paved or where there is no paved street between the subdivision and a paved major or collector street, an interim two lane street at least 24 feet wide shall be constructed to a standard approved by the City Engineer on the major street, collector or local street right of way to the nearest paved major or collector street; when a marginal access road is required, strip paving shall be installed for the major street traffic lanes. Dead end streets extending 200 feet or more and dead end marginal access roads shall be provided a graded and surfaced temporary 40 foot radius turning circle; alleys shall be graded and surfaced to paved streets.

(B) Curbs. Where streets are to be paved, a concrete curb, curb and gutter or valley gutter as designated by the City Engineer shall be installed in accordance with approved city standards. When density of development is low or where for other reasons, such as to provide or maintain a rural atmosphere, the installation of curb and gutter is not considered necessary, the Council may waive this requirement for one or both sides of local streets. Vertical curbs shall be installed on the major street side of a marginal access road, along collector streets and along school or park property.

(C) Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks shall normally be required on both sides of streets and shall be constructed to a width, line and grade approved by the City Engineer in accordance with approved city standards. Where density of development is low, or where for other reasons the installation of sidewalks is not considered necessary, the Council may waive the requirement for one or both sides of local streets.

(D) Crosswalks. Concrete walks through blocks shall be constructed to a width, line and grade approved by the City Engineer.

(E) Street name signs. Signs shall be placed at all street intersections and be in place by the time the street pavement is ready for use. Specifications for design, construction, location and installation shall be by the Department.

(F) Storm drainage. Proper and adequate provision shall be made for disposal of storm water. This shall apply equally to grading of private properties, private access ways and to public streets. Existing major watercourses shall be maintained and dedicated as drainage ways. The type, extent, location and capacity of drainage facilities for a subdivision shall be as required by the City Engineer from the survey and storm runoff calculations made by the subdivider’s engineer. All retention basins, channels and like facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer and in accordance with post-construction sediment and erosion control measure requirements set forth in the city’s AZPDES permit. Water generated on the property by a 100-year frequency storm shall be retained on the site or disposed of as required by the City Engineer. Stormwater management facilities and practices (structural and non-structural control measures, respectively) shall be designed to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. Stormwater management facilities shall have an enforceable operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions as designed. This agreement will include any and all maintenance easements required to access and inspect the stormwater management facilities, and to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facility. In addition, a binding covenant specifying the parties responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be secured prior to approval of final subdivision plat and issuance of any permits for land disturbance activities. The use of non-structural stormwater practices is encouraged in order to minimize the reliance on structural practices.

(G) Sanitary sewage disposal. Sewage disposal facilities shall be installed to serve each lot and be subject to the following standards and approvals:

(1) Public sanitary sewer lines shall be installed in all new subdivisions in accordance with plans, profiles and specifications approved by the County Health Department and the city departments having jurisdiction of water sewers;

(2) In areas where public sanitary sewers are not reasonably accessible, the owning agency, with the approval of the County Health Department, may agree to operate a temporary disposal unit or pumping station. The subdivider shall construct these temporary facilities along with the sewer lines in the subdivision. They shall be designed for connection with a future public sewer system.

(H) Water supply. Each lot shall be supplied with safe, pure and potable water in sufficient volume and pressure for domestic use and fire protection, including fire hydrants, and other types of installations required by the Fire Code in water lines which are designed to the standards of the Water and Sewers Department and the Fire Department.

(I) Irrigation facilities. All irrigation facilities requiring 72 inch diameter pipe or less which are to remain within the boundaries of the tract or in an abutting one half street or alley right of way shall be tiled in accordance with standards of the owning agency and relocated as may be directed by the City Engineer and the owning agency. Where street improvements require relocation of control gates or other structures, such relocation and reconstruction shall conform to the requirements of the City Engineer and the owning agency. In rural developments this requirement may be waived by the City Engineer.

(J) Monuments. Permanent monuments shall be installed in accordance with current city standards at all corners, angle points and point of curves, at all street intersections and at all corners, angle points and points of curve of all conservation easements. After all improvements have been installed, a registered land surveyor or civil engineer shall check the location of monuments and certify their accuracy.

(K) Lot corners. Iron pipes shall be set at all corners, angle points and points of curve for each lot within the subdivision prior to the recording of the plat.

(L) Utilities.

(1) New electric, communication and T.V. lines, including, but not limited to, electric, communication and T.V. lines shall be installed underground. When overhead utility lines exist within the property being platted, said existing overhead utility lines and the new installations within the platted area shall be placed underground; when overhead utility lines exist on the periphery of the property being platted, the existing overhead utility lines and any additions or replacements needed to increase capacity or improve service reliability may remain overhead; provided, however, that any service drops into the platted area from said peripheral overhead lines shall be underground. When overhead utility lines exist on the periphery of the property of five acres or less being platted, then the utility lines within the platted area may be overhead. When, as a result of the subdivision development, it is necessary to relocate, renew or expand existing facilities within the platted area, the subdivider shall make the necessary arrangements with the serving utility for these installations to be placed underground. The subdivider shall arrange with the serving utility for, and be responsible for, the cost of underground service lines to approved street light locations.

(2) The subdivider shall be responsible for the requirements of this subsection and shall make the necessary arrangements with each of the serving utility companies involved for the installation of the underground facilities. Letters from each of the serving utility companies indicating that said arrangements have been made shall be submitted to the City Engineer at the time the final subdivision plat is submitted for approval. When, due to subsurface soil conditions or other special conditions, it is determined by the City Engineer that it is impractical to construct facilities underground, installations shall be overhead. Those electric lines of greater than 3,000 KVA (Kilovolt amperes) capacity as rated by the American Standard Association are excluded from the requirements of this subsection.

(M) Street lights. In subdivisions where all other utilities are installed underground, underground electrical service required for street lighting shall be installed to those street light locations approved by the City Engineer.

(N) Walls on landscape and vehicular non access easements. Continuous undulating or offset decorative masonry walls shall be installed on landscape and vehicular non access easements along major streets when lots back up to a major street in accordance with the design requirements and approval of the City Engineer.

(O) Landscaping. All landscaping, along with appropriate watering systems, within public rights of way or landscape easements, shall be in accordance with plans approved by the City Engineer.

(P) Freeway development standards. The purpose of this section is to provide the appropriate and necessary off site and on site improvements to protect and enhance the livability of properties near the Papago Freeway (Interstate 10) and the Loop 303 Freeway within the city. These Freeway corridors will have a significant impact on the surrounding land uses. Noise and traffic generated by these Freeways will impact residential land uses and other noise sensitive uses that may be constructed adjacent to the Freeway corridors. It is the intent of the city to ensure that future freeway noise impacts are mitigated by establishing noise attenuation requirements applicable to future development of residential subdivisions.

(1) All residential development located within 500 feet of the Papago and Loop 303 Freeway alignments shall comply with the provisions of this section.

(2) A sound attenuation plan will be required of all residential subdivisions within 500 feet of the future Papago and Loop 303 Freeway right of way boundaries prior to approval of a preliminary plat. Any subdivision completely or partially located within 500 feet of the exterior edge of the planned right of way boundary on each side of the Papago and Loop 303 Freeway alignments shall comply with the provisions of this section. Abatement measures are generally required only with respect to structures designed for human occupancy within the specified distance from the freeway right of way boundaries.

(a) The sound attenuation plan shall include a noise analysis of the subdivision that details the projected freeway noise levels based upon the most current projected traffic volumes available from the Maricopa Association of Governments. The time period for the projected traffic volumes and traffic characteristics shall be a minimum of 15 years from the date of the submittal of the sound attenuation plan, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, or his or her designee. In the event that the design and development of the projected freeway is not at a stage for which a noise analysis is reasonably feasible, then no such noise analysis shall be required, but the sound attenuation plan shall obligate the property owner to construct or otherwise provide for a sound barrier wall of a minimum of eight feet in height or an acceptable equivalent and install landscape treatments, subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator or his or her designee.

(b) The sound attenuation plan shall include the proposed attenuation measures needed to reasonably predict that the projected exterior noise levels on the subdivision at ground level shall not exceed the (Leq) 64 dBA noise level. For the purposes of this section, the noise measurement method used by the Arizona Department of Transportation (ADOT) and the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) will be used. In addition to any proposed attenuation measures, a sound attenuation plan may also identify who, in place of the property owner, may be responsible for the specific measures, the timing for installing the specific attenuation measures and describe or provide for proposed alternative means of compliance as to any specific attenuation measures as may be approved by the City Engineer or his or her designee.

(c) The sound attenuation plan shall include a certification by a qualified transportation noise analyst as to the projected exterior noise levels on the site and that the sound attenuation measures will meet the (Leq) 64 dBA noise level.

(d) The sound attenuation plan shall also include measures needed to reasonably predict that the projected interior noise levels for each dwelling unit shall achieve a maximum interior noise level of (Leq) 45 decibels. In order to comply with this maximum noise level, a minimum of R18 exterior wall assembly, a minimum of R30 roof/ceiling assembly, dual glazed windows and solid wood and foam filled fiberglass or metal doors to the exterior shall be required of new dwelling units. As an alternative, a certification by an architect or engineer to achieve a maximum interior noise level of (Leq) 45 decibels at the time of final construction may be submitted. The sound attenuation standards of this section shall not apply to accessory buildings used on a property with the primary building.

(3) Sound attenuation improvements shall include all reasonable and feasible measures necessary to meet the required standard, including the construction of freeway walls and earthen berms. If there are special characteristics within a freeway corridor, such as the topography of the area, drainage, maintenance requirements or safety considerations, as determined by the City Engineer or his or her designee, then the construction of a noise barrier of greater than 20 feet in height should be avoided. Reasonable and feasible measures may include, without limitation, achieving a noise reduction of at least 5 dBA, barrier height, aesthetic issues relating to a proposed barrier or such other measures as consistent with the ADOT (Arizona Department of Transportation) Noise Abatement Policy and approved by the City Engineer or his or her designee.

(4) The sound attenuation measures shall utilize designs that minimize the visual impact on the subdivision with appropriate use of colors and materials. Any landscape plan proposed for any subdivision subject to the freeway development standards whereby a wall or berm is required shall include, where appropriate, visual mitigation measures, such as colors, materials, styles, designs or additional landscape treatments to minimize the visual impacts of walls or berms.

(5) The City Engineer or his or her designee shall review the sound attenuation plan and its proposed improvements for compliance with the intent of this section.

(6) The approval of the sound attenuation plan shall occur prior to any preliminary plat approval.

(7) Notwithstanding the approval of a particular sound attenuation plan, where changed conditions or circumstances have occurred, any property owner (or its successor in interest) for whom a sound attenuation plan has been approved may apply to the City Engineer or his or her designee to amend the plan. Changed conditions or circumstances may include, without limitation, changes in the location, grade or design of a proposed freeway, changes in the proposed land use adjacent to the freeway or any changes significantly affecting the noise analysis of the subject property.

(8) Subject to the approval of the City Engineer or his or her designee, a residential development shall have the option of complying with an approved sound attenuation plan (or a portion thereof) by placing on deposit with the city for deposit in an interest bearing account (with interest to accrue to and be made a part of such deposit) a sum equivalent to the cost of the applicable noise mitigation measures specified in the plan, in lieu of actual construction of any particular such measures for which a deposit is made. This deposit shall be made prior to recordation of the final plat, and except to the extent expended for the noise mitigation measures specified, shall be reimbursed to the party making the deposit, upon the earlier to occur of:

(a) A determination by the Arizona Department of Transportation (ADOT), the Maricopa County Department of Transportation (MCDOT) or other applicable governmental authority not to construct or extend the Papago (Interstate 10) or Loop 303 Freeway, including any redesignation reducing the status from freeway to some other roadway, in the proximity of the subject property; or

(b) A change in the location or alignment of the Papago or Loop 303 Freeway (or right of way boundaries) as a result of which the subject property ceases to be within the freeway proximity for which this section requires a sound attenuation plan; or

(c) That date which is 20 years after the date of deposit (the Reimbursement Date), unless on or prior to the Reimbursement Date, ADOT, MCDOT or other applicable governmental authority confirms in writing the continued plan for which this section requires a sound attenuation plan, in which event the Reimbursement Date shall be extended up to an additional ten years from the date of such confirmation. In no event may the Reimbursement Date be extended beyond the date which is 30 years after the date of deposit.

(9) If the City Engineer or his or her designee determines that the sound attenuation plan (including a proposed amended plan) does not meet the intent of this section, that decision may be appealed to the City Council within 45 days of the decision.

(Prior Code, § 15-4-4) (Am. Ord. 2002-790, passed 7-22-2002; Am. Ord. 06-1025, passed 9-25-2006)


15-4-5 SUBMITTAL, REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF ENGINEERING PLANS.

Prior to the recording of the plat, a certificate of approval of engineering plans signed by the Department having jurisdiction, along with a certification that the agreement between the city and subdivider has been executed and the letter of agreement with serving utilities has been submitted, and the necessary performance and completion bond, cash or agreement has been posted with the City Engineer shall be filed with the Clerk. If the engineering plans have not been approved within 90 days, the Council may require that the final plat be re submitted.

(Prior Code, § 15-4-5)


15-4-6 SCHEDULE OF IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS.

Specific standards of improvements to be installed in a subdivision shall depend on the location of the subdivision and type of the development proposed therein, as outlined in the following schedule of improvement requirements.

(A) Urban developments.

(1) Description. Urban developments include single family residential developments with lot widths less than 120 feet, lot areas less than 18,000 square feet and a density of about four dwelling units per acre; two family and multi family residential development regardless of site area or density; and commercial and industrial developments.

(2) Requirements. For urban developments, requirements include:

(a) Public sewers in accordance with this chapter;

(b) Public water supply systems in accordance with this chapter, including mains and fire hydrants to city standards;

(c) Storm drainage to an acceptable outlet in accordance with this chapter. Development improvements must be constructed, operated and maintained in such a manner as to ensure that sediment-laden water does not enter the drainage system or violate applicable water quality standards;

(d) All streets with approved pavement and concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks on both sides;

(e) Alleys, if provided, completely surfaced with approved material to an approved width;

(f) Utilities in accordance with this chapter;

(g) Underground street light circuits in accordance with this chapter; and

(h) Private access ways shall have pavement with concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks in accordance with city standards and specifications.

(B) Suburban developments.

(1) Description. Suburban developments include single family residential developments with minimum lot widths of more than 120 feet but less than 150 feet and minimum lot areas of 18,000 square feet but less than 35,000 square feet.

(2) Requirements. Requirements include:

(a) Public sewers in accordance with this chapter;

(b) Public water supply systems in accordance with this chapter, including mains and fire hydrants to city standards;

(c) Storm drainage to an acceptable outlet in accordance with this chapter. Development improvements must be constructed, operated and maintained in such a manner as to ensure that sediment-laden water does not enter the drainage system or violate applicable water quality standards;

(d) All streets with approved pavement, concrete curbs and gutters; sidewalks required on both sides of major or collector streets;

(e) Alleys, if provided, completely paved with approved material to an approved width;

(f) Utilities in accordance with this chapter;

(g) Underground street light circuits in accordance with this chapter;

(h) Private access ways shall have pavement with concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks in accordance with city standards and specifications.

(C) Estate developments.

(1) Description. Estate developments include single family residential developments with minimum lot areas of 35,000 square feet.

(2) Requirements. Requirements include:

(a) Public sewers in accordance with this chapter;

(b) Public water supply systems in accordance with this chapter, including mains and fire hydrants to city standards;

(c) Storm drainage to an acceptable outlet in accordance with this chapter. Development improvements must be constructed, operated and maintained in such a manner as to ensure that sediment-laden water does not enter the drainage system or violate applicable water quality standards;

(d) All streets with approved pavement, concrete curbs and gutters; sidewalks required on both sides of major or collector streets;

(e) Utilities in accordance with this chapter;

(f) Underground street light circuits in accordance with this chapter;

(g) Private access ways shall have approved pavement with concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks in accordance with city standards and specifications.

(D) Rural developments.

(1) Description. Rural developments include single family residential developments with minimum lot widths of 150 feet, minimum lot areas of 35,000 square feet and being developed as a community of small farms.

(2) Requirements. Requirements include:

(a) Public sewers in accordance with this chapter;

(b) Public water supply systems in accordance with this chapter, including mains and fire hydrants to city standards;

(c) Storm drainage handled in a manner acceptable to the City Engineer to an acceptable outlet in accordance with this chapter. Development improvements must be constructed, operated and maintained in such a manner as to ensure that sediment-laden water does not enter the drainage system or violate applicable water quality standards;

(d) All streets with approved pavement; concrete curbs and gutters on both sides of major and collector streets; concrete, or another type of hard surface sidewalks, on one or both sides of major and collector streets;

(e) Utilities in accordance with this chapter;

(f) Underground street light circuits in accordance with this chapter;

(g) Private access ways in accordance with requirements for public streets.

(E) Construction of Improvements. The construction of subdivision improvements pursuant to the approved plans shall commence within 180 days of the date the final plat was recorded with the Maricopa County Recorder and the improvements shall be completed within a reasonable time period for the completion of such improvements. The construction of the improvements shall comply with all applicable requirements of the Subdivision Regulations, the Engineering Standards, and all other applicable federal, state, and/or local laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, policies, and guidelines. Once a construction permit has been issued for improvements, the work shall proceed without interruption until the improvements have been accepted by the City Engineer. Any construction activity shown on approved plans that has been discontinued for a period of 90 days following the commencement of the work or that has not been completed in accordance with the agreed upon time period may be completed by the City. The City shall be entitled to recover the costs incurred by the City in completing the work from the subdivider or property owner and no building permits shall be issued until the City has been reimbursed for the costs of completing such work. No lot shall be released for construction of a building until the required improvements necessary to provide adequate access and utilities to such lot have been completed, as determined by the City Engineer or designee. Any building permit issued shall be subject to a condition (stipulation) that a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any building until all required improvements have been substantially completed, as determined by the City Engineer or designee.

(F) Phasing Plan. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the construction of the subdivision improvements may be constructed in accordance with a Phasing Plan approved by the City Engineer subject to provision for satisfactory drainage, traffic, circulation, utilities, landscaping and other elements of the total development plan.

(1) The improvements, except those utility facilities defined in Section 15-4-4(L), shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the City.

(2) The improvements, except those utility facilities defined in Section 15-4-4(L), shall be completed within an agreed specified time period for each increment.

(3) Adequate Assurance of Construction of the improvements for each phase shall be provided to the satisfaction of the City prior to permits being issued for the construction of the improvements.

(4) If the form of "Assurance of Construction" is a cash deposit, progress payments may be made from any cash deposit made. Such progress payments shall be made in accordance with standards established by the City Engineer.

(G)  Assurance of construction.

(1) To ensure construction of the required improvements as set forth in the Subdivision Regulations and Engineering Standards, except those utility facilities defined in Section 15-4-4(L), the subdivider shall deposit with the City Engineer an amount in cash or a surety bond equal to the amount of the cost of the work (as determined by the City Engineer) guaranteeing that the work will be completed in accordance with City details and specifications. When no marginal access road is being constructed and the improvement of a major or collector street by a governmental agency is imminent, the subdivider shall deposit the current estimated cost of improving the abutting half street in an account to be disbursed to the City at the time the contract is awarded for the City project to improve the full width of the street.

(2) The surety bond shall be executed by the subdivider, as principal, with a corporation duly authorized to transact surety business in the State of Arizona, as surety, and shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney. The bond shall be in favor of the City, shall be continuous in form and shall require that the total aggregate liability of the surety for all claims shall be limited to the face amount of the bond, regardless of the number of years the bond is in force. The bond or cash shall be released upon satisfactory performance of the work and its acceptance by the City Engineer. The bond shall remain in effect until satisfactory performance of the work and its acceptance by the City except as expressly provided herein. The bond may be canceled or the cash withdrawn by the subdivider; provided, that other security satisfactory to the City has been deposited which will cover the obligations of the subdivider which remain to be performed.

(H)  Assurance of construction through loan commitment. In lieu of providing assurance of construction in the manner provided in subsection (G) of this section, the subdivider may provide assurance of construction of required improvements, except those utility facilities defined in Section 15-4-4(L), by delivering to the City Engineer, prior to the recording of said plat, an appropriate agreement between an approved lending institution and the subdivider, stating that funds sufficient to cover the entire cost of installing the required improvements, including engineering and inspection costs and the cost of replacement or repairs of any existing streets or improvements damaged by the subdivider in the course of development of the subdivision, in an amount approved by the City Engineer, have been deposited with such approved lending institution to the subdivider. The agreement shall provide that the funds in the approved amount are specifically allocated and will be used by the subdivider, or on his or her behalf, only for the purpose of installing the subdivision improvements. The City shall be the beneficiary of such agreement or the subdivider’s rights thereunder shall be assigned to the City and the City Engineer shall approve each disbursement from such funds. The agreement may also contain terms, conditions and provisions normally included by such lending institutions in loan commitments for construction funds or as may be necessary to comply with statutes and regulations applicable to such lending institutions.

(Prior Code, § 15-4-6) (Am. Ord. 06-1025, passed 9-25-2006; Am. Ord. 12-1272, passed 12-10-2012)


15-4-7 FEES.

A fee shall be paid prior to the review of any plat, engineering plan, or engineering permit and inspections according to the fee schedule periodically adopted by the Council pursuant to Section 20-1-2(B) pertaining to Cost Recovery and User Fees.

(Prior Code, § 15-4-7) (Am. Ord. 90-319, passed 9-25-1990; Am. Ord. 12-1272, passed 12-10-2012)


ARTICLE 15-5 Modifications

Section

15-5-1    Modifications


15-5-1 MODIFICATIONS.

(A) Where, in the opinion of the Council, there exists extraordinary conditions of topography, land ownership or adjacent development or other circumstances not provided for in this chapter, the Council may modify these regulations in such manner and to such extent as it may deem appropriate to the public interest.

(B) In the case of a plan and program for a complete community or a complete neighborhood, the Council may modify these regulations in such manner as appears necessary and desirable to provide adequate space and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated and may require stipulations to assure conformance with the achievement of the plan.

(C) In modifying the standards or requirements of these provisions as outlined in this section, the Council may make such additional requirements as appear necessary, in its judgement, to secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified.

(Prior Code, Art. 15-5)


ARTICLE 15-6 Prohibition Against Circumvention

Section

15-6-1    Prohibition against circumvention of chapter


15-6-1 PROHIBITION AGAINST CIRCUMVENTION OF CHAPTER.

(A) It is unlawful for any person to offer to sell or lease, to contract to sell or lease or to sell or lease any subdivision or part thereof until a final plat thereof in full compliance with provisions of this chapter and of any subdivision regulations which have been duly recorded in the office of the County Recorder, is recorded in the office of the Recorder, except that this shall not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease or sold or leased in compliance with any law or subdivision regulation regulating the subdivision plat design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established. The County Recorder shall not record a plat unless the plat has been approved by the Council.

(B) No person, firm or corporation shall divide any lot, piece or parcel of land for the purpose of financing, or sell or lease, or offer for sale or lease which:

(1) Is within a subdivision as defined in § 15-1-2 of this chapter without first having recorded a plat thereof in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or

(2) Is not within a subdivision as defined in § 15-1-2 of this chapter without first having obtained approval by the Planning Director as provided in this chapter.

(C) No building permit shall be issued for construction on any lot, piece or parcel of land which is not a part of a recorded subdivision plat or has not been approved by the Planning Director in accordance with the provisions of this chapter

(Prior Code, Art. 15-6) Penalty, see § 15-7-1


ARTICLE 15-7 Violations and Penalties

Section

15-7-1    Violations and penalties


15-7-1 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.

Any person, firm, corporation or legal entity who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be punished by a fine of not more than $2500 or by imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist may constitute a separate offense. The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of these regulations.

(Prior Code, Art. 15-7) (Am. Ord. 90-319, passed 9-25-1990)


ARTICLE 15-8 Special Agreements

Section

15-8-1    Special agreements


15-8-1 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.

No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any developer whereby a developer may enter into negotiations with the city for special rates or requirements as are in the best interests of the city.

(Prior Code, Art. 15-8)


ARTICLE 15-9 Minor Land Divisions

Section

15-9-1    Applicability

15-9-2    Process

15-9-3    Pre application meeting

15-9-4    Minor land division design standards and requirements

15-9-5    Minimum required minor land division improvements

15-9-6    Minor land division applications

15-9-7    Minor land division application and review

15-9-8    Application approval

15-9-9    Denial

15-9-10    Appeal

15-9-11    Engineering plans for minor land divisions

15-9-12    Assurance for the construction of minor land division improvements


15-9-1 APPLICABILITY.

For the purpose of this article, a minor land division shall constitute the following acts, and shall be subject to the provisions of this article:

(A) Land splits, as defined in this chapter.

(B) The division of improved or unimproved land or lands for the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into two or three lots, tracts, or parcels of land when a new street is not involved.

(C) The further division of improved or unimproved land or lands for the purpose of financing, sale, or lease, whether immediate or future, when the boundaries of such property have been fixed by a recorded subdivision plat, and when a new street is not involved.

(D) Lot line adjustments and lot consolidations in a platted subdivision.

(Ord. 06-1024, passed 9-11-2006)


15-9-2 PROCESS.

The preparation, submittal, review, and approval of all minor land divisions located within the city shall proceed through the following progressive stages, except when otherwise provided herein:

(A) Pre application conference with the members of the Community Development and Engineering Departments.

(B) Submittal of a minor land division application and map by the subdivider and review by the Community Development Department and the City Engineer, or his or her designee.

(C) Approval, conditional approval or denial of the application by the Community Development Director or his or her designee.

(D) Recordation of the approved minor land division by the city.

(Ord. 06-1024, passed 9-11-2006)


15-9-3 PRE APPLICATION MEETING.

The pre application meeting stage of minor land division review is an investigatory period preceding the preparation and submittal of the minor land division application by the subdivider. The subdivider shall initially present the proposal to the members of the Community Development and Engineering Departments, who shall advise the subdivider of specific public objectives, standards, and regulations related to the property and the procedure for minor land division review.

(Ord. 06-1024, passed 9-11-2006)


15-9-4 MINOR LAND DIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.

(A) Except where expressly modified or permitted by the Community Development Director or City Engineer, all minor land divisions shall be in general conformity with the lot, street, block, alley, and easement design standards and requirements specified for subdivisions. All lots created by a minor land division shall conform to existing zoning district standards and the City General Plan.

(B) All minor land divisions shall be designed to comply with the requirements of the specific zoning district within which the divided property is located.

(C) No lot or parcel shall be divided in such a way that any division of such lot or parcel shall contain more dwelling units than are permitted by the zoning regulations of the district within which the lot is situated.

(D) Any newly created lots shall have adequate access to public roads or highways or private roads with public access easements as determined by the Community Development Director, or his or her designee; and the City Engineer, or his or her designee.

(E) Any newly created lots shall have adequate access to all utilities necessary and appropriate for the development proposed on the property to be divided as determined by the Community Development Director, or his or her designee; and the City Engineer, or his or her designee.

(F) The land split shall not adversely affect public health, safety, convenience or welfare.

(Ord. 06-1024, passed 9-11-2006)


15-9-5 MINIMUM REQUIRED MINOR LAND DIVISION IMPROVEMENTS.

(A) Except where otherwise provided in this section, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to improve or agree to improve all streets, pedestrian ways, alleys, and easements in the minor land division and adjacent thereto that are required to serve the minor land division, and to construct and install all such other improvements as specified for subdivisions. No permanent improvement work shall be commenced until improvement plans have been submitted by the subdivider and approved by the City Engineer, or his or her designee. Improvements shall be satisfactorily installed in accordance with the City Engineering Design Standards, and all other applicable city ordinances and requirements.

(B) Minor land division improvements may be waived for minor land divisions in the following situations:

(1) For lot line adjustments where no new lot is created and utility services are existing;

(2) When the division is to allow construction of a single family dwelling and the Community Development Director or City Engineer determines that less than 50% of the half-street right-of-way for the side of the block on which the property is located would be improved as a result of such condition;

(3) In any case when the Community Development Director or City Engineer determines that the improvement of any or any or all of the abutting street or the installation of any or all of the other normally required improvements would be impractical because of considerations such as, but not limited to: the type and extent of existing street improvements; inability to establish a proper street grade or alignment; physical barriers such as excessive grade of terrain or washes, ditches, canals, buildings or other structures; or other special circumstances where, in the opinion of the Community Development Director or City Engineer, the immediate installation of the improvements is not deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, and that the waiver of the improvement requirements would not impair the purpose and intent of this chapter; or

(4) The Community Development Director or City Engineer may require as a condition for the waiver of the required minor land division improvements an in-lieu payment for the cost of improvements. An acceptable form of assurance may be considered at the discretion of the City Engineer.

(Ord. 06-1024, passed 9-11-2006)


15-9-6 MINOR LAND DIVISION APPLICATIONS.

The subdivider shall submit an application in the form prescribed by the Community Development Department together with the application fee established by Council resolution and the application information and materials required by the Community Development Director or his or her designee. The subdivider shall also submit a title report showing the ownership history of the property demonstrating that a subdivision is not required.

(Ord. 06-1024, passed 9-11-2006)


15-9-7 MINOR LAND DIVISION APPLICATION AND REVIEW.

(A) Information required. All information required as part of the minor land division submittal shall be shown graphically, or by note on plans, or by letter, or by combination thereof, and may comprise several sheets showing various elements of the required data.

(B) Submittal requirements. The applicant shall submit the following materials to the Community Development Department for a minor land division application:

(1) A completed minor land division application form.

(2) A non-refundable minor land division application filing fee to compensate the city for the costs of examining and processing the minor land division application and subsequent field inspections, if applicable. The required fee for minor land division applications shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council.

(3) An ALTA survey, preliminary title report and deed or other instrument showing proper title to the land to be divided.

(4) Digital file of the minor land division map.

(5) All minor land division maps shall contain the following information:

(a) Notation of the map as, "A Minor Land Division Map of (Lot or Parcel of Subdivision/owner’s name)."

(b) Location by quarter-section, section, township and range.

(c) Legal description of the property involved.

(d) Name, address, and phone number of subdivider.

(e) Sale, north point, and dates of preparation and revisions.

(f) Existing street dedications, on- and off-site utility easements, and lot lines of all adjacent properties indicated by subdivision name and Maricopa County Recorder’s Office Book and Page number; and unsubdivided land must be identified as such.

(g) Locations of all existing underground and overhead utilities on the property.

(h) Name, address, registration number, and seal of the registered engineer or land surveyor preparing the map.

(i) Boundaries of the tract to be divided fully balanced and closed showing all bearings and distances determined by an accurate survey in the field. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof.

(j) Location and description of cardinal points of primary interest to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on the map shall be referenced. One corner of the minor land division map shall be tied by course and distance to a section corner monument approved by the City Engineer, or his or her designee.

(k) All existing and proposed drainage easements and natural drainage features.

(l) All existing irrigation easements on the property to be divided.

(m) Location and dimensions of all lots within the minor land division map. All sides of the proposed lots shall be identified by bearings and distances.

(n) All lots shall be identified by number or letter.

(o) Building setbacks, if applicable.

(p) Any information required as part of the minor land division submittal shall be shown:

1. Geographically;

2. By note on the plans;

3. By letter; or

4. By a combination of the foregoing, and may comprise several sheets, 24 inches by 36 inches in size, showing various elements of the required data.

(q) The following certifications must be included on the minor land division map:

1. Certification by a registered engineer or land surveyor preparing the map that the map is correct and accurate, and that the monuments described in it have been located as described.

2. Certification by the City Engineer or his or her designee that all engineering conditions and requirements of the city have been complied with.

(Ord. 06-1024, passed 9-11-2006)


15-9-8 APPLICATION APPROVAL.

(A) If the Community Development Director or his or her designee finds that the proposed minor land division meets all city requirements and the application conforms to good land planning policies and that all new lots created are suitable for the purpose for which they are divided, the application shall be approved or approved with stipulations. The Community Development Director or his or her designee shall transcribe a certificate of approval upon the map, first making sure that:

(1) All stipulations of approval have been complied with;

(2) The required certifications have been duly signed; and

(3) That any instruments for required street right of way and utility easement dedications have been prepared, executed, and duly recorded.

(B) After approval of the minor land division and certification of approval by the Community Development Director or his or her designee, the Community Development office shall then promptly cause the map to be recorded with the Maricopa County Recorder.

(Ord. 06-1024, passed 9-11-2006)


15-9-9 DENIAL.

If the Community Development Director denies the minor land division application, the subdivider will be furnished a letter stating the reasons for the denial. The application may be re-filed if suitable revisions can be made to resolve the conflicts and the stated reasons for denial as noted by the Community Development Director.

(Ord. 06-1024, passed 9-11-2006)


15-9-10 APPEAL.

An applicant aggrieved by the decision of the Community Development Director may file a subdivision application including a statement regarding any proposed modifications or waivers along with justifications of why the proposal should be approved and follow the procedure therein to bring the application before the City Council. A final plat application and associated fee is required for an appeal.

(Ord. 06-1024, passed 9-11-2006)


15-9-11 ENGINEERING PLANS FOR MINOR LAND DIVISIONS.

If improvements are required for minor land divisions pursuant to § 15-9-10 herein, the applicant shall be responsible for the preparation of a complete set of engineering plans, prepared by an Arizona Registered Civil Engineer, satisfactory to the City Engineer for the construction of the required improvements. The plans shall be prepared in conjunction with the minor land division map. The minor land division map shall not be recorded until all engineering plans for the required improvements have been approved by the City Engineer or his or her designee.

(Ord. 06-1024, passed 9-11-2006)


15-9-12 ASSURANCE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF MINOR LAND DIVISION IMPROVEMENTS.

If improvements are required for the minor land division pursuant to § 15-9-9 herein, no building permit for any lot created will be issued until such improvements are completed and the work accepted by the City Engineer or his or her designee. Required improvements may be deferred or waived by the Community Development Director if the subdivider provides a performance bond or other assurance of construction, in a form approved by the City Attorney, or if all such improvements have been completed and paid for, as determined by the City Engineer, or his or her designee.

(Ord. 06-1024, passed 9-11-2006)


CHAPTER 16: Flood Damage Prevention

Article

16-1.    PURPOSE

16-2.    DEFINITIONS

16-3.    GENERAL PROVISIONS

16-4.    ADMINISTRATION

16-5.    PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION

16-6.    VARIANCE PROCEDURE

16-7.    STORMWATER POLLUTION ELIMINATION


ARTICLE 16-1 Purpose

Section

16-1-1    Findings of fact

16-1-2    Statement of purpose

16-1-3    Methods of reducing flood losses


16-1-1 FINDINGS OF FACT.

(A) The flood hazard areas of the City of Goodyear are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

(B) These flood losses may be caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.

(Prior Code, § 16-1-1) (Am. Ord. 90-320, passed 9-25-1990; Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-1-2 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

(A) Protect human life and health;

(B) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

(C) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

(D) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

(E) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

3 (F) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize blight areas caused by flooding;

(G) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard;

(H) Insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions; and

(I) Maintain eligibility for disaster relief.

(Prior Code, § 16-1-2) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-1-3 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.

In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

(A) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

(B) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

(C) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

(D) Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;

(E) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.

(Prior Code, § 16-1-3) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


ARTICLE 16-2 Definitions

Section

16-2-1    Definitions


16-2-1 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. These areas are designated as Zone A, AE, AO, AH and A1-30 on the Flood Insurance Rate Map and other areas determined by the criteria adopted by the director of ADWR. (See "Special Flood Hazard Area".)

BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

BASEMENT. Any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.

BUILDING. See "Structure".

COMMUNITY. Any state, area or political subdivision thereof, or any Indian tribe or authorized tribal organization, or authorized native organization, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction.

DEVELOPMENT. Any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations and storage of materials or equipment.

5 ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

EROSION. The process of the gradual wearing away of landmasses. This peril is not, per se, covered under the program.

FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

(1) The overflow of flood waters;

(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or

(3) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition.

FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). The official map on which FEMA or the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by FEMA that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the FBFM and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. (See "Flood or Flooding".)

FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

FLOODPLAIN BOARD. The Board of Directors of the Flood Control District of Maricopa County, or the City Council of the City of Goodyear, at such times as they are engaged in the enforcement of this chapter. (FLOODPLAIN BOARD as defined in A.R.S. § 48-3601 for counties).

FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.

FLOOD PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

FLOOD RELATED EROSION. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.

FLOODWAY. The area of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. Also referred to as "Regulatory Floodway."

FLOODWAY FRINGE. That area of the floodplain on either side of the "Regulatory Floodway" where encroachment may be permitted.

FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking or port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

GOVERNING BODY. The local governing unit (i.e., county or municipality), which is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

HARDSHIP. Related to Article 16-6, "Variance Procedure" of this chapter means the exceptional hardship which would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The governing body requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:

(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior (Secretary) as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary; or

(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:

a. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary; or

b. Directly by the Secretary in states without approved programs.

LEVEE. A man made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (See "Basement" definition). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non elevation design requirements of this chapter.

MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a "recreational vehicle."

MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.

MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the NFIP, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, to which base flood elevations are shown on a community’s FIRM are referenced.

NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to the structures.

NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.

OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. (See "Base Flood" definition).

PERSON. Any individual or the individual’s agent, a firm, partnership, association, or corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its agencies or political subdivisions.

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle that is:

(1) Built on a singe chassis;

(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

(3) Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.

REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION. An elevation one foot above the base flood elevation for a watercourse for which the base flood elevation has been determined and shall be determined by the criteria developed by the Director of Water Resources for all other watercourses.

REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.

SHEET FLOW AREA. See "Area of Shallow Flooding."

SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. An area having special flood or flood related erosion hazards and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99 or AH.

START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.

SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. This term does not, however, include either:

(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or,

(2) Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration would not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a "historic structure".

VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum

(NGVD) of 1929 or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.

WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.

(Prior Code, Art. 16-2) (Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


ARTICLE 16-3 General Provisions

Section

16-3-1    Lands to which this chapter applies

16-3-2    Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard

16-3-3    Compliance

16-3-4    Abrogation and greater restrictions

16-3-5    Interpretation

16-3-6    Disclaimer of liability

16-3-7    Statutory exemptions

16-3-8    Unlawful acts

16-3-9    Declaration of public nuisance

16-3-10    Abatement of violations


16-3-1 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.

This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the corporate limits of the City of Goodyear.

(Prior Code, § 16-3-1) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-3-2 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.

The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the County of Maricopa and Incorporated Areas" dated July 19, 2001 with accompanying FIRMs dated July 19, 2001, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the Floodplain Board by the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Board, within its area of jurisdiction, shall delineate (or may, by rule, require developers of land to delineate) for areas where development is ongoing or imminent, and thereafter as development becomes imminent, floodplains consistent with the criteria developed by FEMA and the Director of Water Resources. The FIS and FIRM panels are on file at City Hall, 190 N. Litchfield Rd., Goodyear, Arizona 85338.

(Prior Code, § 16-3-2) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-3-3 COMPLIANCE.

All development of land, construction of residential, commercial or industrial structures, or future development within delineated floodplain areas is subject to the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.

(Prior Code, § 16-3-3) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-3-4 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

(Prior Code, § 16-3-4) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-3-5 INTERPRETATION.

In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

(A) Considered as minimum requirements;

(B) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

(C) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.

(Prior Code, § 16-3-5) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-3-6 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, the State of Arizona or FEMA, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.

(Prior Code, § 16-3-6) (Am. Ord. 2005-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-3-7 STATUTORY EXEMPTIONS.

(A) In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3609(H), unless expressly provided, this and any regulation adopted pursuant to this article do not affect:

(1) Existing legal uses of property or the right to continuation of the legal use. However, if a nonconforming use of land or a building or structure is discontinued for twelve months, or destroyed to the extent of 50% of its value as determined by a competent appraiser, any further use shall comply with this article and regulations of the City of Goodyear;

(2) Reasonable repair or alteration of property for the purposes for which the property was legally used on August 3, 1984, or any regulations affecting the property takes effect, except that any alteration, addition or repair to a nonconforming building or structure which would result in increasing its flood damage potential by 50% or more shall be either floodproofed or elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation;

(3) Reasonable repair of structures constructed with the written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613; and

(4) Facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a certificate of environmental compatibility issued pursuant to A.R.S. Title 40, Chapter 2, Article 6.2.

(B) Before any authorized construction begins for the exceptions listed below, the responsible person must submit plans for the construction to the floodplain board for review and comment. In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3613, written authorization shall not be required, nor shall the Floodplain Board prohibit:

(1) The construction of bridges, culverts, dikes and other structures necessary to the construction of public highways, roads and streets intersecting or crossing a watercourse;

(2) The construction of storage dams for watering livestock or wildlife, structures on banks of a watercourse to prevent erosion of or damage to adjoining land if the structure will not divert, retard or obstruct the natural channel of the watercourse or dams for the conservation of flood waters as permitted by A.R.S. Title 45, Chapter 6;

(3) Construction of tailing dams and waste disposal areas for use in connection with mining and metallurgical operations. This paragraph does not exempt those sand and gravel operations which will divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse from complying with and acquiring authorization from the Floodplain Board pursuant to regulations adopted by the Floodplain Board under this article;

(4) Other construction upon determination by the floodplain board that written authorization is unnecessary;

(5) Any flood control district, county, city, town or other political subdivision, from exercising powers granted to it under A.R.S. Title 48, Chapter 21, Article 1;

(6) The construction of streams, waterways, lakes and other auxiliary facilities in conjunction with development of public parks and recreation facilities by a public agency or political subdivision; and

(7) The construction and erection of poles, towers, foundations, support structures, guy wires and other facilities related to power transmission as constructed by any utility whether a public service corporation or a political subdivision.

(C) In addition to other penalties or remedies otherwise provided by law, this state, a political subdivision or a person who may be damaged or has been damaged as a result of the unauthorized diversion, retardation or obstruction of a watercourse has the right to commence, maintain and prosecute any appropriate action or pursue any remedy to enjoin, abate or otherwise prevent any person from violating or continuing to violate this section or regulations adopted pursuant to this Article. If a person is found to be in violation of this section, the court shall require the violator to either comply with this section if authorized by the Floodplain Board or remove the obstruction and restore the watercourse to its original state. The court may also award such monetary damages as are appropriate to the injured parties resulting from the violation including reasonable costs and attorney fees.

(Prior Code, § 16-3-7) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-3-8 UNLAWFUL ACTS.

(A) It is unlawful for a person to engage in any development or to divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse if it creates a hazard to life or property without securing the written authorization of the Floodplain Board. Where the watercourse is a delineated floodplain, no development shall take place in the floodplain without written authorization of the Floodplain Board.

(B) No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City of Goodyear from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

(Prior Code, § 16-3-10) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005) Penalty, see Art. 1-8


16-3-9 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.

All development located or maintained within any area of special flood hazard after August 8, 1973, in violation of this chapter is a public nuisance per se and may be abated, prevented or restrained by action of this political subdivision.

(Prior Code, § 16-3-8) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-3-10 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.

Within 30 days of discovery of a violation of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall submit a report to the Floodplain Board which shall include all information available to the Floodplain Administrator which is pertinent to said violation. Within 30 days of receipt of this report, the floodplain board shall either:

(A) Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of such violation; or

(B) Issue a variance to this ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Article 16-6 herein; or

(C) Order the owner of the property upon which the violation exists to provide whatever additional information may be required for their determination. Such information must be provided to the floodplain administrator within 30 days of such order and the Floodplain Administrator shall submit an amended report to the Floodplain Board within 20 days. At the next regularly scheduled public meeting, the Floodplain Board shall either order the abatement of said violation or they shall grant a variance in accordance with the provisions of Article 16-6 herein; or

(D) Submit to FEMA a declaration for denial of insurance, stating that the property is in violation of a cited state or local law, regulation or ordinance, pursuant to § 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 as amended.

(Prior Code, § 16-3-9) (Am.Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


ARTICLE 16-4 Administration

Section

16-4-1    Establishment of development permit

16-4-2    Designation of the Floodplain Administrator

16-4-3    Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator


16-4-1 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.

(A) A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in § 16-3-2. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing.

(B) Specifically, the following information is required:

(1) Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures. In Zone AO, elevation of existing highest adjacent natural grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures;

(2) Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed;

(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any non-residential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in § 16-5-1(C)(2);

(4) Require base flood elevation data for subdivision proposals or other development greater than 50 lots or five acres; and

(5) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

(Prior Code, § 16-4-1) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-4-2 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.

The City Engineer is hereby appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions.

(Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-4-3 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.

Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following.

(A) Permit review. Review all development permits to determine that:

(1) The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

(2) All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

(3) The site is reasonably safe from flooding;

(4) The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, ADVERSELY AFFECTS means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

(B) Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with § 16-3-2, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer Article 16-5. Any such information shall be consistent with the requirements of FEMA and the Director of Water Resources and shall be submitted to the Floodplain Board for adoption.

(C) Information to be obtained and maintained. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available the following:

(1) The certified regulatory flood elevation required in § 16-5-1(C)(1);

(2) The Zone AO certification required in § 16-5-1(C)(1);

(3) The floodproofing certification required in § 16-5-1(C)(2);

(4) The certified opening elevation required in § 16-5-1(C)(3).

(D) Alteration of watercourses. Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:

(1) Notify adjacent communities and ADWR prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA through appropriate notification means; and

(2) Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse be maintained.

(E) Written notice of development plan. Advise the district of Maricopa County and any adjunct jurisdiction having responsibility for floodplain management in writing and provide a copy of the development plan of all applications for floodplain use permits or variances to develop land in a floodplain or floodway within one mile of the corporate limits of the city. Also, advise the district of Maricopa County in writing and provide a copy of any development plan of any major development proposed within a floodplain or floodway which could affect floodplains, floodways or watercourses within the district’s area of jurisdiction. Written notice and a copy of the plan of development shall be sent to the district no later than three working days after having been received by the city.

(F) Interpretation of firm boundaries. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article 16-6.

(G) Actions on violations. Take actions on violations of this chapter as required in § 16-3-10.

(H) Notification. Notify FEMA and ADWR of acquisition by means of annexation, incorporation or otherwise, of additional areas of jurisdiction.

(I) Delineation of floodplains. Within 120 days after completion of construction of any flood control protective works which changes the rate of flow during the flood or the configuration of the floodplain upstream or downstream from or adjacent to the project, the person or agency responsible for installation of the project shall provide to the governing bodies of all jurisdictions affected by the project a new delineation of all floodplains affected by the project. The new delineation shall be done according to the criteria adopted by the Director of Water Resources.

(J) Submission of data. Base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with 44 CFR § 65.3. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data.

(Prior Code, § 16-4-2) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


ARTICLE 16-5 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction

Section

16-5-1    Standards of construction

16-5-2    Standards for storage of materials and equipment

16-5-3    Standards for utilities

16-5-4    Additional standards for development including subdivisions

16-5-5    Standards for manufactured homes

16-5-6    Standards for recreational vehicles

16-5-7    Floodways

16-5-8    Flood related erosion-prone area


16-5-1 STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.

In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required.

(A) Anchoring.

(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; and

(2) All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of § 16-5-5(B).

(B) Construction materials and methods.

(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

(3) All new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and

(4) Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

(C) Elevation and floodproofing.

(1) Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

(a) In an AO Zone, elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.

(b) In an A Zone where a BFE has not been determined, elevated to or above the regulatory base flood elevation or be elevated in accordance with the criteria developed by the Director of Water Resources.

(c) In Zones AE, AH and Al 30, elevated to or above the regulatory base flood elevation.

Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community’s building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

(2) Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with Section 16-5-1(C)(1) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

(a) Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under Section 16-5-1(C)(1) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

(3) All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the following criteria:

(a) Have a minimum of two openings, on different sides of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; or

(b) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect.

(4) Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in § 16-5-5.

(Prior Code, § 16-5-1) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-5-2 STANDARDS FOR STORAGE OF MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT.

(A) The storage or processing of materials that could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited.

(B) Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to damage by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.

(Prior Code, § 16-5-2) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-5-3 STANDARDS FOR UTILITIES.

(A) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from systems into flood waters.

(B) On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

(C) Waste disposal systems shall not be installed wholly or partially in a regulatory floodway.

(Prior Code, § 16-5-3) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-5-4 ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT INCLUDING SUBDIVISIONS.

(A) All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions), greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:

(1) Identify the area of the special flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood; and

(2) Identify on the final plans the elevation(s) of the proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final lowest floor and grade elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

(B) All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

(C) All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

(D) All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

(Prior Code, § 16-5-4) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-5-5 STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES.

All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved shall:

(A) Be elevated so that the bottom of the structural frame or the lowest point of any attached appliances, whichever is lower, is at or above the regulatory flood elevation; and

(B) Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.

(Prior Code, § 16-5-5) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-5-6 STANDARDS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.

All recreational vehicles placed on site will either:

(A) Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or

(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

(C) Meet the permit requirements of § 16-5-4 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in § 16-5-5.

(Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-5-7 FLOODWAYS.

Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 16-3-2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

(A) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;

(B) If § 16-5-7 is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article 16-5.

(Prior Code, § 16-5-6) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-05)


16-5-8 FLOOD RELATED EROSION-PRONE AREA.

(A) The Floodplain Administrator shall require permits for proposed construction and other development within all flood related erosion prone areas as known to the community.

(B) Permit applications shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe from flood related erosion and will not cause flood related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing hazard.

(C) If a proposed development is found to be in the path of flood related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvements shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard.

(D) Within Zone E on the FIRM, a setback is required for all new development from the lake, bay, riverfront or other body of water to create a safety buffer consisting of a natural vegetative or contour strip. This buffer shall be designated according to the flood related erosion hazard and erosion rate, in relation to the anticipated "useful life" of structures and depending upon the geologic, hydrologic, topographic and climatic characteristics of the land. The buffer may be used for suitable open space purposes such as agricultural, forestry, outdoors recreation and wildlife habitat areas and for other activities using temporary and portable structures only.

(Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


ARTICLE 16-6 Variance Procedure

Section

16-6-1    Nature of variances

16-6-2    Appeal Board

16-6-3    Conditions for variances


16-6-1 NATURE OF VARIANCES.

(A) The variance criteria set forth in this section of the ordinance are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants or the property owners.

(B) It is the duty of the City of Goodyear to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below the regulatory flood elevation is so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.

(Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-6-2 APPEAL BOARD.

(A) The Floodplain Board of Goodyear shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.

(B) The Floodplain Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

(C) In passing upon such applications, the Floodplain Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:

(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and Floodplain Management Program for that area;

(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system and streets and bridges.

(D) Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (C) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the Floodplain Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

(E) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

(1) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and

(2) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property.

(3) The land upon which the variance is granted shall be ineligible for exchange of state land pursuant to the flood relocation and land exchange program provided by A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter 2, Article 2. A copy of the notice shall be recorded in the office of the Maricopa County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

(F) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to FEMA.

(Prior Code, § 16-6-1) (Am. Ord. 2005-956, passed 8-22-2005)


16-6-3 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.

(A) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the procedures Articles 16-4 and 16-5 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

(B) Variances may be issued for the repair, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structures continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

(C) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

(D) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

(E) Variances shall only be issued upon:

(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;

(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;

(3) A showing that the use cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This includes only facilities defined in Article 16-2 of this chapter in the definition of "Functionally Dependent Use"; and

(4) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

(Prior Code, § 16-6-2) (Am. Ord. 05-956, passed 8-22-2005)


ARTICLE 16-7 Stormwater Pollution Elimination

Section

16-7-1    Statement of purpose

16-7-2    Definitions

16-7-3    Prohibition of non stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system; exception

16-7-4    Controls to reduce pollutants in stormwater

16-7-5    Inspection

16-7-6    Enforcement


16-7-1 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.

It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and welfare by limiting discharges into any Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) which discharges may pollute, contaminate or degrade the waters carried in the system and any waters into which the systems drain. The MS4 shall be used for the purpose of conveying stormwater only, and all necessary measures to prevent said stormwater from carrying undesirable substances into the MS4 shall be taken.

(Prior Code, § 16-7-1) (Ord. 94-497, passed 5-10-1994)


16-7-2 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

APPLICABLE WATER QUALITY STANDARD. A numeric or narrative water quality criteria that limits the quality or concentration of pollutants that may be present in navigable waters as defined in 33 U.S.C. 1362(7).

AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The Director of Public Works, City Services Supervisor, City Utility Supervisor, Code Enforcement Inspector, police officer, fire officer or City Attorney.

BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). The schedules of activities, prohibitions and practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to waters of the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spilling or leaks, sludge or waste disposal or drainage from raw material storage. (40 C.F.R. 122.2)

DISCHARGE. Any addition of any pollutant to waters of the United States from any point source.

ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from municipal separate storm sewer system) and discharges resulting from fire fighting activities. (40 C.F.R. 122.26(b)(2))

MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). Includes, but is not limited to, those facilities within the city by which stormwater may be conveyed to waters of the United States, including any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches and man made channels or storm drains which are not part of Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined at 40 C.F.R. 122.2.

NONRESIDENTIAL USER. Any real property that is or is intended to be used for commercial, industrial, agricultural or recreational purposes; the immediate vicinity of five or more connected residential dwelling units and residential subdivisions or dwellings that have never been occupied by a bona fide purchaser or tenant.

NON STORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge that is not entirely composed of stormwater.

NPDES PERMIT. A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. 1342.

POLLUTANT. Solid, liquid, gases or other substances that can alter the physical or chemical properties of water, including, but not limited to, fertilizers, solvent, sludge, petroleum and petroleum products, biological materials, radio active materials, sand, dirt, animal waste, acids, bases, anti freeze, brake fluid and other automotive chemicals, insecticides, soaps, detergents, paints and other household chemicals.

POLLUTION. The presence of pollutants on land or in stormwater.

PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel, real estate or land or portion of land, either improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

PUBLIC STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. All or any part of the storm drains, ditches, pipes, graded areas and gutters located within publicly owned easements, public rights of way, public parks, streets, roads or highways or in common areas or real property leased from the city that are used for collecting or conveying stormwater.

RELEASE. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, placing, leaching, dumping or disposing into or on any land in a manner that can cause pollution, whether or not the released materials have actually entered the stormwater drainage system.

SIGNIFICANT MATERIALS. Includes, but is not limited to, raw materials, fuels, materials such as solvents, detergents, plastic pellets, finished materials such as metallic products, raw materials used in food processing or production, hazardous substances designated under Section 101(14) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. 9601(14), any chemical the facility is required to report pursuant to Section 313 of Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, 42 U.S.C. 11023, fertilizers, pesticides and waste products, such as ashes, slag and sludge that have the potential to be released with stormwater discharges.

STORMWATER. Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff and surface runoff and drainage, 40 C.F.R. 122.26(b)(12).

WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES OR WATERS OF THE STATE.

(1) All waters which are currently used, were used in the past or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide.

(2) All interstate waters, including interstate wetlands.

(3) All other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams) mudflats, sand flats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie pot holes, playa lakes or natural ponds, the use, degradation or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce, including any such waters:

(a) Which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other purposes;

(b) From which fish or shell fish are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign commerce; or

(c) Which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate commerce;

(4) All impoundments of waters, otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition;

(5) Tributaries of waters identified in subsections (1) through (4) above;

(6) The territorial sea;

(7) Wetlands adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselves wetlands) identified in subsections (1) through (4) above; and

(8) Waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the Clean Water Act (other than cooling ponds as defined in 40 C.F.R. 423.11(m) which also meet the criteria of this definition) are not waters of the United States. This exclusion applies only to man made bodies of water which neither were originally created in the waters of the United States (such as disposal areas and wetlands) or resulted from the impoundment of waters of the United States. (40 C.F.R. 122.2.)

(Prior Code, § 16-7-2) (Ord. 94-497, passed 5-10-1994)


16-7-3 PROHIBITION OF NON STORMWATER DISCHARGES TO THE MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM; EXCEPTION.

(A) Discharge of pollutants prohibited. The discharge of all non stormwater discharges to the MS4 is prohibited. All discharges of material other than stormwater must be in compliance with a NPDES permit issued for the discharge.

(B) Exceptions to discharge prohibition. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in subsection (A) of this section:

(1) The prohibition on discharges shall not apply to any discharge regulated under a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to the discharger under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharge is in full compliance with all regulations;

(2) Fire hydrant flushing, water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources; foundation or footing drains that are not contaminated by significant materials; naturally occurring seeps, springs, wet lands or riparian areas; non agricultural irrigation water and residential lawn watering; irrigation water; diverted stream flows; rising ground waters; uncontaminated ground water infiltration to separate storm sewer; uncontaminated pumped ground water; air conditioning condensation and residential evaporative cooler runoffs; vehicle washing at no charge in residential areas or not for profit fund raisers for educational or public service groups; dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; flows from fire fighting; flows already covered by a NPDES permit; and dust control watering.

(Prior Code, § 16-7-3) (Ord. 94-497, passed 5-10-1994)


16-7-4 CONTROLS TO REDUCE POLLUTANTS IN STORMWATER.

(A) Reduction of pollutants in stormwater. Any person engaged in activities which may or will result in pollutants entering the MS4 shall take all practical measures to reduce such pollutants. Examples of such activities shall include construction activities that disturb one acre or more, or if the activity is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that would disturb one acre or more, and/or ownership and use of facilities which may be a source of pollutants, such as parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, commercial facilities, stores fronting city streets and the like. Stormwater management facilities and practices (structural and non-structural control measures, respectively) shall be designed to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. Stormwater management facilities shall have an enforceable operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions as designed. This agreement will include any and all maintenance easements required to access and inspect the stormwater management facility, and to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facility. In addition, a binding convenant specifying the party/parties responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be secured prior to approval of final subdivision plat and issuance of any permits for land disturbance activities. The use of non-structural stormwater treatment practices is encouraged in order to minimize the reliance on structural practices.

(B) Littering.

(1) No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained any refuse, rubbish, garbage or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles and accumulations in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business place or upon any public or private lot of land in the city, so that the same might be or become a pollutant, except in the designated collection containers or in lawfully established dumping grounds.

(2) The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee or proprietor of any real property in the city in front of which there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain said sidewalk free of dirt or litter to the maximum extent practicable. Sweepings from said sidewalks shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained on said real property as required for the disposal of garbage.

(3) No person shall throw or deposit any litter in any fountain, pond, lake stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city.

(C) Standard for parking lots and similar structures. Persons owning or operating a parking lot, gas station, pavement or other similar structure shall clean those structures as frequently and thoroughly as practicable in a manner that does not result in discharge of pollutants to the MS4.

(D) Illicit discharge and illicit connections. It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain or continue illicit drainage connections to the MS4 system and to commence or continue any listed discharges to the

MS4. This prohibition is expressly retroactive and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under a permit or other authorization or whether permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection.

(E) Permission required to connect to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4); fee; violation; classification.

(1) A person desiring to make a connection to the MS4 or to cause flood water or other stormwaters to be emptied into the MS4 shall first apply to the city for permission to make the connection. The city may require the connection to be made in such a manner as it directs and may impose reasonable conditions and such reasonable connection fee as it deems proper or, if reasonably justified by the circumstances, may refuse permission. In addition, the city may require any action or impose any restriction that the city considers reasonably necessary to meet the city’s obligations, if any, to comply with local, state or federal water quality laws.

(2) A person making a connection which causes flood waters to be so discharged without first having obtained permission is guilty of a misdemeanor if actual degradation of receiving waters can be shown, but, in addition, may be prosecuted under state or federal felony statutes for knowingly causing any such degradation.

(F) Interceptors required. Grease, oil or sand interceptors shall be provided for laundries, restaurants, service stations, auto repair shops, car washes and other facilities when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid waste containing grease or oil in excessive amounts or any flammable waste, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. Interceptors shall not be required where a total runoff from a 100 year six hour storm can be retained on site in retention basins.

(1) Interceptors type, capacity and location. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director of Public Works and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.

(2) Interceptors construction of grease and oil interceptors. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, water tight and equipped with easily removable covers. When the bolted covers are required, they shall be gas tight and water tight.

(3) Interceptors maintenance. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at the owner’s expense, in continually efficient operation at all times.

(G) Compliance with best management practices. Where best management practices guidelines or requirements have been adopted by any federal agency, the State of Arizona, a regional and/or city agency, for any activity, operation or facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges or discharge of non storm water to the stormwater system, any person undertaking such activity or operation or knowing or operating such facility shall comply with such guidelines or requirements (as may be identified by the City Engineer).

(H) Notification of intent and compliance with general permits.

(1) Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity or other discharger described in any general stormwater permit addressing such discharges, as may be adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, shall provide notice of intent, comply with and undertake all other activities required by any general stormwater permit applicable to such discharges.

(2) Each discharger, identified in an individual NPDES permit relating to stormwater discharge, shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit.

(I) Discharge in violation of permit. Any discharges that would result in or contribute to a violation of any present or future NPDES permit (Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System permit) and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the discharge, and such person shall defend, identify and hold harmless the city in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such discharge.

(J) Watercourse protection.

(1) Any person owning the property through which a watercourse passes or such person’s lessee or tenant shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other obstacles which would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to the watercourse so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse and shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for said maintenance or remove such vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion.

(2) No person shall commit or cause to be committed any of the following acts, unless a written permit has first been obtained by the Director of Public Works:

(a) Discharge into or connect any pipe or channel to a watercourse;

(b) Modify the natural flow of water in a watercourse;

(c) Carry out development within any creek, channel or 20 feet outside at the top of a bank;

(d) Deposit in, plant in or remove any material from a watercourse, including its banks, except as required for necessary maintenance;

(e) Construct, alter, enlarge, connect to, change or remove any structure in a watercourse; or

(f) Place any loose or unconsolidated material along the side of or within a watercourse or so close to the side as to cause a diversion of the flow or to cause a probability of such material being carried away by stormwaters passing through such watercourse.

(Prior Code, § 16-7-4) (Ord. 94-497, passed 5-10-1994; Am. Ord. 06-1025, passed 9-25-2006)


16-7-5 INSPECTION.

(A) The authorized enforcement official is authorized and directed to make inspections of real property, including structures and buildings as necessary to assess compliance with this chapter, a stormwater NPDES permit issued to the city or with stormwater NPDES permits applicable to the property.

(B) Inspections conducted pursuant to this chapter may be expanded to include items covered by other chapters of the city code that relate to the quality or management of stormwater.

(Prior Code, § 16-7-5) (Ord. 94-497, passed 5-10-1994)


16-7-6 ENFORCEMENT.

(A) The remedies specified herein are cumulative and the authorized enforcement official may proceed under these or any other remedies authorized by law. In addition to any other authorized remedies, any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day of violation of each element of this chapter shall be a separate offense.

(B) Any owner, occupant or other person having control over an activity or any land who causes, permits, facilitates, aids or abets any violation of any provision of this chapter, or who fails to perform any duties required by this chapter, is guilty of a class one misdemeanor.

(C) The authorized enforcement official may issue a notice of violation to any person who has violated or is in violation of this chapter or an NPDES permit applicable to stormwater. Failure to perform any act required in the notice of violation shall be a separate violation for each day beyond the tenth calendar day following the issuance of the notice of violation.

(D) Any person who transfers ownership, occupancy or control of any activity or land that is in violation of this chapter shall continue to be responsible for any fines or penalties that could be imposed for violations that originate prior to transfer and which continue after transfer unless the transferee accepts responsibility for any violations that continue after the transfer.

(E) A person who violates this chapter is subject to a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect a civil sanction of not less than $50 nor more than $2,500 for each violation. Each day of each violation shall constitute a separate civil offense.

(F) The owner of record of the property upon which a violation of this chapter occurs shall be presumed to be a person having lawful control over an activity or parcel of land. If more than one person is identified as the owner of record, such person shall be presumed to be jointly and severally in lawful possession and control of the activity or land.

(Prior Code, § 16-7-6) (Ord. 94-497, passed 5-10-1994)


CHAPTER 17: Cable Communications

Article

17-1.    GENERAL

17-2.    APPLICATION, GRANT, TRANSFERS

17-3.    STREETS AND CONSTRUCTION

17-4.    SYSTEM

17-5.    FINANCIAL

17-6.    SERVICE

17-7.    BILLING PRACTICES, INFORMATION AND PROCEDURES

17-8.    RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS

17-9.    SECURITY FOR PERFORMANCE

17-10.    VIOLATION BY LICENSEE

17-11.    REMEDIES

17-12.    INSURANCE, LIABILITY AND INDEMNITY

17-13.    MISCELLANEOUS


ARTICLE 17-1 General

Section

17-1-1    Intent

17-1-2    Short title

17-1-3    Definitions

17-1-4    Police powers


17-1-1 INTENT.

The city finds that the development of cable television and communications systems has substantial benefit and impact upon the residents, businesses, industries and institutions within the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the city or such persons as the city shall designate. It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible public interest and public purpose in these matters, and any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part.

(Prior Code, § 17-1-1)


17-1-2 SHORT TITLE.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Goodyear Cable Code.

(Prior Code, § 17-1-2)


17-1-3 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number, and the use of any gender shall be applicable to all genders whenever the sense requires. The word SHALL is mandatory and the word MAY is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

ACCESS CHANNEL. A channel dedicated in whole or in part for local noncommercial programming which is not originated by a cable company, provided that such local programming shall not include:

(1) The retransmission of local television broadcast signals; or

(2) Programming produced by persons unaffiliated with the cable company under the provisions of Section 612 of the Cable Act.

APPLICANT. The person or entity applying for a license from the city.

APPLICATION. The form required by the city to be submitted by an applicant for an initial license.

BASIC SERVICE. Any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined in 47 U.S.C. 521 through 559, as amended from time to time. Each basic service tier shall include all access channels, as defined in Section 611 of the Cable Act, as it may be amended from time to time.

CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, being 47 U.S.C. 521 et seq. as amended from time to time.

CABLE SERVICES. The one way transmission to subscribers of video programming and other programming services, together with subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such programming and programming services that the licensee makes available to all subscribers generally. A licensee may accomplish subscriber interaction through two way communication.

CABLE SYSTEM. A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable services which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city (as hereinafter defined), but such term does not include:

(1) A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;

(2) A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control or management, unless such facility uses or crosses over any public right of way;

(3) A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, being 47 U.S.C. 521 et seq. except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or

(4) Any facility of an electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.

CHANGE OF SERVICE. All requests by existing subscribers for modifications to their cable service, including without limitation additions or deletions of premium services, additional outlets, remote controls and FM service. Such term shall not include initial installation of basic cable service, total disconnection of basic cable service or service calls.

CITY. The city, a municipal corporation of the State of Arizona, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form.

CITY COUNCIL. The present governing body of the city or any future Council constituting the legislative body of the city.

COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION or COMPLETE SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION shall mean SATISFACTORILY COMPLETE and FULLY ACTIVATE. In each instance, these terms shall mean that strand has been put up and all necessary cable (including trunk and feeder cable) has been lashed, or, for underground construction, that all cable has been laid and trenches refilled, all road surfaces restored and, except as prevented by weather conditions or delayed because of seasons, landscaping restored; that all amplifier housings and modules have been installed; that power supplies have been installed; that construction of the headends or hubs has been completed and all necessary processing equipment has been installed; and that any and all other construction necessary for the cable system to be ready to deliver cable service to subscribers has been completed. Final balancing shall have been conducted on each otherwise completed segment of the cable system before direct marketing of that segment begins. It is expected that segments of less than the entire cable system will be activated and final balanced when completed. Construction of any segment or of the entire cable system will not be considered complete until final balance has been conducted on such segment (or in the case of the entire cable system, until final balancing and proof of performance tests have been conducted on all segments of the cable system) and any problems found during testing have been corrected. The term completion of construction does not include marketing and installation of subscriber service.

FEEDER or DISTRIBUTION PLANT. Those cables, active and passive components, that extend from the trunk specified local distribution connection points to the subscriber tap device.

GROSS REVENUES. All cash, credits, property of any kind or nature or other consideration received as if on a cash basis directly or indirectly by a licensee, its affiliates, subsidiaries or parent and any person, firm or corporation in which a licensee has a financial interest or which has a financial interest in a licensee, arising from or attributable to the licensee’s operation of its cable system within the city, including, but not limited to:

(1) Revenue from all charges for cable services provided to subscribers;

(2) Revenue from all charges for the insertion of commercial advertising upon the cable system subject to the provisions in subsection (7) below;

(3) Revenue from all charges for the leased use of studios;

(4) Revenue from all charges for the installation, removal, connection and reinstatement of equipment necessary for a subscriber to receive cable services;

(5) Revenue from the sale, exchange, use or cablecast of any programming developed for community use or institutional users;

(6) Revenue or value received by a licensee (or any of its affiliates, subsidiaries or parent) through advertising, except cooperative advertising;

(7) (a) And any other income derived from the cable system. Gross revenues shall not include taxes collected by licensee on behalf of any governmental authority; any increase in the value of any stock, security or asset; the value of complimentary service provided to licensee’s employees and as required by this chapter or any license; and dividends or other distributions made in respect of any stock or securities.

(b) When a licensee (or an affiliate, subsidiary or parent) holds one or more other cable television licenses in Maricopa County, then gross revenues shall include the following percentage of revenues derived from joint local regional advertising or production of video programming within all Maricopa County license areas shall be allocated pro rata to the city based on the ratio of the number of subscribers of licensee in the city to the total numbers of subscribers of licensee (or an affiliate, subsidiary or parent) in all the jurisdictions in Maricopa County in which licensee (or an affiliate, subsidiary or parent) holds a cable license.

(c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, GROSS REVENUES shall include cash, credit, property of any kind or nature or other consideration received by a licensee’s affiliates, subsidiaries, parent or any person, firm or corporation in which a licensee has a financial interest or which has a financial interest in a licensee only:

1. When they would be gross revenues if the licensee received them directly; and

2. When and to the extent the person or entity which receives the gross revenues is entitled to receive them because of a transaction with the licensee which was not made at arms length and which is not commercially reasonable. The licensee shall notify the city when a third party is providing services over the cable system.

INITIAL ACTIVATION OF CABLE SERVICE. With respect to a particular segment (as defined in any license issued hereunder), or with respect to a group of segments or the entire cable system, as the case may be, that all proposed cable services and cable system capabilities as stated in the license are available or in place, construction has been completed (see above definition of construction) and the completed segment or segments in question or the entire cable system, as the case may be, have been activated.

INITIAL LICENSE. A license sought by, or granted to, a person who does not hold a license.

LICENSE. Any authorization granted under this chapter in terms of a privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a cable system in the city, including initial licenses and renewal licenses (as hereinafter defined). Any such authorization, in whatever term granted, shall be nonexclusive and shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city.

LICENSEE. The person, firm or corporation to whom or which a license is granted by the City Council under this chapter and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said person, firm or corporation.

LOCAL ORIGINATION PROGRAMMING. Video programming locally produced by a licensee anywhere in Maricopa County, Arizona.

MINIMUM CHANNEL CAPACITY. Activated capacity of 330 megahertz or 43 channels upon initial activation of cable service.

OUTAGE. Exists whenever licensee’s cable system experiences three subscriber complaints within any 60 minute period of no picture within the same quarter section.

PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, association, joint venture or organization of any kind and the lawful trustee, successor, assignee, transferee or personal representative thereof.

PROPERTY OF LICENSEE. All property owned, installed or used by a licensee in the conduct of a cable system business in the city under the authority of a license granted pursuant to this chapter.

PROPOSAL. A submission by a qualified cable company setting forth in writing a detailed statement or statements defining the cable services to be provided to residents, businesses, industries and institutions within the city and the manner and policies pursuant to which said services will be provided, the fees for such services and the fee to be paid the city for a license.

RENEWAL LICENSE. A license sought by, or granted to, a cable company already providing cable services in the city.

SERVICE CALL. Results when service problems are reported to the licensee relating to:

(1) Any no picture complaint;

(2) A signal failing to meet FCC standards on one or more channels;

(3) Property damage by licensee’s employees or authorized contractors; or

(4) Problems associated with in house cable equipment owned by licensee.

STANDARD DROP. A cable connection which requires no more than a 150 foot drop measured from the nearest point of a subscriber’s home or place of business to the nearest active tap on the cable system and involves only one outlet and standard materials and does not involve a wall fish. In addition, a STANDARD DROP shall exclude custom installation work, including specific subscriber requested work that requires non standard inventory or cable routing requiring construction methods exceeding reasonable underground or aerial work.

STREET or PUBLIC STREET. Only a street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway or drive which is owned by a public entity in fee or as to which a public easement has been dedicated for street purposes, and with respect to which, and to the extent that the city has a right to grant the use of the surface of and space above and below in connection with a license for a cable system or other compatible uses.

SUBSCRIBER. Any person or entity receiving for any purpose the cable service of a licensee’s cable system.

TRUNK or MAIN LINE PLANT. A transportation cable, active and passive components, connecting the headend or hub (the origin of signal) with specified local distribution connection points.

USER. A party utilizing a cable system channel for purposes of production or transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with receipt in a subscriber capacity.

(Prior Code, § 17-1-3)


17-1-4 POLICE POWERS.

Nothing in this chapter or in any agreement awarding a license in accordance herewith shall be construed as an abrogation by the city of any of its lawful police powers.

(Prior Code, § 17-1-4)


ARTICLE 17-2 Application, Grant, Transfers

Section

17-2-1    Contents of application and proposal for initial license

17-2-2    Application fees for initial license

17-2-3    Selection of licensee for an initial license

17-2-4    Procedure for license renewal

17-2-5    Grant of license

17-2-6    Transfers and assignments


17-2-1 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION AND PROPOSAL FOR INITIAL LICENSE.

(A) Content. Each application for an initial license to construct, operate or maintain any cable system in the city shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk and shall be on forms prescribed by the city and contain a request for such information as required by the City Manager or his or her designee. The forms shall require, but shall not be limited to, the following information:

(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;

(2) A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including, but not limited to, the following, and to whatever extent required by the city:

(a) The names, residence and business addresses of all officers, directors and associates of the applicant;

(b) The names, residence and business addresses of all officers, persons and entities having a 1% or larger share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each such person or entity;

(c) The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including, but not limited to, cable systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent and subsidiary and the areas served thereby;

(d) A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year next preceding the date of the application hereunder and a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the City Council setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed cable system in the city or a statement from an independent certified public accountant, certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable system in this city;

(e) A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the initial license, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements and a source and use of funds statement. All information is to be presented in the format required by the city; and

(f) A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable system license awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said license with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such licensed cable system; and the amount of applicant’s and its parent’s or subsidiary’s resources committed to the completion thereof.

(3) A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(a) A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced;

(b) A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications of rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges and cable service charges;

(c) A detailed, informative and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant;

(d) A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber; and

(e) A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the license.

(4) A copy of any agreement covering the license area, if existing between the applicant and the local telephone or electric utilities providing for the use of any facilities of the utility, including, but not limited to poles, lines or conduits; and

(5) Any other details, statements, information or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the City Council or by any other provision of law.

(B) Proposal. The filing of the application shall be accompanied by a proposal of the said applicant.

(Prior Code, § 17-2-1)


17-2-2 APPLICATION FEES FOR INITIAL LICENSE.

(A) Amount. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter, each applicant for an initial license must furnish with its application a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount of $10,000 by certified or cashier’s check made payable to the city. No application for an initial license shall be considered without receipt of said check.

(B) Deposit and use. All checks received will be deposited to the general account of the city and will first be used to recover expenses incurred by the city in the preparation and granting of the initial license, including a reasonable allocation of cost for the city’s in house staff.

(C) Additional fee. Any licensee under an initial license, upon acceptance of such initial license, shall reimburse all additional expenses, including, but not limited to, any and all administrative, engineering, publication or legal costs and consultants expenses incurred in connection with the processing, evaluation and preparation of documents relating to the initial licensee. The city shall document all such expenses by invoice. In the event that expenses exceed the total amount of filing fees collected from the applicant, the licensee shall pay to the city the excess amount within 60 days of demand of the city.

(Prior Code, § 17-2-2)


17-2-3 SELECTION OF LICENSEE FOR AN INITIAL LICENSE.

(A) Solicitation of applications and proposals. The city may, by advertisement or any other means, solicit and call for applications and proposals for cable system licenses and may determine and fix any date upon or after which the same shall be received by the city or the date before which the same must be received or the date after which the same shall not be received and may make any other determinations and specify any other times, terms, conditions or limitations respecting the soliciting, calling for, making and receiving of such applications and proposals. The terms and conditions for application shall be described in a document called request for applications and proposals.

(B) Unsolicited proposals. The city upon receipt of an unsolicited application and proposal for an initial license may by advertising or other means solicit and call for competing applications and proposals pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, or may, in its sole discretion, accept the application and proposal or reject such application and proposal as being untimely.

(C) Compliance with city requirements. Any person, firm or corporation submitting an application and proposal for an initial license to operate a cable system in response to the city’s request for applications and proposals shall provide all information required by this chapter and all other information requested by the city’s request for applications and proposals or otherwise required by the city. Each application and proposal shall be responsive to the questions soliciting the information and shall completely, accurately and materially supply all of the information so solicited. Any misrepresentation, failure, neglect or refusal to provide any of such information may, at the option of the city, render an application or proposal invalid. The requested information must be complete and verified as true by the applicant.

(D) Property of city. All applications and proposals for an initial license received by the city from an applicant shall become the sole property of the city.

(E) Applicant responsibility. Before submitting an application and proposal, each applicant shall be solely responsible for and must:

(1) Examine all regulatory chapters and the request for proposals documents thoroughly;

(2) Be familiar with local conditions which may in any manner affect performance under the license, including, but in no event limited to, community and institutional telecommunication needs, relevant demographics, topographies, pole attachment policies of appropriate utility authorities, undergrounding and subscriber desires;

(3) Be familiar with all applicable federal, state and local laws, chapters, rules and regulations affecting performance under the license; and

(4) Carefully correlate all observations with the requirements of this chapter and the request for applications and proposals documents.

(F) Referral to City Manager. Upon receipt of any application and proposal for an initial license, the City Council shall refer the same to the City Manager, who shall prepare or cause to be prepared a report, including recommendations respecting such application and proposal, and cause the same to be completed and filed with the City Council. The city will evaluate all applications and proposals that are submitted. All applicants that have met the city’s qualifications in the request for applications and proposals and have submitted them on the required forms will be offered the opportunity to make a formal presentation to the City Council in support of their applications and proposals.

(G) Investigations. The city may make such investigations as it deems necessary to determine the ability of the applicant to perform under the license, and the applicant shall furnish to the city all such information and data for this purpose as the city may request.

(H) Rejection. The city may reject any and all applications or proposals from whatever source and whenever received, and the city also reserves the right to waive all formalities where the best interest of the city may be served, and may, if it so desires, request new or additional applications and proposals.

(I) Public comment. If, upon receiving the City Manager’s report, the City Council shall determine to further consider the applications and proposals, it shall set a public hearing for consideration of the applications and proposals when any persons having any interest therein may file written comments or objections to any application or proposal and appear before the City Council and be heard and direct the City Clerk to publish a notice of the public hearing in the manner and time established by the City Council.

(J) Consideration. In making any determination hereunder as to any application for an initial license, the city may consider any and all factors relevant to significant interests of the community in cable television, including, but not limited to, the quality of the cable services proposed, areas to be served, rates to subscribers, income to the city, experience, character, background and financial responsibility of any applicant and its management and owners, technical and performance quality of equipment, willingness and ability to meet construction and physical requirements, to meet all requirements set forth in this chapter and to abide by all policy conditions, license limitations and requirements and all other matters deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public.

(K) Determination. At the time set for the hearing on applications and proposals for initial licenses, or at any adjournment thereof, the City Council shall proceed to hear all comments. Thereafter, the City Council shall make one of the following determinations:

(1) That such application and proposal be denied, which determination shall be final and conclusive; or

(2) That an initial license be granted and the terms and conditions thereof. No provision of this chapter shall be deemed or construed so as to require the granting of an initial license.

(L) Additional information. The City Council or its designee may at any time demand and applicant shall provide such supplementary, additional or other information as the city may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested license should be granted.

(M) Awards based on public record. It is the intention of the city to award any initial license solely on the basis of the public record. To this end, communication with the Mayor and City Council by those wishing to submit proposals for an initial license should be limited to public sessions. Requests for information should be directed to the office of the City Manager.

(N) City Council decisions shall be final. Any decision of the City Council concerning awarding of an initial license, pursuant to this chapter, shall be final.

(Prior Code, § 17-2-3)


17-2-4 PROCEDURE FOR LICENSE RENEWAL.

(A) Unless otherwise preempted by federal law, the license renewal procedure set forth in this section shall be followed.

(B) License renewal procedures shall comply with the following provisions and follow Section 626 of the Cable Communications Act of 1992, as amended from time to time.

(1) During the six month period which begins with the thirty sixth month before the license expiration, the city may, on its own initiative, and shall at the request of the licensee, commence proceedings which afford the public appropriate notice and participation for the purpose of:

(a) Identifying the future cable related community needs and interests; and

(b) Reviewing the performance of the licensee under the license during the then current license term.

(2) Upon completion of a proceeding under subsection (B)(1) of this section, the licensee seeking renewal of a license may, on its own initiative or at the request of the city, submit a proposal for renewal. If not then in violation of any federal law or regulation, the proposal shall be accompanied by a certified or cashier’s check payable to the city in the nonrefundable amount of $5,000 to be deposited by city in its general account and first applied by the city to recover its costs and expenses, including reasonable in house staff time, incurred by the city in the administration, evaluation and processing of the proposal.

(a) Subject to Section 624 of the Cable Act, such proposal shall contain such material as the city may require, including proposals for an upgrade of the cable system.

(b) The city may establish a date by which such proposal shall be submitted.

(3) Upon submittal by the licensee of a proposal to the city for the renewal of the license, the city shall provide prompt public notice of such proposal and, during the four month period which begins on the completion of any proceedings under subsection (1) of this subsection, renew the license or issue a preliminary assessment that the license should not be renewed and, at the request of the licensee or on its own initiative, commence an administrative proceeding, after providing prompt public notice of such proceeding, in accordance with this subsection to consider whether:

(a) The licensee has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing license and with applicable law;

(b) The quality of the licensee’s service, including signal quality, response to consumer complaints and billing practices, but without regard to the mix, quality or level of cable services or other services provided over the cable system has been reasonable in light of community needs;

(c) The licensee has the financial, legal and technical ability to provide the services, facilities and equipment as set forth in the licensee’s proposal; and

(d) The licensee’s proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests. In any proceeding under this section, the licensee shall be afforded adequate notice, and the licensee and the city or its designee shall be afforded fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to introduce evidence (including evidence related to issues raised in the proceeding under subsection (1) of this subsection), to require the production of evidence and to question witnesses. At the written request of either the city or licensee, the proceedings shall be recorded or taken by a reporter at the sole cost of the party making such request, and a transcript of the proceeding shall be made available to the person requesting such transcript at the cost of such person. At the completion of a proceeding under this section, the city shall issue a written decision granting or denying the proposal for renewal based upon the record of such proceeding and transmit a copy of such decision to the licensee. Such decision shall state the reasons therefor.

(4) Any denial of a proposal for renewal shall be based on one or more adverse findings made with respect to the factors described in subsections (3)(a) through (d), pursuant to the record of the proceeding under this section. The city may not base a denial of renewal solely on a failure to substantially comply with the material terms of the license under subsection (3)(a) or on events considered under subsection (3)(b) unless the city has provided the licensee with notice and the opportunity to cure, or in any case in which it is documented that the city has waived its right to object, or has effectively acquiesced.

(5) Any licensee whose proposal for renewal has been denied by a final decision of the city made pursuant to this section, or has been adversely affected by a failure of the city to act in accordance with the procedural requirements of this section, may appeal such final decision or failure pursuant to the provisions of Sections 626 and 635 of the Cable Act.

(6) Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, the licensee may submit a proposal for the renewal of the license pursuant to this section at any time, and the city may, after affording the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, grant or deny such proposal at any time (including after proceedings pursuant to subsection (1) have commenced). The denial of a renewal pursuant to this subsection shall not affect action on a renewal proposal that is submitted in accordance with subsection (2) of this subsection.

(Prior Code, § 17-2-4)


17-2-5 GRANT OF LICENSE.

(A) Authority to grant license. The city may grant one or more nonexclusive, revocable licenses for the city.

(B) Grant.

(1) In the event that the city grants a nonexclusive, revocable license to construct, operate, maintain, expand and reconstruct a cable system or a renewal of an existing license, the license shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the services of a cable system as required by the provisions of this chapter and the license. The license shall include those provisions of the applicant’s proposal that are finally negotiated and accepted by the city and licensee. Any license granted under the terms and conditions of this chapter shall be consistent with federal laws and regulations and state laws and regulations. In the event of conflict between the terms and conditions of the license and the terms and conditions on which the city can grant a license, the federal and state general law or statutory requirements or both shall, without exception, control to the extent any such federal or state laws or regulations are deemed to preempt the conditions of the license.

(2) Any license granted is subject to all provisions of this chapter in effect at the time the license is granted. In the event of a conflict between the terms of the license and other codes and ordinances of the city, the license shall control. However, nothing in the license shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the other codes and ordinances of the city regarding permits, fees to be paid or manner of construction.

(3) To the extent permitted and not preempted by applicable federal and state law, a license under this chapter shall grant to the licensee the right and privilege to operate and use its cable system to provide telecommunications services other than cable services (such as two way communication), and the city may exercise all such authority as it may have under applicable law to regulate such telecommunications services, including, but not limited to, the authority to regulate such telecommunications services to protect the public welfare, safety and health and to comply with the standards established by this chapter. To the extent applicable law does not permit the city to grant such a license nor prohibit a licensee from using the cable system to provide such telecommunications services without a license from the city, this chapter shall not limit a licensee’s authority to provide such telecommunications services, subject to all the authority of the city to regulate such telecommunication services (and the facilities through which they are provided) to protect the public welfare, safety and health.

(C) License required. No cable system shall be allowed to occupy, use or cross any street in the city or be allowed to operate without a license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(D) Establishment of license requirements. The city may establish appropriate requirements for initial licenses or renewal licenses and may modify these requirements from time to time to reflect changing conditions and the state of the art in the cable industry, consistent with federal law. However, such requirements shall not be retroactive to licenses then in effect, except as set forth in § 17-2-4.

(E) Duration. Unless sooner terminated as hereinafter provided in this chapter, the term of any license and all rights, privileges, obligations and restrictions pertaining thereto shall be as established in the license but shall not exceed the maximum length permitted under law.

(F) License nonexclusive. Any license granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional licenses as it deems appropriate.

(G) Rights to purchase. The city may reserve in the license a right of first refusal or the right to purchase a licensee’s cable system in and under terms agreed upon by the licensee and the city. Such rights shall arise only in the event of revocation or failure to renew a license.

(H) License applications. Applicants for a license shall submit to the city written applications utilizing the standardized format provided by the city, at the time and place designated by the city for accepting applications, and including the application fees designated by the city.

(I) Grant procedure.

(1) All applications for a new license, when filed, shall be available for public inspection at places designated by the city. No later than 120 days after the final date for filing applications, one or more public hearings shall be held on the applications. The city may grant one or more licenses or may decline to grant any license.

(2) All applications for a renewal license, submitted by a licensee pursuant to § 17-2-4, shall be available for public inspection at places designated by the city. Upon submittal of a renewal proposal, the city shall determine in a manner consistent with applicable federal law whether such proposal should be accepted. Such determination shall be based solely on whether:

(a) Licensee has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing license and with applicable law;

(b) The quality of licensee’s service, including signal quality, response to consumer complaints and billing practices, but without regard to the mix, quality or level of cable services or other services provided over the cable system has been reasonable in light of community needs;

(c) Licensee has the financial, legal, administrative and technical ability to provide the services, facilities and equipment as set forth in the proposal; and

(d) Licensee’s proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests.

(J) Other terms. A license may contain other terms and conditions not inconsistent with this chapter and applicable federal and state law.

(Prior Code, § 17-2-5)


17-2-6 TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS.

(A) (1) A license shall not be sold, assigned, transferred, pledged, mortgaged or hypothecated in whole or in part, nor shall substantially all of the assets of the cable system of the licensee be leased or sublet in any manner unless mandated by federal law or regulation or shall title thereto, either legal or equitable or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person, except an affiliate or subsidiary of licensee, without prior written consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.

(2) Such consent shall not be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation in whole or in part to secure an indebtedness; provided, however, in the event of a sale or transfer of the license by reason of a default on any such indebtedness and whether or not assets of the licensee or stock of the licensee are sold to be transferred to any person, including the creditor of licensee, consent as required hereunder shall be first obtained. Such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.

(3) The licensee and proposed assignee must submit a completed Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Form 394, together with all exhibits, to the city for consent to the assignment or transfer of the license. Such submission shall demonstrate that the assignment or transfer will not cause any increased risks of nonperformance of the license or any loss to the city of its bargained for consideration in the license by detailing facts sufficient to show that the assignee’s technical ability, financial capability, legal qualifications and general character qualifications are sufficient to permit transferee to operate and the assignee must agree to comply with all provisions of the license. The city shall have 120 days from the date of such submission to act upon such transfer request. If the city fails to act upon such transfer request within such 120 days, such request shall be deemed granted unless the city and the licensee agree in writing to an extension of time.

(B) Except for a transfer to an affiliate or subsidiary of licensee, no change, transfer or acquisition of control of the licensee shall occur without prior written consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The licensee shall promptly notify the city of any actual or proposed change in, transfer to or acquisition by any other party of control of the license. The word control as used herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised.

(C) A non rebuttable presumption that transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person, or group of persons, of 50% or more of the voting interest of the licensee or of the person exercising management authority over the licensee.

(D) (1) Except in the case of an assignment of the license to an affiliate or subsidiary of licensee, upon submission of FCC Form 394, together with all exhibits, by the licensee to the city requesting consent to a proposed assignment of the license, or transfer of control of ownership of the licensee company, the Council shall promptly direct the City Manager to issue, and the City Manager shall promptly issue, his or her written notice fixing and setting forth the day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein may appear and be heard. The City Clerk shall cause such notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The City Clerk also shall cause a copy of such notice to be mailed to the licensee at least ten days prior to the date specified for the hearing. At the time set for such hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the City Manager shall proceed to hear the matter. Following the close of such hearing, the City Manager shall prepare and file with the Council his or her report of the hearing, his or her findings and an opinion containing his or her recommendations and the reasons therefor.

(2) If after the expiration of ten days, following receipt of the City Manager’s report and opinion, the Council shall find that the assignment of the license or transfer of control or ownership of the licensee company will not be detrimental or injurious to the best interests and welfare of the subscribers and users and of the city, then the Council by resolution, or by ordinance, if the licensee is a corporation, shall consent to the assignment of the license or transfer of control or ownership of the licensee company. Such resolution or ordinance shall thereupon become and shall be a part of any license granted under this chapter and affected thereby. The city shall have 120 days from the date of its submission of FCC Form 394 to act on licensee’s transfer or assignment request, unless the city and licensee agree in writing to an extension of time.

(E) The consent or approval of the City Council to any transfer of a license shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the streets, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of the license.

(F) In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, and except as provided by federal law, the City Council will not approve any transfer or assignment of a license within three years of the acquisition or initial construction of the cable system by licensee.

(G) In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without the successor in interest becoming a signatory to the license. However, the transferring licensee shall not be released from any liabilities for acts or omissions or violations of its license which have occurred prior to the city issuing the new license to the transferee.

(H) The transferee of a license or any person or other entity gaining control of the licensee as defined in this section shall cure any licensee’s defaults under the license or this chapter in accordance with a schedule approved by the city, provided the city gives written notice of their known defaults to the transferee prior to the city’s approval of such transfer.

(I) If not then in violation of any federal law or regulation, the entity or person requesting the city’s consent to a transfer or assignment, such request for consent shall be accompanied by a cashier’s check or certified check payable to the city in a nonrefundable amount of $3,000, to be deposited by the city in its general account and first applied by the city to recover its costs and expenses, including reasonable in house staff time, incurred by the city in the administration, evaluation and processing the request for such consent.

(Prior Code, § 17-2-6)


ARTICLE 17-3 Streets and Construction

Section

17-3-1    Authority for use of streets

17-3-2    Conditions on street occupancy

17-3-3    Approval of construction by city; inspection

17-3-4    Construction standards

17-3-5    Undergrounding

17-3-6    Relocation

17-3-7    Completion

17-3-8    Removal


17-3-1 AUTHORITY FOR USE OF STREETS.

(A) For the purposes of operating and maintaining a cable system in the city, licensee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, under, upon, across and along the streets within the city such lines, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the cable system, provided that all applicable permits are applied for and granted, all fees paid and all other city codes and ordinances are otherwise complied with.

(B) Licensee shall construct and maintain a cable system so as not to unreasonably interfere with other uses of streets. Licensee shall make use of existing facilities available to licensee. Licensee shall use reasonable efforts to individually notify all property owners affected by proposed construction prior to the commencement of that work.

(C) Notwithstanding the grant to use streets as provided in this section, no street shall be used by licensee if the city, in its absolute discretion, determines that such use is inconsistent with the terms, conditions or provisions by which such street was created, dedicated or presently used.

(Prior Code, § 17-3-1)


17-3-2 CONDITIONS ON STREET OCCUPANCY.

(A) All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the licensee within the city shall be so located as not to interfere with the ordinary use by the city or public of streets, landscaping, alleys and other public ways and places or to interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who abut any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places.

(B) In case of disturbance of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way, paved area or landscaped area, the licensee shall promptly, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the City Engineer, replace and restore such street, sidewalk, alley, public way, paved area or landscaped area in compliance with city standards. If licensee fails to comply with city standards, any such failure shall be corrected within ten business days of written notification to licensee at licensee’s sole cost and expense. If licensee is not able to correct such failure or damage in ten days, then licensee must notify the City Manager or his or her designee of delay and provide a schedule for repairs or replacement acceptable to the City Manager. If a schedule as referred to in this section is not acceptable to the city, the city may, at its option, correct such disturbance or damage and upon demand by the city, licensee shall promptly pay the city the costs and expenses incurred by the city in the correction or repair of such damage.

(Prior Code, § 17-3-2)


17-3-3 APPROVAL OF CONSTRUCTION BY CITY; INSPECTION.

A licensee shall at all times fully comply with all city requirements regarding work within the city’s rights of way. As required by the city, all construction of any kind within the city’s rights of way must have prior approval by the Public Works Director. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, and action shall be taken on any request for approval within three business days of the receipt of an acceptable request. Licensee shall be able to make emergency repairs where and if required by the city code. The city has the right to inspect the construction, operation and maintenance of the cable system by the licensee to insure compliance with this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 17-3-3)


17-3-4 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.

(A) Licensee shall at all times comply with the National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); federal, state and local regulations; and codes and ordinances of the city, including all applicable laws, regulations and codes involving environmental or pollution concerns.

(B) The cable system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property within the city or other areas where the licensee may have equipment located.

(C) During construction of the cable system all working facilities, conditions and procedures used shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.

(D) Construction, installation and maintenance of the cable system shall be performed in close coordination with public and private utilities serving the city in an orderly and workmanlike manner, following generally accepted construction procedures and practices and working through existing committees and organizations.

(E) All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines and multiple cable configuration shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering consideration.

(Prior Code, § 17-3-4)


17-3-5 UNDERGROUNDING.

Except when permitted under this chapter and when reasonably required to fill small gaps in existing permitted aerial utility systems when approved by the City Manager or his or her designee, a licensee shall not erect any pole on or along any street or public way of the city. Except as prohibited in this chapter, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the use of existing poles, provided that use agreements are entered into between a licensee and the owners of said poles.

(A) The undergrounding of cables is required under the following conditions when either have or do occur:

(1) Cables shall be installed underground where all existing utilities are already underground;

(2) Previously installed aerial cable shall be undergrounded in concert with utilities when they are undergrounded; and

(3) When previously installed aerial utilities are undergrounded.

(B) To prevent unnecessary damage to streets, right of way and property, the installation of cable service cables underground shall be accomplished in new subdivisions at the same time and in the same trench as other communications, electric and other permanent services to structures.

(Prior Code, § 17-3-5)


17-3-6 RELOCATION.

If during the term of a license, the city elects to alter, repair, realign, abandon, improve, vacate, reroute or change the grade of any street or to replace, repair, install, maintain or otherwise alter any city facility, whether above ground or underground cable, wire conduit, pipe, line, pole, wire holding structure, structure or other city facility utilized for the provision of utility or other such services or transportation of drainage, sewage or other liquids, the licensee shall, unless otherwise provided in this chapter, at its sole expense, remove or relocate, as necessary, its wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes and any other facilities which it has installed. A licensee shall take action to remove or relocate its facilities at such time as directed by the city or entity whose facilities are affected. Advance written notice shall be mailed to the licensee advising the licensee of the date removal or relocation is to be undertaken.

(Prior Code, § 17-3-6)


17-3-7 COMPLETION.

(A) A final order of completion for a new licensee shall be issued by the City Council when:

(1) The construction of the cable system has been completed and certified by the licensee to be in compliance with the construction standards and the design and other requirements of this chapter and of any applicable laws, ordinances or regulations, and the restoration or repair of any street or public improvement approved by the Public Works Director as being in compliance with applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations;

(2) Cable services have been made available, if applicable, per the line extension policy in § 17-6-1;

(3) Any and all studio facilities, equipment, channels and other services, resources or benefits required for public, educational and governmental access purposes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter have been completed and made available;

(4) Complete and accurate as built plans shall be available for inspection by the city; and

(5) A notice of completion has been filed by the licensee.

(B) For purposes of this chapter, cable service shall be deemed to be made available when cable services are offered on a non discriminatory basis for immediate provision to prospective subscribers, if applicable, per the line extension policy in § 17-6-1.

(C) The licensee must be able to offer to install operable cable services to all dwelling units in the city no later than 24 months after the Council grants a new license, if applicable, per the line extension policy in § 17-6-1.

(D) The provisions of this section shall apply only to construction of a new cable system pursuant to an initial license or to system wide reconstruction of an existing cable system. In no other circumstances shall a final order of completion be required by the city, provided that all other applicable city regulations and codes have been complied with.

(Prior Code, § 17-3-7)


17-3-8 REMOVAL.

(A) Upon expiration or termination of a license, if the license is not renewed, and if no one purchases the cable system, the licensee may remove any underground cable, if the cable may be removed without trenching.

(B) A licensee shall file written notice of its intention to remove underground cable with the City Clerk not later than 30 calendar days following the date of expiration or termination. The notice shall inform the city of licensee’s intention to remove its cable and shall provide a schedule for the removal.

(C) The schedule filed pursuant to subsection (B) of this section shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

(D) Removal of cable by the licensee shall be completed not later than 12 months following the date of expiration or termination.

(E) If notice is not filed pursuant to subsection (B) of this section, the underground cable shall be deemed abandoned.

(F) If the licensee does remove cable, all underground cable which is not removed pursuant to subsection (D) of this section shall be deemed abandoned.

(G) Upon expiration or termination of the license, if the license is not renewed and if no one purchases the cable system, the licensee, at its sole expense, shall, unless relieved of the obligation by the city, remove from the streets and all public rights of way, alleyways and other public property, all above ground elements of the cable system located thereon and also all underground elements of the cable system if requested in writing by the city upon direction of the City Council. All removal required under this subsection shall be completed within 12 months following the termination or expiration of the license. The city may require, and licensee shall furnish, a corporate surety bond in an amount as mutually agreed upon in the license, from and by an entity acceptable to the City Council to assure performance of licensee’s obligations under this subsection. In the event the licensee fails to specify an amount for such bond, the bond shall be of sufficient amount to cover the reasonable costs of removal agreed hereunder.

(H) The licensee shall apply for and obtain such encroachment permits, licenses, authorization or other approvals and pay such fees and deposits or such security as required by applicable ordinances of the city, shall conduct and complete the work of removal in compliance with all such applicable ordinances and shall restore the streets and other public ways or property to as nearly as possible the same condition they were in before the work of removal commenced.

(Prior Code, § 17-3-8)


ARTICLE 17-4 System

Section

17-4-1    General capability

17-4-2    System reliability

17-4-3    Upgrade requirements

17-4-4    Public, educational and governmental access

17-4-5    Public drops

17-4-6    Theft of service

17-4-7    Tampering with system


17-4-1 GENERAL CAPABILITY.

Each cable system shall, at a minimum:

(A) Relay to subscriber those broadcast signals required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC);

(B) Distribute in color all television signals which it receives in color;

(C) If required by the FCC, make available to subscribers, upon request, an RF switch (an A B switch) permitting conversion from cable to antenna reception; and

(D) Have the minimum channel capacity as set forth in this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 17-4-1)


17-4-2 SYSTEM RELIABILITY.

(A) Standby power. Each cable communications system shall include equipment capable of providing standby powering for headend, microwave hubs and key trunk amplifiers for approximately two hours. The equipment shall be so constructed as to automatically revert to the standby mode when the utility power returns. The cable system shall incorporate safeguards necessary to prevent injury to linemen resulting from a standby generator powering a dead utility line.

(B) System reliability. A desirable objective to be achieved in the maintenance and operation of the cable system is that the cable system meet the standards therefor set by the FCC regulation or greater.

(C) Omitted standards. In the event FCC regulations do not prescribe standards as herein contemplated, licensor may include any omitted standards for the maintenance and operation of the cable system as agreed in the license or any amendment thereto which will be required if no FCC regulations then require any standards.

(Prior Code, § 17-4-2)


17-4-3 UPGRADE REQUIREMENTS.

The license may provide that a licensee shall upgrade the cable system as specified in the license.

(Prior Code, § 17-4-3)


17-4-4 PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS.

(A) The following topics shall be discussed and resolved unless otherwise provided for in this chapter during the application process for an initial license or the renewal of a license.

(1) City Hall programming. Whether the cable system shall include the capability to televise and distribute to subscribers events occurring live at the City Hall with a signal quality similar to that of other major channels distributed by the licensee.

(2) Community service channels. Whether the system shall include the provision of community service or access channels, including one channel for government usage and one channel for public access/local origination.

(3) Facilities and management. Whether licensee shall provide access to studio facilities, production equipment, technical assistance and other facilities and equipment to enable the city and its residents to fully utilize the cable system as not only an entertainment medium.

(4) Use available. If use of facilities for public, educational and governmental access is made available, whether a licensee shall:

(a) Allow all persons and entitles desiring to cablecast public, educational or governmental access programming to produce programming upon and electronically interface directly with the cable system of licensee so as to effectively cablecast the public, educational or governmental access programming; or, in the alternative,

(b) Establish such reasonable rules and procedures for the utilization of such public, educational or governmental access programming.

(B) One channel shall be provided by licensee without any additional costs for exclusive use by public schools, colleges and universities.

(Prior Code, § 17-4-4)


17-4-5 PUBLIC DROPS.

To the extent specified in the license, a licensee shall provide free basic subscriber services and one standard drop without cost to municipal and educational facilities.

(Prior Code, § 17-4-5)


17-4-6 THEFT OF SERVICE.

It shall be a misdemeanor for any person or entity to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, to any part of a licensed cable television system within the city for the purpose of enabling receipt of video, audio, digital or other signals or information, without payment to licensee; a violation of this section shall subject any such person to a fine of up to $1,000 for any such violation. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense under this section.

(Prior Code, § 17-4-6)


17-4-7 TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM.

It shall be a misdemeanor for any person or entity, without the consent of licensee, to willfully tamper with, remove, damage or destroy any cable or equipment used in connection with a cable system within the city; a violation of this section shall subject any person to a fine of up to $1,000 for any such violation. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense under this section.

(Prior Code, § 17-4-7)


ARTICLE 17-5 Financial

Section

17-5-1    License fee

17-5-2    Rates


17-5-1 LICENSE FEE.

(A) For the reason that the streets and other public rights of way which are used by the licensee in the operation of its cable system within the boundaries of the city are valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the city at great expense to its taxpayers and that the grant to the licensee to the use of said streets is a valuable property right without which the licensee would be required to invest substantial capital in right of way costs and acquisitions, and because the city will incur costs in regulating and administering the license, the licensee shall pay to the city an amount no less than 5% of licensee’s gross revenues (the license fee) in a 12 month period. The purpose of the license fee is to provide full compensation to the city for licensee’s use of the streets and public ways and for the city’s costs of regulation of licensee. Licensee shall not be required to pay construction or engineering permit fees or similar charges.

(B) Should federal regulations be amended in the future to allow the city to receive a greater fee than the fee set forth in subsection (A) of this section, then, in that event, the city shall have the right to increase the fee as specified in the license.

(C) The payment of the license fee by the licensee to the city shall be made quarterly by delivery of the same to the City Manager or his or her designee on or before the twentieth day of the following month with a ten day grace period. If such payment is not made by the next to the last business day of the following month, the city may impose interest at a rate of 1.5% per month commencing from the date payment should have been made and continuing until the payment is made. Fractions of a month shall be considered to constitute a full month for the purpose of computing interest. In addition to interest which may be assessed under this subsection, if licensee fails to pay any license fee, before the end of such grace period, licensee shall be subject to the following civil penalties.

(1) A licensee who fails to pay the license fee or any portion thereof within the time prescribed shall pay a penalty of 10% of the unpaid fee each month. This penalty does not apply to amounts determined to be due under subsection (D) of this section.

(2) Licensee who fails or refuses to pay a license fee or any portion thereof after notice and demand by the city shall pay a penalty of 25% of the unpaid fee. This penalty does not apply to amounts determined to be due under subsection (D) of this section.

(3) If the cause of failure to pay the licensee fee or any portion thereof is determined by the city to be due to civil fraud or evasion of the license fee, the licensee shall pay a penalty the greater of:

(a) $500 for each month or part thereof during which such deficiency continues; or

(b) 50% of the amount of deficiency. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed a waiver of the city’s claim for attorneys fees, special damages or punitive damages in the event such fraud or evasion is found to exist.

(D) The city shall have the right to inspect the licensee’s income records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this chapter; provided, however, that such audit shall take place within 36 months following the close of each of the licensee’s fiscal years. Any additional amount due to the city as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the licensee by the city, the notice shall include a copy of the audit report and shall bear interest or penalties on the unpaid balance from the date each such amount should have been paid until payment thereof in the amount specified in the license, together with a 1.5% charge on a monthly basis on the amount by which underpayment is found to be more than 5% of the amount due for any such payment until paid.

(E) If licensee pays an additional license fee as a result of such audit under protest, and upon exhaustion of all appeals, such additional fee is determined to have been overpaid, then the city shall refund such licensee fee overpayment plus interest at the rate set forth in the license from the date of payment to the date of refund by the city.

(Prior Code, § 17-5-1)


17-5-2 RATES.

(A) The licensee shall not discriminate in the assessment, levy, charge, imposition or collection of rates on the basis of age, race, creed, color, religion, national origin, sex or marital status.

(B) The city may regulate the rates for cable services in accordance with such procedure and policies as may be adopted by the City Council not inconsistent or contrary to federal and state law or regulations.

(Prior Code, § 17-5-2)


ARTICLE 17-6 Service

Section

17-6-1    Extension of service

17-6-2    Discrimination prohibited

17-6-3    Local business office requirement

17-6-4    Efficient telephone communications services

17-6-5    Service standards

17-6-6    Response to subscriber complaints about service

17-6-7    Subscriber’s right upon failure of service

17-6-8    Subscriber solicitation procedures

17-6-9    A/B switch

17-6-10    City and subscriber notification required


17-6-1 EXTENSION OF SERVICE.

Cable services are to be made available to all units within the city for the following types of services, in accordance with this section: residential service; commercial service; and service drops for single family residential units, commercial units and multiple dwelling unit.

(A) Residential service.

(1) When requested by a resident or developer in the city, licensee shall, at licensee’s sole expense, extend cable services to any single family residence or dwelling within the city, provided that such extension involves existing density of 40 homes per mile as measured in linear trench or aerial strand footage from the nearest technically feasible point on the system. Such extension shall include cutting in one or more taps and extending feeder cable and, when necessary, trunk cable.

(2) When a resident or developer in the city requests an extension of service to an area that does not meet the minimum 40 homes per mile density as described in subsection (1) above, licensee shall be required to comply with such request only if the resident or developer agrees to pay to the licensee in advance an amount equal to all incremental costs incurred. The incremental costs to be paid shall be licensee’s costs (reasonable labor and materials) of extending the cable system consistently with licensee’s overall system design to the resident or developer from the nearest technically feasible point on the system. The costs shall include cutting in one or more taps and extending trunk and feeder cable excluding cutting in one or more taps. In the case of extension to a developer, the extension shall be made to the nearest technically feasible point of connection to the development, licensee shall then extend the cable system within the development at no cost.

(3) Regardless of whether licensee is requested to extend service, licensee shall install conduit in open trenches used by electric power and telephone companies in new single family subdivisions at the same time as such other utilities are installed in the event the owner or developer of the property to be served by the trench notifies licensee in writing that utilities will be placed in the trench and such notice is given to licensee at least 72 hours prior to the placing of the first utilities in the trench.

(4) Extension of service pursuant to this section shall be accomplished within 150 days of the developer or resident’s request unless such time is extended by the City Manager or his or her designee upon a finding that such extension cannot be accomplished because of non availability of materials, strikes, acts of God, war or insurrection or other like reasons beyond the control of licensee.

(B) Commercial service. Licensee shall make cable services available to commercial establishments in the manner provided for in the license as granted by the city but which said license shall include at least the following, except that licensee shall not be required to make service available to commercial establishments where the owner of the property has not granted licensee reasonable access to the property:

(1) When requested by the owner of a commercial establishment within the city, licensee shall extend cable services to any such owner’s commercial establishment, provided that no plant extension and nothing more than a standard drop is required to make such cable services available;

(2) When the owner of a commercial establishment within the city requests an extension of service that does not meet the criteria described in this subsection, licensee shall be required to comply with such request only if such owner pays to licensee an amount equal to the reasonable actual labor and material costs incurred by licensee over and above the cost of a standard drop in making cable services available to such owner’s commercial establishment;

(3) Reasonable access to the commercial property shall be granted to the licensee;

(4) Absent a showing by licensee to the City Manager or designee of unusual circumstances, including without limitation, street crossings, an extension of service pursuant to this subsection shall be accomplished within 150 days of the owner’s request unless the time is extended by the City Manager or his or her designee upon a finding that such extension cannot be accomplished because of non availability of materials, strikes, acts of God, war or insurrection or other like reasons beyond the control of licensee.

(C) Service drops.

(1) Single family residential dwelling units (RDU’s).

(a) Licensee shall make service available to any single family residence or dwelling within the city at the standard connection charge if the connection requires a standard drop.

(b) If making service available requires more than a standard drop, licensee shall not be required to make such service available unless the person or entity requesting such service pays to licensee:

1. The standard connection charge; and

2. An amount equal to the reasonable actual labor and material costs incurred by licensee for the additional facilities and work.

(c) Absent a showing by licensee to the City Manager or designee of unusual circumstances, including, without limitation, street crossings:

1. Any standard drop to a single family residence or dwelling shall be accomplished within ten days of the request for service; and

2. Any drop that is not a standard drop shall be accomplished within 20 days of such request.

(2) Commercial/industrial. Licensee shall make service available to any commercial establishment within the city at the standard connection charge if the connection requires a standard drop upon the following conditions:

(a) If making service available requires more than a standard drop, licensee shall not be required to make such service available unless the person or entity requesting such service pays to licensee:

1. The standard connection charge; and

2. An amount equal to the reasonable actual labor and material costs incurred by licensee for the additional facilities and work.

(b) Any standard drop to a commercial establishment shall be accomplished within 20 days after the owner of such commercial establishment executes any necessary easement documents and capital contribution agreements and any commercial drop that is not a standard drop shall be accomplished within 30 days of the owner’s execution of such documents and agreements; provided, however, such period of time for accomplishment may be extended by the City Manager or his or her designee upon a finding that such extension cannot be accomplished because of non availability of materials, strikes, acts of God, war or insurrection or other like reasons beyond the control of licensee.

(3) Service to multiple dwelling unit (MDU) projects. Licensee shall make cable service available to multiple dwelling units in the manner provided in the license as granted by the city, provided such license shall provide at least the following: when an agreement granting licensee, among other provisions, reasonable access to the property, has been negotiated between licensee and the MDU project owners or agents:

(a) Licensee shall make service available to any multi dwelling unit complex within the city at the standard connection charge if the connection requires a standard drop;

(b) If making service available requires more than a standard drop, licensee shall not be required to make such service available unless the person or entity requesting such service pays to licensee:

1. The standard connection charge; and

2. An amount equal to the reasonable actual labor and material costs incurred by licensee for the additional facilities and work.

(c) Absent a showing by licensee to the City Manager or designee of unusual circumstances, including without limitation, line extensions or street crossings:

1. Any standard drop in a multiple dwelling unit or dwelling shall be accomplished within ten days of the request for service; and

2. Any drop that is not a standard drop shall be accomplished within 20 days of such request.

(d) Licensee may offer bulk billing service but shall not require a bulk billing agreement as a condition of providing service, if the person or entity requesting service pays to licensee the applicable amount(s) set forth in subsections (1) or (3) of this subsection.

(Prior Code, § 17-6-1)


17-6-2 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.

Except as provided in the license, no person, firm or corporation in the city of the license shall be arbitrarily refused cable services by licensee; provided, however, that the licensee shall not be required to provide cable services to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable line extension connection fee or cable service charge as provided in the license.

(Prior Code, § 17-6-2)


17-6-3 LOCAL BUSINESS OFFICE REQUIREMENT.

A licensee shall maintain a business office for the purpose of receiving inquiries regarding new service, handling converters, paying bills and receiving complaints within 15 miles of the City Hall or such lesser distance as may be provided in the license.

(Prior Code, § 17-6-3)


17-6-4 EFFICIENT TELEPHONE COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.

A licensee shall render efficient telephone communication service and, at a minimum, meet the standards set forth below.

(A) A licensee shall have a publicly listed, local or toll free telephone number, in accordance with this section and receive complaints and requests for repairs, service calls, billing inquiries and other subscriber information on a 24 hour per day, seven day a week basis.

(B) The specific telephone standards which shall be met by licensee shall be equal to or exceed FCC standards as amended by the FCC from time to time.

(Prior Code, § 17-6-4)


17-6-5 SERVICE STANDARDS.

(A) A licensee shall put, keep and maintain all parts of its cable system in good, operational condition throughout the entire license period.

(B) Upon termination of cable services to any subscriber, a licensee shall promptly remove its converter equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon subscriber’s request.

(C) A licensee shall render efficient cable services, make repairs promptly and interrupt cable services only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall occur during periods of minimum cable system use.

(D) A licensee shall not knowingly allow its cable or other operations to interfere with television reception of persons not serviced by licensee, nor shall the cable system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the operation of the various utilities serving the residents of the city.

(E) A licensee shall continue, through the term of the license, to maintain the technical, operational and maintenance standards and quality of cable service set forth in this chapter and as specified in the license. If the licensee fails to maintain these standards and quality of cable service, the city may direct the improvements to be made.

(F) In the event any licensee should violate any provision of this section, the city shall promptly give such licensee written notice of the violation. The licensee shall, within 30 days of receipt of such written notice from the city:

(1) Respond to the city in writing, contesting the city’s assertion of a violation and providing such information or documentation as may be necessary to support the licensee’s position; or

(2) Cure such violation (and provide written notice of the same to the city); or, in the event that the nature of the violation is such that it cannot be cured within 30 days, take reasonable steps to cure such violation and diligently continue such efforts until such violation is cured.

(G) In the event that a licensee contests the city’s assertion of violation, fails to respond to the city’s notice of violation or fails to take reasonable steps to cure a violation which cannot be cured within 30 days, the city may proceed with hearings in accordance with § 17-10-2.

(H) The license may contain such other service standards as may be deemed appropriate by the City Council and set forth in the license.

(Prior Code, § 17-6-5)


17-6-6 RESPONSE TO SUBSCRIBER COMPLAINTS ABOUT SERVICE.

(A) Licensee shall ensure that there are stand by technicians on call at all times after normal business hours capable of reasonable response to service complaints and, where reasonable, the prompt curing of service complaints.

(B) Whenever it has been determined that an outage exists, licensee shall respond within the time specified in the license, but it shall not be deemed a violation of the license if licensee responds within the time specified in applicable FCC regulations, as may be amended from time to time, or in a lesser time.

(C) Licensee shall respond to all service calls within the times provided for in the license. It shall not be deemed a violation of the license if licensee does not exceed the time permitted for response by any applicable FCC regulations.

(D) Licensee shall schedule all installation, change of service and service calls with subscribers to the extent reasonably practicable. The scheduling shall, at a minimum, be in time frames of visitation of no more than four hours. If the appointment cannot be kept, the licensee shall attempt to notify the subscriber.

(E) Absent a showing by licensee to the City Manager of unusual circumstances, any change of service shall be accomplished within the time specified in the license or within the time specified in any applicable FCC regulation, as amended from time to time, such failure shall be deemed a violation of the license.

(Prior Code, § 17-6-6)


17-6-7 SUBSCRIBER’S RIGHT UPON FAILURE OF SERVICE.

(A) Any subscriber shall be entitled, upon request, to a refund equal to one day’s service for each loss of service:

(1) For a continuous 24 hour period; or

(2) For a period of two or more hours on each of any four days within a monthly billing period. Each such service loss shall commence upon licensee’s oral or written receipt of notice of such loss of service.

(B) Licensee shall maintain service call records on the time of call, nature of service call and any corrective action taken. These service call records shall be made available to the City Manager, or a designee, upon request, subject to applicable federal, state and local law. A summary of service calls shall be prepared by the licensee and submitted in a form approved by the city and the licensee to the City Manager, or a designee, upon request.

(C) The licensee shall notify subscribers at the time of initial subscription to the cable system of the procedure for reporting and resolving inquiries.

(Prior Code, § 17-6-7)


17-6-8 SUBSCRIBER SOLICITATION PROCEDURES.

(A) All personnel, agents and representatives of the licensee, including subcontractors, shall wear a cable uniform or clearly display a photo identification badge when acting on behalf of the licensee in the city.

(B) Licensee shall provide all prospective subscribers with complete, clear and concise written information, prior to or at the time of installation of cable services, concerning all services and rates by licensee. Such sales materials shall clearly and conspicuously disclose the price and other information concerning licensee’s lowest cost service tier. Such information shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(1) All service rates, deposits, if applicable, installation costs, additional television set charges, service upgrade or downgrade charges, relocation of cable outlet charges and any other charges for ancillary cable services;

(2) Information concerning billing and collection procedures, procedures for ordering changes in or termination of services and all refund policies;

(3) Information concerning the utilization of video cassette recorders (hereinafter VCR’s) with cable services, if requested;

(4) A parental control feature that will permit a subscriber to lock out any objectionable programming from the cable services entering his or her home; and

(5) Complete written information concerning licensee’s privacy policies, pursuant to federal law.

(C) A licensee shall promptly inform all affected subscribers and the City Manager or designee of any changes in the information set forth in § 17-6-7 and this section.

(Prior Code, § 17-6-8)


17-6-9 A/B SWITCH.

If required by any then existing current federal law, the licensee shall make available to subscribers the optional installation of a cable/antenna (A/B) switch.

(Prior Code, § 17-6-9)


17-6-10 CITY AND SUBSCRIBER NOTIFICATION REQUIRED.

The licensee shall provide all subscribers with 30 days’ advanced written notice and the city with 37 days’ advanced notice of any planned changes in rates, programming or services. The licensor and licensee may agree to a waiver of this notification procedure if deemed in the public interest.

(Prior Code, § 17-6-10)


ARTICLE 17-7 Billing Practices, Information and Procedures

Section

17-7-1    Notification of billing and collection procedures

17-7-2    Right of rescission

17-7-3    Billing procedures

17-7-4    Disconnection and termination of cable services


17-7-1 NOTIFICATION OF BILLING AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES.

Upon solicitation of service and prior to the consummation of any agreement for installation of service, a licensee shall inform all prospective subscribers of information respecting billing and collection procedures, procedures for ordering changes in or termination of services, refund and credit policies. Such information shall be provided to subscribers in easy to understand language.

(Prior Code, § 17-7-1)


17-7-2 RIGHT OF RESCISSION.

The licensee shall afford each subscriber of the cable system with a three day right of rescission for ordering the service of the cable system, provided that such right of rescission shall end upon initiation of physical installation of cable system equipment on such subscriber’s premises.

(Prior Code, § 17-7-2)


17-7-3 BILLING PROCEDURES.

Billing procedures shall be as follows.

(A) Licensee shall bill all subscribers to its cable system in a uniform, non discriminatory manner, regardless of subscriber’s level of service. In no case shall any subscriber be required to pay for services in excess of 30 days prior to receipt of such service. Payment shall be due no sooner than the twentieth day of each billing period, and the due date shall be listed on each bill. Bills shall be mailed no later than the fifth day of the billing period.

(B) Licensee shall provide all subscribers with an itemized monthly bill that contains, at a minimum, the following information:

(1) A list of each service or package received for that billing period;

(2) The rate or charge for each service or package received;

(3) The period of time over which said services are billed;

(4) The total charges due for the monthly period, separate from any previous balance due; and

(5) A specific date by which payment is required before a late charge is imposed.

(C) Late charges, if applied, shall in no case exceed amounts allowed by applicable law and shall in no case be imposed until the 30 day billing period has elapsed.

(Prior Code, § 17-7-3)


17-7-4 DISCONNECTION AND TERMINATION OF CABLE SERVICES.

Licensee shall only disconnect or terminate a subscriber’s cable for good and just cause. In no event shall licensee disconnect said cable service for nonpayment without the prior written notification to the affected subscriber at least seven days prior to such disconnection or termination. In no event shall such disconnection or termination for nonpayment occur in less than 30 days after a subscriber’s failure to pay a bill due. Where the licensee has improperly discontinued cable system service to any such subscriber, it shall provide free reconnection to the cable system to such subscriber.

(Prior Code, § 17-7-4)


ARTICLE 17-8 Rights of Individuals

Section

17-8-1    Prohibition against denial of service and equal employment opportunity

17-8-2    Protection of subscriber privacy

17-8-3    Permitted disclosure

17-8-4    Subscriber access

17-8-5    Distribution of information

17-8-6    Remedy for act of licensee

17-8-7    Governmental entity entitlement to personally identifiable information


17-8-1 PROHIBITION AGAINST DENIAL OF SERVICE AND EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY.

(A) A licensee shall not deny cable service, deny access or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, users or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age or disability. A licensee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, and as amended from time to time, relating to nondiscrimination.

(B) A licensee shall strictly adhere to applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state and local regulations and as amended from time to time.

(Prior Code, § 17-8-1)


17-8-2 PROTECTION OF SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.

(A) At the time of entering into an agreement to provide any cable service or other service to a subscriber and at least once a year thereafter, a licensee shall provide notice in the form of a separate, written statement to such subscriber which clearly and conspicuously informs the subscriber of:

(1) The nature of personally identifiable information collected or to be collected with respect to the subscriber and the nature of the use of such information;

(2) The nature, frequency and purpose of any disclosure which may be made of such information, including any identification of the types of persons to whom the disclosure may be made;

(3) The period during which such information will be maintained by the licensee;

(4) The times and place at which the subscriber may have access to such information; and

(5) The limitations provided by this section with respect to the collection and disclosure of information by a licensee and the right of the subscriber under this chapter to enforce such limitations.

(B) For purposes of this article, the term PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION does not include any record aggregate data which does not identify particular persons.

(C) Except as provided in this article, a licensee shall not use the cable system to collect personally identifiable information concerning any subscriber without the prior written or electronic consent of the subscriber concerned.

(D) A licensee may use the cable system to collect information in order to:

(1) Obtain information necessary to render a cable service or other service provided by the licensee to the subscriber; or

(2) Detect unauthorized reception of cable communications.

(E) Except as provided in this article, a licensee shall not disclose personally identifiable information concerning any subscriber without the prior written or electronic consent of the subscriber concerned.

(Prior Code, § 17-8-2)


17-8-3 PERMITTED DISCLOSURE.

A licensee may disclose the information acquired by licensee as permitted under this article, if the disclosure is:

(A) Necessary to render or conduct a legitimate business activity related to a cable service or other service provided by the licensee to the subscriber;

(B) Subject to the provisions of this article, made pursuant to a court order authorizing such disclosure, if the subscriber is notified of such order by the person to whom the order is directed; or

(C) A disclosure of the names and addresses of subscribers to any cable service or other service, if:

(1) The licensee has provided the subscriber the opportunity to prohibit or limit such disclosure; and

(2) The disclosure does not reveal, directly or indirectly, the extent of any viewing or other use by the subscriber of a cable service or other service provided by the licensee, or the nature of any transaction made by the subscriber over the cable system of the licensee.

(Prior Code, § 17-8-3)


17-8-4 SUBSCRIBER ACCESS.

A cable subscriber shall be provided access to all personally identifiable information regarding that subscriber which is collected and maintained by a licensee. Such information shall be made available to the subscriber at reasonable times and at a convenient place designated by such licensee. A cable subscriber shall be provided reasonable opportunity to correct any error in such information.

(Prior Code, § 17-8-4)


17-8-5 DISTRIBUTION OF INFORMATION.

A licensee shall destroy personally identifiable information if the information is no longer necessary for the purpose for which it was collected and there are no pending requests or orders for access to such information under this chapter or pursuant to a court order or state law.

(Prior Code, § 17-8-5)


17-8-6 REMEDY FOR ACT OF LICENSEE.

Any person aggrieved by any act of a licensee in violation of this article may bring a civil action in a court of general jurisdiction, as provided in Section 631 of the Cable Act. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the city from enacting or enforcing additional laws consistent with this section for the protection of subscriber privacy.

(Prior Code, § 17-8-6)


17-8-7 GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY ENTITLEMENT TO PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION.

A governmental entity may obtain personally identifiable information concerning a cable subscriber pursuant to a court order only if, in the court proceeding relevant to such court order:

(A) Such entity offers clear and convincing evidence that the subject of the information is reasonably suspected of engaging in a criminal activity and that the information sought would be material evidence in the case; and

(B) The subject of the information is afforded the opportunity to appear and contest such entity’s claim.

(Prior Code, § 17-8-7)


ARTICLE 17-9 Security for Performance

Section

17-9-1    Performance bond/irrevocable letter of credit or assurances


17-9-1 PERFORMANCE BOND/IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT OR ASSURANCES.

(A) Each applicant for an initial license shall file with its application and maintain in full effect at all times thereafter until the filing of a final order of completion pursuant to § 17-3-7 a corporate surety bond issued by a surety licensed by the State of Arizona and approved by the City Manager or an irrevocable letter or credit or other assurance approved by the City Council in an amount equal to the greater of:

(1) The licensee’s reasonable estimate of the total cost of construction of the cable system within the city; or

(2) The product of the number of miles of plant, to the nearest one tenth of a mile, in the city multiplied by the current prevailing costs for installation or construction thereof for each mile or portion thereof of proposed cable as shown on the maps required by this chapter to be on file with the city.

(B) Upon the issuance of a final order of completion pursuant to this chapter, the amount of the aforesaid corporate surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit or other assurance shall be reduced to $10,000 and maintained at such an amount at all times thereafter during the term of the license.

(C) This article and replacements thereof shall be effective for the entire term of the license and renewal thereof and conditioned that in the event the licensee shall fail to comply with any one or more of the provisions of the license, then there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond or letter of credit or other assurance by the city any damages, delinquent license fees, penalties, compensation and costs of repairing or completing the cable system and cost of removal or abandonment of property and repair of streets and other public improvements, up to the full amount of the bond or letter of credit; said condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of the license and thereafter until licensee has satisfied all of its obligations which may have arisen from the acceptance of the license or from the exercise of any privileges thereunder. The surety bond or letter of credit shall provide that the obligations of the surety or letter of credit shall not cease for any reason until 30 days after receipt by the city of written notice of cancellation, or intent not to renew, and shall contain the following endorsement:

This letter of credit (bond) may not be canceled or allowed to lapse until thirty days after receipt by the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the letter of credit of its intent to cancel or not to renew.

(D) Neither the provisions of this article, nor the terms of any bond or letter of credit accepted by the city, nor the recovery of any damages under the bond or letter of credit, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the licensee or to limit the liability of the licensee for damages.

(E) In the event of the lapse of the bond or other assurance provided for in this section without the prior replacement thereof is not cured by licensee within five business days after such lapse, such lapse shall be deemed a material default in the obligations of licensee.

(Prior Code, § 17-9-1)


ARTICLE 17-10 Violation by Licensee

Section

17-10-1    Notice of violation and required response of licensee

17-10-2    Administrative hearing


17-10-1 NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND REQUIRED RESPONSE OF LICENSEE.

(A) Except as may be provided in the license, in the event licensee should violate any provision of the license, the city shall promptly give the licensee written notice of the violation. The licensee shall, within 30 days of receipt of written notice from the city:

(1) Respond to the city in writing, contesting the city’s assertion of violation and providing such information or documentation as may be necessary to support licensee’s position; or

(2) Cure any such violation (and provide written evidence of the same), or, in the event that, by the nature of the violation, such violation cannot be cured within such 30 day period, to take reasonable steps to cure said violation and diligently continue such efforts until said violation is cured. Licensee shall report to the city, in writing, at 30 day intervals as to licensee’s efforts, indicating the steps taken by licensee to cure said violation and reporting licensee’s progress until such violation is cured.

(B) In the event that licensee contests the city’s assertion of violation or fails to respond to the city’s notice of violation within 15 days, the city shall convene hearings in strict accordance with the procedures set forth in § 17-10-2.

(Prior Code, § 17-10-1)


17-10-2 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.

(A) Within 15 days of receipt of notice of contest pursuant to § 17-10-1(B), or expiration of the response time referred to in § 17-10-1(A), an administrative hearing must be scheduled by the City Manager and conducted by the City Manager within 30 days, unless licensee, in its sole discretion, waives such administrative hearing in writing whereupon a hearing before the City Council, as provided for in subsection (D) of this section, shall be held. This shall be a public hearing which shall be posted and published in accordance with the meeting laws of Arizona, and licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard and to present evidence, but without the formal rules of evidence applying. Within 30 days after the conclusion of such hearing, the City Manager shall issue a determination. In that determination the City Manager may:

(1) Find that licensee is not in violation of the terms of the license;

(2) Find that the licensee is in violation, but that such violation was with just cause and waive any penalty that might otherwise be imposed;

(3) Find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the license, take corrective action and foreclose on all or any appropriate part of the surety provided pursuant to § 17-9-1 to pay the cost thereof;

(4) Except when licensee pays liquidated damages under § 17-11-1, find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the license and impose a penalty of up to $100 per day for each day the violation continues following the cure date as set forth in § 17-10-1;

(5) In the case of a material violation recommend that the City Council declare the licensee in violation and terminate the license, provided that the City Council may take action on any such recommendation only after a public hearing as set forth in subsection (D) of this section.

(B) If the City Manager determines that licensee has committed a violation, the determination shall be accomplished by a detailed statement of reasons for the determination, including findings of fact.

(C) The City Manager’s decision shall become final unless licensee requests a public hearing before the City Council within 30 days of its receipt of the City Manager’s statement of reasons and findings of fact.

(D) If a public hearing before the City Council is requested in writing by licensee or is held pursuant to any provision of this chapter, it shall be de novo and it shall initially convene within 30 days, or such other period of time as specified in the Cable Act or regulation of the FCC in furtherance of such act, of the written request therefor. All witnesses shall be sworn and shall be subject to cross examination; however, formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The City Council’s decision, which shall include findings of fact and conclusions, shall be made not later than 45 calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. In that decision, the City Council may:

(1) Find that licensee is not in violation of the terms of the license;

(2) Find that licensee is in violation but that such violation was with just cause and waive any penalty or part thereof that may otherwise be imposed;

(3) Find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the license, take corrective action and foreclose on all or any appropriate part of the surety provided pursuant to § 17-9-1 to pay the cost thereof;

(4) Except when licensee pays liquidated damages as provided in subsection (5) below, find that licensee is in violation of the terms of the license and impose a penalty of up to $100 per day for each day the violation continues following the cure date as set forth in § 17-10-1;

(5) For those instances specified in § 17-11-1(A) find that the licensee is in violation and impose penalties in such amounts and from the applicable dates as set forth in the license; or

(6) In the case of a material violation of the license declare the licensee in violation and terminate the license. The fact that a penalty is imposed for a violation of this chapter shall not prohibit a termination of a license in addition to any such fine or in lieu thereof whenever the violation is a material violation of the license.

(Prior Code, § 17-10-2)


ARTICLE 17-11 Remedies

Section

17-11-1    Remedies for customer service violations

17-11-2    Alternative remedies

17-11-3    Nonenforcement


17-11-1 REMEDIES FOR CUSTOMER SERVICE VIOLATIONS.

The licensee understands and agrees that failure to comply with any time and performance requirements in this chapter will result in damage to the city and that it is and will be impracticable to determine the actual amount of such damage in the event of delay or nonperformance; therefore, the parties hereby agree to the liquidated damages specified below. The following amounts per day or part thereof may be chargeable to the letter of credit for the following concerns.

(A) Failure to comply with the time limitations set forth in § 17-6-1(A) or (B) may subject licensee to penalties for each day of violation as provided in this subsection. Penalties may accrue at the rate of up to $50 per day from the first day of violation until the earlier of the date the violation is cured or the date that the licensee receives the City Manager’s written notice of the violation; provided that, notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than 14 days of penalties shall accrue prior to the receipt of the City Manager’s written notice of violation by licensee. From and after the date that licensee receives the City Manager’s written notice of violation, penalties may accrue at the rate of up to $100 per day from the date that licensee received written notice of the violation until the violation is cured. Penalties may be imposed only by affirmative action of the City Manager and shall not automatically accrue in the absence of such affirmative action by the City Manager. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, no penalties shall accrue or be payable by licensee if the violation is cured prior to the receipt by licensee of the City Manager’s written notice of violation.

(B) Failure to comply with the average response times as set forth in § 17-6-6 may subject the licensee to penalties for each month of violation as provided in this subsection. If the City Manager determines that licensee has not complied with the average response time, the City Manager shall notify licensee of the violation, whereupon licensee shall have until the end of the following calendar month to cure such violation. If the violation is not so cured, penalties may be imposed. The penalty shall be $500 for the first month after the 30 day period of § 17-6-5(F) and (G) if the violation is not cured. The penalty shall be $1,000 for the next month and escalate $1,000 each month thereafter until the violation is cured. The penalty is payable on the fifth day of each following month as the penalty accrues. Penalties may be imposed only by affirmative action of the City Manager and shall not automatically accrue in the absence of such affirmative action by the City Manager. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, no penalties shall accrue or be payable by licensee for any period in excess of 60 days prior to the date of the City Manager’s notice of noncompliance. Failure to complete system construction or reconstruction in accordance with the cable license of this chapter, unless the City Council specifically approves the delay by motion or resolution, $500 per day.

(C) A licensee shall not be relieved of any obligation to comply with any of the provisions of the license or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder by reason of any failure of the city or its officers, agents or employees to enforce prompt compliance.

(D) Each failure to properly restore the public right of way or to correct related violations of specifications, code, ordinance or standards within seven working days of having been notified by the city to correct such defects, $200 per day.

(E) Each failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system following a written request, $200 per day.

(F) Any other material action or non action by the licensee, as agreed upon by the city and licensee, such agreement shall not be unreasonably withheld by either party, $50 per day.

(G) In the event that licensee contests the City Manager’s assertion of violation, the city shall convene hearings in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 17-10-2.

(Prior Code, § 17-11-1) (Am. Ord. 95-520, passed 1-24-1995)


17-11-2 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.

No provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to bar the right of the city or the licensee to seek or obtain judicial relief otherwise available to it. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in this chapter nor the exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of the city or the licensee to recover monetary damages or judicial enforcement of the licensee’s or the city’s obligations by means of specific performance, injunctive relief or mandate or any other judicial remedy at law or in equity.

(Prior Code, § 17-11-2)


17-11-3 NONENFORCEMENT.

A licensee shall not be relieved of any obligation to comply with any of the provisions of the license or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder by reason of any failure of the city or its officers, agents or employees to enforce prompt compliance.

(Prior Code, § 17-11-3)


ARTICLE 17-12 Insurance, Liability and Indemnity

Section

17-12-1    Policies to be filed with city

17-12-2    Indemnification by licensee


17-12-1 POLICIES TO BE FILED WITH CITY.

(A) Upon the execution of a license, a licensee shall file with the city, and maintain in full force and effect throughout the term of the license, and any renewal thereof, insurance policies issued by an insurer, duly authorized and licensed to conduct business in the State of Arizona, reasonably acceptable to the City Manager, insuring with respect to the installation, construction, operation and maintenance of the cable communication system, comprehensive general and automobile liability coverage, including, but not limited to:

(1) Blanket contractual liability;

(2) Completed operations liability;

(3) Broad form property damage endorsement, including, but not limited to, coverage for explosion, collapse and underground incidents; and

(4) Automobile non ownership liability.

(B) This insurance shall include coverage which meets or exceeds the following 1992 standard minimum amounts (which minimums may be increased by the city from time to time to compensate for inflation or exposure to loss):

(1) For bodily injury, including death, in the amount of $1,000,000 combined single limit;

(2) For property damage in the minimum amount of $500,000;

(3) Comprehensive automobile liability for bodily injury of $1,000,000 combined single limit;

(4) Excess umbrella liability in the amount of $4,000,000 in excess of underlying coverage; and

(5) Worker’s compensation coverage as required by the laws, rules and regulations of the State of Arizona.

(C) Any insurance policy obtained by licensee in compliance with this section shall include the city as an additional insured, shall be primary and must be approved by the City Risk Manager and City Attorney, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Such insurance policy shall be filed and maintained with the city during the term of the license and may be changed from time to time to reflect changing liability limits. Licensee shall immediately advise the city of any litigation that may develop that would affect this insurance or reduce the amount of coverage. Any insurance or self insured coverage carried by the city shall be excess coverage and not contributory insurance to that provided by a licensee.

(D) Neither the provisions of this section, nor any damages recovered by the city thereunder, shall be construed to limit the liability of licensee to the city for damages.

(E) All insurance policies shall contain the following endorsement:

This insurance policy may not be canceled by the insurance carrier, nor may the insurance carrier fail to renew this policy until thirty days after receipt by the city of the insurance carrier’s written notice of its intention.

(F) Licensee may self insure the above described policy coverage if licensee or its parent are of sufficient financial standing acceptable to the City Manager to reasonably provide such insurance. A licensee that elects to self insure shall file with the city a certificate of insurance as specified by the city.

(Prior Code, § 17-12-1)


17-12-2 INDEMNIFICATION BY LICENSEE.

(A) Each licensee shall, at its sole expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, and in their capacity as such, the officers, agents and employees thereof, for, from and against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages or otherwise and for the city’s reasonable attorney fees incurred in connection therewith:

(1) For actual or alleged injury to persons or property, including loss of use of property, including loss of use of property due to an occurrence, whether or not such property is physically damaged or destroyed, in any way arising out of or through or alleged to arise out of or through the acts or omissions of the licensee or its officers, agents, employees or contractors;

(2) Arising out of or alleged to arise out of any claim for damages for invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service make or patent attributable to the acts or omissions of licensee or its officers, agents, employees or contractors; and

(3) Arising out of or alleged to arise out of licensee’s failure to comply with the provisions of any statute, regulation or chapter of the United States, State of Arizona or any local agency applicable to the licensee in its business.

(B) Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the city from participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel at the city’s sole expense. Such participation shall not under any circumstances relieve the licensee from its duty of defense against liability or of paying any judgment entered against such party; provided, however, that licensee shall have no obligation or liability for paying any settlement made by the city without first consulting with licensee on the terms and conditions of the settlement. The licensee shall promptly undertake the defense, at its own expense, of any matter for which this indemnity is established upon written request of the city.

(Prior Code, § 17-12-2)


ARTICLE 17-13 Miscellaneous

Section

17-13-1    Communications with regulatory agencies

17-13-2    License amendments

17-13-3    City’s right to include additional provisions in a license

17-13-4    Savings clause


17-13-1 COMMUNICATIONS WITH REGULATORY AGENCIES.

(A) Upon request, there shall be provided to the city copies of any communications and reports submitted by a licensee to the Federal Communications Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting construction or operation of a cable system or services provided through such a system.

(B) Licensee shall provide the city with regular written and verbal reports, as reasonably requested by the city, to establish licensee’s compliance with the various standards and other provisions of this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 17-13-1)


17-13-2 LICENSE AMENDMENTS.

A license may reserve and provide for a mechanism that will cause licensee and licensor to meet and confer for the purpose of amending this chapter or the license on mutually acceptable terms.

(Prior Code, § 17-13-2)


17-13-3 CITY’s RIGHT TO INCLUDE ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS IN A LICENSE.

The city shall have the right and power to provide for additional terms and conditions in any license it may issue which the city finds reasonably necessary in the exercise of its lawful powers so long as such terms and conditions are not inconsistent with this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 17-13-3)


17-13-4 SAVINGS CLAUSE.

Any license issued or any cable system operating under any license issued prior to the effective date of this chapter shall continue to be subject to and operate under the provisions of this chapter as it existed prior to the effective date of this chapter; provided, however, any renewal of any such license which was issued prior to such date and the operations of any cable system operator holding such a renewed license shall be subject to all of the terms and provisions of this chapter as they may exist upon the renewal of any such license.

(Prior Code, § 17-13-4)


CHAPTER 18: Civil Code Enforcement

Article

18-1.    CIVIL CODE ENFORCEMENT


ARTICLE 18-1 Civil Code Enforcement

Section

18-1-1    Civil code infractions; jurisdiction; purpose

18-1-2    Civil sanctions

18-1-3    Commencement of action

18-1-4    Authority to issue civil citations

18-1-5    Appearance by defendant

18-1-6    Default judgment

18-1-7    Rules of procedure

18-1-8    Collection of civil sanctions

18-1-9    Each day separate violation


18-1-1 CIVIL CODE INFRACTIONS; JURISDICTION; PURPOSE.

(A) The city court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to adjudicate and assess and collect penalties for civil violations of the city code and other ordinances as declared in Art. 1-8(C).

(B) The jurisdiction of the city court over civil code violations shall not be interpreted or applied in any manner to limit the jurisdiction of the Superior Court over civil actions for declaratory relief, injunctive relief, abatement of public or private nuisances or damages, the basis of which may be an act, omission or condition in violation of the city code or other ordinances.

(C) The purpose of this article is to provide, as an additional alternative to other enforcement means, for an informal, speedy and inexpensive process for adjudication of civil code violations, based upon an administrative hearing model, in which citizens who receive a civil infraction complaint may obtain a prompt, simplified hearing, without the need in most cases to retain an attorney to represent them and without the severity of the consequences which might follow a criminal conviction for a class one misdemeanor.

(Prior Code, § 18-1-1) (Ord. 93-482, passed 4-24-1993)


18-1-2 CIVIL SANCTIONS.

If a person pleads responsible or is found to be responsible for a civil violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance incorporated herein, the court shall, unless some other sanction is specifically set forth elsewhere in the code, impose a civil sanction in accordance with the following guidelines: for a first time offense, the civil sanction shall be in an amount not less than $50 nor more than $300; for a second offense, the civil sanction shall be in a sum not less than $300, nor more than $500; and for a third offense or subsequent offense, the civil sanction shall be in an amount not less than $550, nor more than $1,000. In imposing any sanction, the court shall take into account the city’s cost of enforcement against the offender.

(Prior Code, § 18-1-2) (Ord. 93-482, passed 4-24-1993; Am. Ord. 97-592, passed 8-28-1997)


18-1-3 COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION.

(A) A civil code violation action commenced under this article may be commenced by the issuance of a citation or by a long form complaint.

(B) The citation shall be in substantially the same form as the Arizona Traffic Ticket and Complaint and shall direct the defendant to appear in the Goodyear Municipal Court within 10 days after the issuance of the citation.

(C) The citation will further notify the defendant that if he or she fails to appear on or before the date specified in the citation, a judgment by default will be entered against him or her, and the court may, in its discretion, impose a civil sanction in accordance with the guidelines set forth in Section 18-1-2.

(D) Service of the citation may be accomplished and will be deemed proper and complete by any of the following methods:

(1) By having the defendant sign the citation with a promise to appear in court within 10 days of the issuance of the citation;

(2) If the defendant refuses to sign the citation, by hand-delivering a copy of the citation to the defendant;

(3) By mailing a copy of the citation to the person charged by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the person’s last known address;

(4) In the event service cannot be accomplished as set forth in subsections (D)(1), (2) and (3) of this section, the state may serve the defendant by any means allowed by the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure;

(5) Service of citations for parking violations of Chapter 13 may be accomplished by placing a copy of the citation on the subject vehicle’s windshield or sending the citation by first class mail to the subject vehicle’s registered owner’s last known address with the Arizona Motor Vehicle Division.

(Prior Code § 18-1-3) (Ord. 93-482, passed 4-24-1993; Am. Ord. 2001-755, passed 5-14-2001; Am. Ord. 09-1199, passed 12-7-09)


18-1-4 AUTHORITY TO ISSUE CIVIL CITATIONS.

Any of the following persons may issue a civil citation pursuant to this chapter:

(A) Any peace officer;

(B) The City Attorney or any assistant;

(C) The City Prosecutor or any assistant;

(D) The Code Compliance Officer;

(E) The Code Compliance Manager;

(F) Any other person designated by the City Manager in writing filed with the City Clerk.

(Prior Code, § 18-1-4) (Ord. 93-482, passed 4-24-1993; Am. Ord. 2001-755, passed 5-14-2001)


18-1-5 APPEARANCE BY DEFENDANT.

(A) The defendant shall, within ten days of the issuance of the citation, appear in person, or through his or her attorney, in the Goodyear Municipal Court and shall either admit or deny the allegations contained in the citation.

(B) If the defendant admits the allegations, the court shall enter judgment against the defendant and shall impose a civil sanction pursuant to the guidelines set forth in § 18-1-2.

(C) If the defendant denies the allegations contained in the citation, the court shall set a date for a hearing on the matter.

(Prior Code, § 18-1-5) (Ord. 93-482, passed 4-24-1993; Am. Ord. 2001-755, passed 5-14-2001)


18-1-6 DEFAULT JUDGMENT.

(A) If the defendant fails to appear as directed on the citation, the court shall enter a default judgment and shall impose a civil sanction for the violation in accordance with the guidelines set forth in § 18-1-2.

(B) If the defendant fails to appear for the hearing, the defendant’s failure to appear shall be deemed an admission of the offense, and the court shall enter judgment against the defendant and shall impose a civil sanction for the violation pursuant to the provisions of § 18-1-2.

(Prior Code, § 18-1-6) (Ord. 93-482, passed 4-24-1993)


18-1-7 RULES OF PROCEDURE.

Proceedings under this article shall be conducted in accordance with the Arizona Rules of Court for Civil Traffic Violation Cases except where such rules are modified or inconsistent with the provisions of this article, the local rules of the Goodyear Magistrate Court or the rules of the Arizona Supreme Court.

(Prior Code, § 18-1-7) (Ord. 93-482, passed 4-24-1993)


18-1-8 COLLECTION OF CIVIL SANCTIONS.

Any judgment for civil sanctions taken pursuant to this article may be collected as any other civil judgment as provided in the Arizona Revised Statutes.

(Prior Code, § 18-1-8) (Ord. 93-482, passed 4-24-1993)


18-1-9 EACH DAY SEPARATE VIOLATION.

Each day any violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance incorporated herein, or the failure to perform any act or duty required by this code or ordinance incorporated herein, continues shall constitute a separate offense.

(Prior Code, § 18-1-9) (Ord. 93-482, passed 4-24-1993)


CHAPTER 19: Fees and Procedures for Modification of Municipal Improvement Assessment Districts

Article

19-1.    GENERAL PROVISIONS

19-2.    PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING MODIFICATION OF AN ASSESSMENT

19-3.    ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES AND TIME OF PAYMENT


ARTICLE 19-1 General Provisions

Section

19-1-1    Purpose and intent

19-1-2    Reserved


19-1-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.

The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide for a procedure to be followed for the modification of an assessment in a municipal improvement district as defined and referred to in A.R.S. Title 48, other than community facility districts and to provide for the establishment of fees in order to compensate the city for the expense incurred in analyzing each request for modification and in computing, assessing and collecting new assessments.

(Prior Code, § 19-1-1) (Ord. 95-517, passed 1-10-1995)


19-1-2 RESERVED.


ARTICLE 19-2 Procedure for Obtaining Modification of an Assessment

Section

19-2-1    Application to city

19-2-2    Contents of petition for modification of assessment


19-2-1 APPLICATION TO CITY.

In the event a modification of an assessment in a Municipal Improvement District is sought, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk a Petition for Modification of Assessment. Such petition shall be in a form provided by or otherwise acceptable to the city and shall list thereon the names and addresses of all persons claiming an interest in the property to be affected by the requested modification, including mortgage and lien holders. This petition shall be executed by all such persons with the signatures being properly notarized.

(Prior Code, § 19-2-1) (Ord. 95-517, passed 1-10-1995)


19-2-2 CONTENTS OF PETITION FOR MODIFICATION OF ASSESSMENT.

The Petition for Modification of Assessment required to be filed with the city in § 19-2-1 shall be in form and substance acceptable to the city and its bond counsel and shall contain at least the following:

(A) Introduction describing the reasons for the modification request as well as a general description identifying the parcels affected and the assessment values to be modified;

(B) Description of the proposed modification’s effect on the ratio of fair market value of each assessment parcel to the amount of the proposed assessment for each parcel affected;

(C) Description of the assessment methodology utilized in spreading the proposed assessments; for example, front footage, acreage, per lot or other methodology;

(D) A Status of Ownership in Title Report showing all parties having any interest in the affected parcels;

(E) Amended assessment diagram;

(F) A site map or vicinity map showing the location of the affected parcels in relation to other areas of the city for an area of approximately two to four miles, showing major streets;

(G) An electronic database (32 inch disk) reflecting parcel information after the modification (including, for each parcel, legal description, situs address, assessment amount and ownership name and address).

(Prior Code, § 19-2-2) (Ord. 95-517, passed 1-10-1995)


ARTICLE 19-3 Establishment of Fees and Time of Payment

Section

19-3-1    Establishment of fees and time of payment


19-3-1 ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES AND TIME OF PAYMENT.

In connection with any modification or recalculation there is imposed a fee of $300, plus $20 for each new assessment or assessment parcel resulting from the requested modification and $5 for each assessment to be removed (collectively, the base fees). In addition to the base fees, the party submitting the application for modification or recalculation of any assessment shall also pay all outside engineering and legal fees incurred by the city in connection with the review of any modification or recalculation of any assessment (collectively, the outside fees). Base fees are due and payable to the city when the Petition for Modification of Assessment is filed with the City Clerk. Outside fees shall be billed to and paid by the applicant before the modification request is approved by the Council.

(Prior Code, Art. 19-3) (Ord. 95-517, passed 1-10-1995)


CHAPTER 20: Cost Recovery and User Fees

Article

20-1.    COST RECOVERY AND USER FEES


ARTICLE 20-1 COST RECOVERY AND USER FEES

Section

20-1-1    Findings and intent

20-1-2    Delegation of authority and direction to manager

20-1-3    Alternative method

20-1-4    Parks and Recreation Department fees

20-1-5    Public notice

20-1-6    Provision of data

20-1-7    Appeal to Council


20-1-1 FINDINGS AND INTENT.

(A) It is the intent of the Mayor and Council to require the recovery of those direct and indirect costs, charges or fees associated with providing related services or materials to the public.

(B) This chapter provides a mechanism for ensuring that fees adopted by the City for services to the public in which an applicant receives a direct benefit are recovered by all or a part of the reasonable cost for providing the services for which the fees are charged and that tax subsidies to which the services charges are made, pursuant to policy established by the Mayor and Council.

(Ord. 10-1202, passed 5-10-10)


20-1-2 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY AND DIRECTION TO MANAGER.

(A) The City Manager is delegated the authority and directed to provide documents to the City Council to implement its herein enumerated policy to adjust fees and charges to recover at least the percentage of reasonable costs in providing the regulation, product or service, numerated in this chapter in the percentage of reasonable costs and on the schedule of rate review and revision as established in this chapter.

(B) All fees and fee amounts for services or other operations of the City governed by this chapter shall be authorized, established and/or amended by resolution of the City Council. Any provision of the code requiring a fee to be authorized or established by ordinance is hereby amended to allow said fees to be enacted, established and amended by resolution.

(Ord. 10-1202, passed 5-10-10)


20-1-3 ALTERNATIVE METHOD.

(A) Notwithstanding the terms thereof, in the event the Council is not presented with the information upon which actual costs of service can be determined, the Council may automatically adjust fees if the adjustment is based on a nationally recognized inflator index applicable to the cost of the necessary service since the date the fees were last adjusted or were established. The present and proposed fees and charges shall be available for review in the office of the City Clerk.

(B) Fees will be reviewed and revised on an ongoing basis to ensure they are consistent with changes in the cost of living as well as changes in methods or levels of service delivery. In implementing this goal, a comprehensive analysis of City costs and fees should be made at least every five years. In the interim, fees may be adjusted by annual changes in the Consumer Price Index.

(Ord. 10-1202, passed 5-10-10)


20-1-4 PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT FEES.

(A) The Parks and Recreation Department fees may fluctuate in an amount within the permissible fee structure for cost recovery as approved by resolution.

(B) The Parks and Recreation Department shall charge nonresidents of the City additional fees as approved by resolution.

(Ord. 10-1202, passed 5-10-10)


20-1-5 PUBLIC NOTICE.

(A) The Clerk shall cause a published public notice to be provided, and the Council shall receive, at a regularly scheduled meeting, oral and written information and staff presentations concerning fees and charges proposed to be increased or added.

(B) Such notice, oral and written presentation and public meeting shall be provided prior to either the Council or City Manager taking any action on any new or increased fees or charges.

(Ord. 10-1202, passed 5-10-10)


20-1-6 PROVISION OF DATA.

At least 10 working days prior to the public meeting set out in Section 20-1-5, the City Manager shall make available to the public appropriate data indicating the cost or estimated cost required to support the fees and charges for which changes are proposed to be made or fees or charges are proposed to be imposed. The City Manager shall also make available a summary of the present fee and charge schedules.

(Ord. 10-1202, passed 5-10-10)


20-1-7 APPEAL TO COUNCIL.

Any person who feels that any fee or charge determined and set is in excess of the percentage of reasonable costs to be recovered as provided in this chapter may appeal in writing to the Mayor and Council.

(Ord. 10-1202, passed 5-10-10)


CHAPTER 21: 	Alarm Systems

Article

21-1.    GENERAL PROVISIONS

21-2.    DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

21-3.    GENERAL REGULATIONS

Prior legislation: Ord. 99-668, Ord. 06-1031.


ARTICLE 21-1 General Provisions

Section

21-1-1    Intent and purpose

21-1-2    Definitions


21-1-1 INTENT AND PURPOSE.

This chapter shall be known as the Alarm Ordinance and may be cited as such. The intent and purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards of operation and regulations applicable to Alarm Systems, Alarm Businesses, and Alarm Users; to encourage the improvement and reliability of systems, devices and services; and to ensure that public safety personnel are not unduly endangered or diverted from responding to actual emergency activity as a result of responding to false alarms and receiving information regarding the basis for the alarm activation. This chapter is intended to apply prospectively only and all outstanding fees and fines due prior to enactment shall continue to be due.

(Ord. 12-1252, passed 2-13-2012)


21-1-2 DEFINITIONS.

For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

ALARM, ALARM SYSTEM OR ALARM DEVICE means any alarm, alarm system, device, or mechanism which, when activated, transmits a telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, or other form of message to an Alarm Business, or some other number, or emits an audible, visible or some other form of signal that may be heard, seen or detected by persons outside the protected premises, or transmits a signal beyond the premises in some other fashion, except those exempt as provided in this chapter. An Alarm System may consist of one or more components (e.g., motion detector, window breach detector, or similar components) all reporting to a central unit/system panel which, in turn, may be connected to or report to a Central Monitoring Station via telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, or other form of message.

ALARM BUSINESS means any person, business entity, or its representative or subcontractor engaged in the business of leasing, renting, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, connecting, replacing, installing, selling, moving, inspecting or monitoring any Alarm System or other related activity in the City. The foregoing sentence includes, but is not limited to, any person or business that derives any pecuniary benefit from any contract for the installation or monitoring of any Alarm System. This definition is intended to include all activities of Alarm System Installation, Alarm System Sales, Alarm System Repair Businesses and Alarm System Monitoring Businesses. This includes Alarm Businesses that are located both inside and outside the City of Goodyear. Neither the City of Goodyear nor the Police Department is an Alarm Business.

ALARM BUSINESS PERSONNEL means the employees, representatives, independent contractors, subcontractors, or any other person or business working on behalf of or for any Alarm Business, including but not limited to any person or business that derives any pecuniary benefit from any contract for the installation or monitoring of any Alarm System.

ALARM MONITORING BUSINESS/SERVICES; CENTRAL MONITORING STATION (“ALARM BUSINESS”) means any Person or business that intercepts or receives signals, regardless of form, indicating the activation of an Alarm System and relays this information to Public Safety Personnel. This includes all systems, which intercept, transmit or receive signals, regardless of form, from an Alarm installed within the City of Goodyear to any location inside or outside the City. For purposes of this chapter, any Central Monitoring Station acting on behalf of an Alarm Monitoring Company and/or any person responsible for Alarm Monitoring shall be considered an Alarm Monitoring Business.

ALARM SITE or ALARM PREMISE means any commercial or private premises or location which has and uses an Alarm System as provided by this chapter. Each tenancy, if served by a separate Alarm System in a multi-tenant building or complex, shall be considered a separate Alarm Site.

ALARM SYSTEM USER, ALARM USER means any Person who leases, rents, purchases, possesses, maintains, uses, controls or operates (or has the ability to operate) any monitored or proprietor Alarm System.

AUDIBLE ALARM means any device ar mechanism designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on the premises and which, when activated, generates an audible sound on the premises.

AUTOMATIC DIALER means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line, cellular telephone service or radio link and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response either by voice methods or coded signals or by maintaining an open line with emergency services.

BURGLAR ALARM means any alarm other than a panic or duress alarm.

CENTRAL MONITORING STATION; ALARM MONITORING BUSINESS means any office, station or telephone answering service where persons monitor, receive, record, verify, validate and/or report emergency signals received from Alarm Systems.

CROSS ZONING means a way of configuring logic within the control panel such that two or more zones of the security system are interdependent to cause the alarm activation.

ENHANCED CALL VERIFICATION (“EVC”) means at least two calls to different telephone numbers are made by the Alarm Business (or its representative/subcontractor) to verify that an alarm signal is valid before requesting that public safety personnel respond to the alarm signal. For purposes of this ordinance, telephone and/or other verification shall require, at a minimum, that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user or key holder who can properly identify themselves, to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch.

FALSE ALARM means any signal, message or other communication transmitted by an alarm system, person or other device which causes police or fire department response in which it is determined by the City not to be of an existing emergency or unlawful situation.

FIRE ALARM means a signal initiated by an Alarm System or portion of a combination system consisting of components and circuits arranged to monitor and annunciate the status of fire alarm or supervisory signal initiating devices and to initiate the appropriate response to those signals.

FIRE ALARM CONTROL UNIT (“PANEL”) means a system component that receives inputs from automatic and manual fire alarm devices and might supply power to detection devices and a transponder(s) or an off-premises transmitter(s). The control unit might also provide transfer of power to the notification appliances and transfer of condition to relays or devices connected to the control unit. The fire alarm control unit can be a local fire alarm control unit or master control unit.

PERSON, BUSINESS means an individual, corporation, firm, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture, or any other group, the legal or commercial entity, and its employee(s), representative(s) or subcontractor(s).

PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL means any police, fire or medical personnel.

RESIDENTIAL ALARM means an alarm installed and used in any structure in which a person lawfully resides. All other Alarms are considered to be Non-Residential Alarms.

RESPONSIBLE PARTY or KEY HOLDER means any person(s) designated by the Alarm User to be responsible for responding to the premises of an alarm activation, who has the authority and ability to do all of the following: (1) to enter the premises/Alarm Site (possess a key or access card); (2) to set and deactivate the Alarm System; (3) to approve immediately necessary repairs to the Alarm System; (4) to allow access to the Alarm Site and the Alarm System; and (5) is capable of reaching the Alarm Site within 30 minutes of being contacted by the City or the Alarm Business.

ROBBERY, PANIC ALARM, DURESS ALARM means any system device, or mechanism, manually activated by an individual on or near the premises, to alert others that a robbery or any other crime is in progress, or that the user is in need of immediate assistance or aid in order to avoid injury or serious bodily harm, which is: (1) installed on real property; (2) designed to be manually activated by an individual for the purpose of summoning assistance to the premises; and (3) transmits a signal, regardless of form, that can be heard, seen or received by persons outside the protected premises.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS OPERATOR means a dispatcher for public safety personnel.

(Ord. 12-1252, passed 2-13-2012)


ARTICLE 21-2 Duties and Responsibilities

Section

21-2-1    Installation and equipment standards

21-2-2    Prohibited devices and systems

21-2-3    Alarm business duties

21-2-4    Alarm business monitoring responsibilities

21-2-5    Enhanced call verification (ECV) procedures

21-2-6    Alarm user duties


21-2-1 INSTALLATION AND EQUIPMENT STANDARDS.

(A) Alarm Businesses shall be required to install, using good workmanship, Alarm Systems that are compatible with the environment, and to take reasonable measures to prevent the occurrence of false alarms. At the completion of the installation or inspection of an Alarm System, the Alarm Business shall inspect and test (along with required municipal witnesses if a fire alarm, refer to fire code) all equipment and features to ensure to the best of their reasonable ability that the Alarm System is operating as designed and will not be a source of False Alarms caused by system or component failure. No Alarm Business shall place into service or monitor an Alarm System that is known to be defective or contains defective components.

(B) All Alarm Businesses that install and/or service an Alarm System in the City shall provide complete oral and written instructions to all Alarm Users and/or principal occupants of the building(s) or premise(s) protected by the Alarm System in the proper use and operation of the Alarm System. Such instructions will specifically include all information necessary to activate and deactivate the Alarm System, cancel false alarm activations and any other steps necessary to avoid False Alarms.

(C) All Alarm Business personnel selling, installing, monitoring or servicing Alarm Systems or related equipment in the City shall wear a picture identification card issued by the Alarm Business on their outer garments while working on site in the City. The identification card shall contain the name of the Alarm Business, the employee’s full name and photograph.

(D) Alarm Businesses shall not cause a false alarm during the servicing, installation, repairing, testing or inspection of an Alarm System.

(E) All Alarm Systems are required to be approved by the City (where applicable) and in compliance with the City fire and building codes. Alarm Control Panels, photoelectric beams, motion detectors, smoke detectors and electronic glass breakage detectors shall be Underwriters Laboratories (UL) or Factory Mutual (FM) approved and may only be installed by Alarm Business personnel trained by a manufacturer or trained in a class organized for teaching alarm technologies in the proper installation and adjustment of such devices. Alarms installed in residences must be designed for use in residences and all Alarms installed in commercial property/structures and/or businesses must be designed for use in commercial property/structures and/or businesses.

(F) Any alarm equipment installed by an Alarm Business after the effective date of this chapter shall meet the ANSI/SIA CP-01 standards.

(G) All Alarm Systems shall be designed and installed to alert the monitoring company and/or Alarm User of possible system problems. It is unlawful for an Alarm Business or their personnel to fail to comply with any Installation and Equipment Standard.

(H) Whenever an Alarm System is serviced, modified or inspected, the Alarm Business shall remove from the system: (1) single action, non-recessed switches that activate a panic alarm, and (2) duress or “one-plus” programming that activates a panic alarm.

(I) All Alarm Businesses shall be required to comply with all requirements set forth in this chapter.

(J) All Alarm Businesses who program an alarm to a Central Station or Alarm Monitoring Business shall conspicuously place on the outside of the premises a sign or decal identifying the Alarm Business and a 24 hour emergency contact number to call when the alarm has been activated. The sign or decal shall be updated as necessary to reflect accurate current information or change in monitoring company. The same information is also required to be posted at all alarm control panels. This requirement is for the benefit of the Alarm Users and Public Safety Personnel.

(Ord. 12-1252, passed 2-13-2012)


21-2-2 PROHIBITED DEVICES AND SYSTEMS.

(A) No person shall install, monitor, operate or use an Alarm System that emits an audible sound where such emission does not automatically cease 10 minutes from the initial activation of the Alarm. Nothing in this section shall limit the duration of a fire or other evacuation alarm during a bona fide emergency when the sound may assist in saving life or avoiding injury.

(B) It is unlawful for any person to install, monitor, operate or use an Alarm System that does any of the following:

(1) Automatically dials, or is programmed to automatically dial, directly to a police department;

(2) Prevents termination of a call by Public Safety Personnel;

(3) Is programmed to transmit directly to any public safety facility;

(4) Emits a sound similar to that of an emergency vehicle or civil defense warning system;

(5) Functions or is programmed as a silent burglar alarm (excluding Automatic Teller Machine “ATM” silent alarms); or

(6) Has a single action non-recessed button as a device to activate a Panic or Duress Alarm or a “one-plus” programming that activates a Panic or Duress Alarm.

(Ord. 12-1252, passed 2-13-2012)


21-2-3 ALARM BUSINESS DUTIES.

(A) All Alarm Businesses shall use ECV as provided in this chapter prior to requesting a response from Public Safety Personnel. ECV is not required for robbery, duress, or panic alarm.

(B) All Alarm Businesses shall collect and maintain current records of all Alarm Systems including specific information regarding the nature, type and location of the Alarm and designated zones.

(C) All Alarm Businesses shall collect and maintain current records of all Alarm Users which include, but is not limited to, the names and telephone numbers of Primary Users and the address where the Alarm System is located; names and telephones numbers of the Alarm Users designated Responsible Parties, and other contact information necessary to be used to comply with ECV and Responsible Party notification. The Alarm Business shall provide this information to the Central Monitoring Station and/or Alarm Monitoring Business. It is the responsibility of the Alarm Business to update this information annually.

(D) All Alarm Businesses shall maintain the Alarm User’s current complete password, including the proper spelling.

(E) A central alarm monitoring station used by an alarm business shall meet the Underwriters Laboratory (UL) or Factory Mutual (FM) standards.

(F) Provide the Alarm Monitoring Business and/or Central Monitoring Station ALL of the following information for each account monitored including but not limited to:

(1) All information required to comply with the Enhanced Call Verification requirements, which includes two telephone numbers for Residential Alarm Systems and four numbers for Non-residential Alarm Systems;

(2) Type of Alarm: burglary, robbery, panic, duress and/or fire;

(3) Type of activation: silent or audible;

(4) Specifically describe location of activations (including zones): interior, exterior, north, south, east, west, front, back of premises, window, door, motion sensors, etc.; and

(5) If there are dogs or guns on the premises.

(Ord. 12-1252, passed 2-13-2012)


21-2-4 ALARM BUSINESS MONITORING RESPONSIBILI'TIES.

(A) An Alarm Business (its representatives and subcontractors) monitoring Alarm Systems in the City shall maintain current name(s), emergency telephone number(s) and the addresses for all Alarm User(s); names and emergency telephone numbers for at least two alternate Responsible Parties for each Alarm System being monitored for residential Alarms and names and telephone numbers for at least four alternate Responsible Parties for each Alarm System being monitored for non-residential alarms.

(B) Any Alarm Business performing alarm monitoring services shall do all of the following when reporting an Alarm Activation to a Telecommunications Operator:

(1) Comply with all ECV Procedures as set forth in this chapter prior to reporting an Alarm Activation to the Telecommunications Operator; unless otherwise provided in this chapter.

(2) Provide ALL of the following information regarding the Alarm Activation, which includes but is not limited to:

(a) Type of Alarm: burglary, robbery, panic, duress or fire alarm;

(b) Type of Activation: silent or audible;

(c) Specifically describe location of activations (including zones): interior, exterior, north, south, east, west, front, back of the premises, window, door, motion sensors, etc.;

(d) All other confirmation information (glass breakage, witness observations, etc.); and

(e) If there are dogs or guns on the premises.

(3) Be prepared and able to contact the Alarm User and/or their Responsible Parties when an alarm dispatch request is made to deactivate the alarm or ensure Public Safety has access to the Alarm Site. The Alarm Business shall be responsible for getting someone (Alarm User, Responsible Party or an Alarm Business Representative) to respond to the Alarm Site to deactivate and/or repair the alarm within 30 minutes of receiving a request from Telecommunication Operators or Public Safety Personnel to do so.

(4) Provide current name(s) and telephone number(s) for the Alarm User and the names and telephone numbers for the two ECV persons contacted by the Alarm Company.

(5) Provide the name, telephone number and corporate address of the Alarm Business monitoring the Alarm and the Alarm Business staff member placing the call, and

(6) Immediately cancel alarm dispatch requests upon confirmation that the alarm is false.

(C) An Alarm Business shall establish procedures with the Alarm Users for communicating and accepting the Cancellation of alarms from Alarm Users and work cooperatively with the Alarm User to aid in the prevention and reoccurrence of false alarms.

(Ord. 12-1252, passed 2-13-2012)


21-2-5 ENHANCED CALL VERIFICATION (ECV) PROCEDURES.

(A) Mandatory Verification. Prior to contacting the City to request the dispatch of public safety personnel, any company performing alarm monitoring service shall first attempt to verify the alarm activation by calling the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone to determine whether an alarm signal is valid. Verification shall require that at a minimum a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid, EXCEPT in the case of a duress, panic, robbery-in-progress, ATM Silent alarm or fire alarm, or as provided in subsection (C) of this section. For Non-residential Alarm Systems, the second telephone number shall be a number that is answered by a person 24 hours per day seven days per week.

(B) Verified False. If the alarm activation is verified as being false during the first, second or succeeding call as a result of getting a valid pass code, the operator shall suspend activities relating to the specific signal being worked.

(C) Additional Methods. Audio verification, video verification, or cross zoning shall be permitted in place of, or in addition to, the second verification call and shall be considered in compliance with this Enhanced Verification Requirement.

(Ord. 12-1252, passed 2-13-2012)


21-2-6 ALARM USER DUTIES.

(A) All Alarm Users, whether for a business or residence, shall do the following:

(1) Properly instruct all persons who are authorized to activate or deactivate the Alarm System in the appropriate method of operation, which includes how to activate and deactivate the Alarm System, and provide them with the password (including the proper spelling) and the Central Monitoring Station telephone number.

(2) Instruct all authorized Alarm Users of the provisions of this chapter, emphasizing the importance of avoiding False Alarms. It is presumed that proper instruction has not been provided if there are more than three False Alarms annually for an Alarm Site.

(3) Maintain the Alarm Site and the Alarm System in a manner that will reasonably eliminate False Alarms, which includes proper maintenance and repair.

(4) Respond or cause a Responsible Party to respond to the Alarm Site within 30 minutes of receiving a request by Telecommunication Operators or public safety personnel to do so. Persons responding must have the ability to: access the premises; the authority and ability to provide public safety personnel access to the Alarm Site where an alarm signal is being emitted; the current alarm code to reset or deactivate the alarm, or the ability to consent to the deactivation of, or repair, of a malfunctioning Alarm System.

(5) Notify the Alarm Business monitoring the Alarm System prior to activation of an alarm for maintenance, repair, testing or instructional purposes.

(B) It shall be unlawful for any owner of an Alarm System, or Alarm User, to fail to correct and repair Alarm Equipment and/or fail to provide proper instruction in the use of the Alarm System to every person with authority to activate or deactivate an Alarm System.

(C) All Alarm Users shall provide the Alarm Business monitoring the Alarm User’s Alarm System with current information regarding the Alarm User, which includes, but is not limited to, the names and telephone numbers of the Primary Alarm User and the address where the Alarm System is located; the names and telephone numbers for the Alarm Users designated as Responsible Parties; and all other contact information necessary to be used for Enhanced Call Verification and Responsible Party notification.

(D) If an Alarm User uses an Alarm System without the assistance of an Alarm Business, the Alarm User is subject to the same duties, responsibilities and restrictions as an Alarm Business provided in this chapter.

(Ord. 12-1252, passed 2-13-2012)


ARTICLE 21-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS

    Section

21-3-1    Liability of City

21-3-2    Powers of the Chief of Police

21-3-3    Violations and penalties


21-3-1 LIABILITY OF CITY.

Nothing in this chapter imposes or creates any express or implied duty or obligation on the part of the City, its Police and Fire Departments or any other governmental agency. Nothing in this chapter is intended to, nor will it, create any express or implied duty or obligation for the City to respond to an alarm activation of any sort, whether confirmed or not. Any and all liability or consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to an alarm activation of any sort is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained by the City.

(Ord. 12-1252, passed 2-13-2012)


21-3-2 POWERS OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE.

The Chief of Police shall have broad discretion to promulgate, execute and enforce policies, procedures and directives he or she determines necessary to implement the provisions, and carry out the intent, of this chapter.

(Ord. 12-1252, passed 2-13-2012)


21-3-3 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.

(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly activate any alarm or alarm system or cause signals to be transmitted for any reason other than to warn of an actual emergency. This subsection shall not apply to the testing of Alarm Systems as provided by this chapter.

(B) A violation of any provision of this chapter may be pursued civilly and/or criminally, and subject to all penalties, as provided in Article 1-8 and Chapter 18 of the Goodyear City Code. A first violation of any provision of this chapter shall result in the imposition of not less than a $300 fine; for a second or any subsequent offense the mandatory minimum fine is not less than $500. Each day, or portion thereof, during which a violation of any provision of this chapter is maintained or continued, shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.

(C) The penalties set forth in this chapter are non-exclusive and the city may seek any and all legal and equitable relief permitted by law.

(D) In the event any person or entity defaults on any obligation to pay a fee or fine under this chapter, the City may collect such unpaid amounts by any method provided by law including but not limited to attachment and foreclosure of a lien on the Alarm Site.

(Ord. 12-1252, passed 2-13-2012)


CHAPTER 22 Telecommunications and Fiber Optic Cable Communication Systems

Article

22-1.    TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE

22-2.    FIBER OPTIC CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS

22-3.    WIRELESS PROVIDERS USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY


ARTICLE 22-1 Telecommunications Service

Section

22-1-1    Purpose

22-1-2    Definitions

22-1-3    License required

22-1-4    License application

22-1-5    License term

22-1-6    Penalties for violation of license terms

22-1-7    Compensation

22-1-8    Coordination to minimize disruption to the city’s streets and public ways


22-1-1 PURPOSE.

(A) The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies governing the management of streets, roads, highways and other rights of way for the provision of telecommunications services providers and fiber optic cable communication systems within the city. These policies provide the city with the ability to issue licenses, on a competitively neutral and non discriminatory basis, to telecommunications and fiber optic cable corporations who use city rights of way to provide telecommunications and fiber optic services, except in cases where state or federal law forbids establishment of a license or franchise requirement. These provisions will also allow the city to manage rights of way so as to minimize the impact and cost to Goodyear citizens, as well as minimize congestion, inconvenience, visual impact and other adverse effects from the placement of telecommunications and fiber optic services within city rights of way.

(B) Without limitation upon the rights that the city might otherwise have, the city does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, powers and authorities:

(1) To exercise its governmental powers now or hereafter to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the city;

(2) To determine any question of fact relating to the meaning, terms, obligations or other aspects of this chapter;

(3) To grant multiple, nonexclusive licenses, franchises or permits within the city to other persons for the operation of telecommunication systems and fiber optic communication systems.

(Prior Code, § 22-1-1)


22-1-2 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CABLE SERVICES and CABLE SYSTEM. These terms shall have the same meaning as defined in Chapter 22 of this code.

COMMERCIAL MOBILE RADIO SERVICE. Two way voice commercial mobile radio service as defined by the Federal Communications Commission in 47 U.S.C. § 157.

FACILITIES. The plant, equipment, and property, including but not limited to poles, wires, pipe, conduits, pedestals, antenna, and other appurtenances placed in, on, or under highways and not owned by the city and used in the provision of telecommunication services.

STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS. All roads, streets and alleys and all other dedicated public rights-of-way and public utility easements of the city.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. The term does not include commercial mobile radio services, pay phone services, interstate services or cable services.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS CORPORATION. Any public service corporation to the extent that it provides telecommunications services in this state.

TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. The offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.

(Ord. 03-842, passed 5-12-2003)


22-1-3 LICENSE REQUIRED.

(A) No telecommunications corporation shall install, maintain, construct or operate telecommunications facilities in any street or public ways in the city, unless a license to provide telecommunications services has first been granted by the City Council under this chapter.

(B) Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, any telecommunications corporation that was providing telecommunications service within the State of Arizona as of October 31, 1997 pursuant to a grant made to it or its lawful predecessors prior to the effective date of the Arizona Constitution, may continue to provide telecommunications services pursuant to that state grant, until the state grant is lawfully repealed, revoked or amended, and need not obtain any further authorization from the city to provide telecommunication services; provided, however, that the entity must in all other respects comply with the requirements applicable to telecommunications corporations, as provided in A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 5, Article 7.

(C) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to affect the terms or conditions of any franchise, license or permit issued by the city prior to October 31, 1997, or to release any party from its obligations thereunder. Those franchises, licenses or permits shall remain fully enforceable in accordance with their terms. The City Manager, with the consent of the City Council, may enter into agreements with franchise holders, licensees or permittees to modify or terminate an existing franchise, license or agreement.

(D) A license to any telecommunications corporation to use the streets and public ways to install, maintain, construct or operate telecommunications facilities under this chapter shall not authorize the use of the streets and public ways to provide any other service; nor shall the issuance of the same invalidate any franchise, license or permit that authorizes the use of the streets and public ways for such other service; nor shall the fact that an entity holds a franchise, license or permit to make any other use of the streets and public ways or to provide any other service authorize installation, maintenance, construction or operation of telecommunications facilities in any street or public way in the city, without obtaining a license hereunder.

(E) Any license granted shall not be exclusive.

(F) A telecommunications licensee or franchisee may enter into contracts for use of the licensee’s or franchisee’s facilities within the public highways to provide telecommunications services. A political subdivision may require a telecommunications licensee or franchisee to disclose all persons with whom it contracts to use its facilities in the public highways within the political subdivision to provide telecommunications services. A political subdivision may require a person using a licensee’s or franchisee’s facilities in the public highways within the political subdivision to obtain from the political subdivision a telecommunications license or franchise if the person constructs, installs, operates or maintains telecommunications facilities within the public highways of the political subdivision.

(Ord. 03-842, passed 5-12-2003)


22-1-4 LICENSE APPLICATION.

(A) A telecommunications corporation desiring a license to construct, install, operate and maintain telecommunication facilities in streets and public ways of the city shall file an application with the City

Manager requesting a license in the form prescribed by the city, and shall pay a fee in the amount of $2,500, as may be adjusted from time to time. The amount of the fee is reasonably related to the cost directly incurred by the city to review and process the application.

(B) At the discretion of the City Manager, an application for a telecommunications license may be processed simultaneously with the same applicant’s application for a permit to install the applicant’s telecommunication system facilities.

(C) Each application for a license shall include a description of the types of services that will be offered and the benefits that these services will bring to the community, and the following information:

(1) The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the applicant, including those for responsible parties during application, construction and implementation process. This includes a 24 hour emergency telephone contact;

(2) A copy of the applicant’s valid Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity which has been issued by the Arizona Corporation Commission; except that this requirement shall not apply to a telecommunication corporation that provides solely interstate telecommunications within the state as demonstrated to the city’s satisfaction;

(3) Three references from current or previous licensors to demonstrate that minimal professional standards have been met.

(4) Any other details, statements, information or references, pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the City Manager and/or City Council, or by any other provision of law.

(D) As a condition of issuing or renewing a license to use the streets and public ways to construct, install, operate and maintain telecommunication facilities, the city may require that:

(1) The applicant shows that it has received a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity from the Arizona Corporation Commission;

(2) The applicant agrees to comply with the streets and public ways use requirements that the city may establish from time to time;

(3) The applicant agrees to provide and maintain accurate maps showing the location of all the facilities it will use in the streets and public ways within the city, and to comply with the other mapping requirements as the city may establish from time to time;

(4) The applicant obtains the insurance, and provide proof of insurance as required by the city; posts the performance bonds and security fund required by the city; agrees to fully indemnify the city, its officers, agents, boards and commissions, in a form satisfactory to the city; and agrees that it shall have no recourse against the city for monetary damages as a result of any damage that may result from the city’s exercise of its rights under the license, or applicable provisions of law;

(5) The applicant agrees to comply with and be bound by the administrative and enforcement provisions as may be prescribed from time to time by the city which may include:

(a) Provisions covering assignment;

(b) The right to inspect records to determine compliance by the licensee;

(c) Provisions for renewal;

(d) Fees and charges contemplated by A.R.S. § 9-582(c) may be charged by the city pursuant to this section. The city may retain outside experts to assist in the review and processing of telecommunications license applications and all costs for such experts in excess of the application processing fee shall be disclosed to the applicant and recovered by the city through mutual agreement.

(Ord. 03-842, passed 5-12-2003)


22-1-5 LICENSE TERM.

(A) Any license granted by the city pursuant to this chapter shall commence upon adoption of the license and acceptance of the license by the provider. The license shall be for a term of five years, and subject to the conditions and restrictions provided in the instrument and this chapter. Every license shall be subject to the following provisions:

(1) Licenses shall be personal to the licensee. Except as provided in the license, no transfer of a license or licensee, or change of control over the same (including, but not limited to, transfer by forced or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership, or any other means) can occur without prior consent by the City Council.

(2) (a) Notwithstanding the foregoing, prior consent shall not be required for transfers to any company which is owned or controlled or under common control and with the same direct parent as licensee, and which is intended after such transfer to remain under the ownership or control of that parent or an entity under common control or with the same direct parent, provided that, no transfer shall be valid unless licensee and the proposed transferee submit a binding agreement and warranty to the city stating that:

1. The proposed transferee has read, accepts, and agrees to be bound by the license;

2. The proposed transferee assumes all obligations, liabilities and responsibility under the license for the acts and omissions of licensee, known and unknown, for all purposes, and agrees that the transfer shall not permit it to take any position or exercise any right which licensee could not have exercised; and

3. The transfer will not substantially diminish the financial resources available to the licensee.

(b) Prior to completing the transfer described in division (A)(2)(a)2., licensee and the proposed transferee shall submit to the city a description of the nature of the transfer, and submit complete information regarding the effect of the transfer on the direct and indirect ownership and control of the license.

(3) Every licensee shall obtain the insurance, and provide proof of insurance as required by the city; post the performance bonds and security fund required by the city; and agree to fully indemnify the city, its officers, agents, boards and commissions, in a form satisfactory to the city; and agree that it shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city or its officials, boards, commissions, agents or employees for any loss, costs, expense or damages arising out of any provision or requirement of the city because of the enforcement of the license or because of defects in this chapter or the license issued.

(4) The city shall have continuing jurisdiction and supervision over any facilities located within or on city streets and public ways. Daily administrative, supervisory and enforcement responsibilities of the provisions of this chapter shall be delegated and entrusted to the City Manager to interpret, administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, and to promulgate standards regarding the construction, reconstruction, relocation, maintenance, dismantling, abandonment or use of the facilities within the city streets and public ways. Every licensee shall comply with and be bound by the administrative and enforcement provisions as may be prescribed from time to time by the city.

(5) The licensee agrees to provide and maintain accurate digital maps in an electronic format specified by the city that shows the location of all facilities it will use in the streets and public ways within the city, and comply with such other mapping requirements as the city may establish from time to time.

(B) Every licensee shall be subject to the city’s exercise of such police, regulatory and other powers as the city now has or may later obtain, and a license may not waive the application of the same, and must be exercised in strict conformity therewith. Every license shall be subject to revocation if the licensee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the license or applicable law. Provided, however, that a license shall not be revoked unless the licensee is given written notice of the defect in performance and fails to cure the defect within 60 days of the notice, except where the city finds that the defect in performance is due to intentional misconduct, is a violation of criminal law, or is part of a pattern of violations where the licensee has already had notice and opportunity to cure. A hearing shall be held before a license is revoked or not renewed if the licensee requests a hearing.

(C) The issuance of a license by the city is not a representation or warranty that such license is a legally sufficient substitute for a franchise and is not a representation or warranty that a franchise is not required.

(Ord. 03-842, passed 5-12-2003)


22-1-6 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF LICENSE TERMS.

(A) Every provider shall be subject to the city’s exercise of the police, regulatory and other powers as the city now has or may later obtain, and a provider may not waive the application of the same, and the license must be exercised in strict conformity therewith. Every license shall be subject to revocation if the provider fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the license or applicable law. A license shall not be revoked unless the provider is given written notice of the defect in performance and fails to cure the defect within 60 days of the notice, except where the city finds that the defect in performance is due to intentional misconduct, is a violation of criminal law, or is part of a pattern of violations where the provider has already had notice and an opportunity to cure. A hearing shall be held before a license is revoked or not renewed if the provider requests a hearing. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and other provisions of the city code, the stricter requirement shall apply.

(B) Any remedies available to the city are cumulative, and are not limited by the recovery of any amounts pursuant to the insurance provisions of the license, or pursuant to any indemnity clause.

(C) If the licensee fails to pay amounts owed to the city by the time prescribed for payment, the licensee shall pay interest on the amounts owed, at the rate of 1% per month.

(D) If licensee fails or refuses to meet any requirement of the license or this chapter and fails or refuses to remedy or perform any requirement after receiving written notice of violation, the city, at its sole discretion may elect to terminate the license.

(E) A licensee that receives a telecommunications service license pursuant to this chapter may apply for a renewal of its license, which renewal shall be reviewed in accordance with the requirements of law.

(F) Termination or revocation. Upon termination or revocation in accordance with divisions (A) and (D) of this section, or through failure to renew, the licensee shall have two years to obtain a permit and remove its facilities from the streets and public ways. In the event a licensee’s facilities are not removed from the streets and public ways within two years of termination, the facilities shall be deemed abandoned and shall become the property of the city without further notice or compensation.

(Ord. 03-842, passed 5-12-2003)


22-1-7 COMPENSATION.

(A) The city shall not levy a tax, rent, fee or charge on a telecommunications corporation for the use of the streets and public ways to provide telecommunications services, or levy a tax, fee or charge upon the privilege of engaging in the business of providing telecommunications services, except that, in connection with its provisions of telecommunications services and its use of the streets and public ways to provide the same, each telecommunications corporation shall:

(1) Pay a transaction privilege tax on the business of providing intrastate telecommunications services or applicable use tax, as may be specified from time to time in the city code;

(2) Pay an annual fee based on the number of linear feet of trench in the streets and public ways in which facilities placed carry interstate traffic between and among the telecommunications corporation’s interstate points of presence exclusive of facilities used by the local network and the portion of the interstate network that carries intrastate calls. The rate per linear foot shall not be increased in any calendar year by more than the increase in the average Consumer Price Index as published by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. For the calendar year 2003, the rate per linear foot shall be $2.80;

(3) Pay street and public ways permit fees established from time to time by the city, including but not limited to, construction, street cut fees and barricading fees;

(4) Pay all costs associated with the construction, installation, maintenance and operation of its facilities in the street and public ways used to provide telecommunications services, including reasonable costs associated with damage caused to the public highways by the licensee;

(5) Pay an initial license or renewal license application processing fee of $2,500, as amended from time to time, by ordinance, to cover the cost of reviewing and processing the application;

(6) Pay the inspection fee to cover the cost of inspection of the construction, work or installation to insure it meets all city requirements; and

(7) Pay any and all additional reasonable costs for damage, including but not limited to, loss of utility, reduced life, and other proportionate and attributable costs and damages caused to the streets and public ways by the licensee, the licensee’s facilities, or the licensee’s use of the streets and public ways.

(B) The City Manager is authorized to review the costs associated with construction, maintenance and operation of facilities in the streets and public ways to provide telecommunications services and to establish any fee required to recover those costs. Nothing in this section is intended to limit the obligation of any person to pay amounts owed under any license. Provided that, for licenses issued after the effective date of this chapter, payments required under the license for the provision of telecommunications services shall comply with the provisions of applicable state and federal laws.

(Ord. 03-842, passed 5-12-2003)


22-1-8 COORDINATION TO MINIMIZE DISRUPTION TO THE CITY’s STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS.

(A) The city has the duty to regulate and oversee the use of the city’s streets and public ways, subterranean spaces and air rights. The city finds that the management of the streets and public ways has been made more complex because of the increase in building construction and influx of competitive telecommunications providers, and a corresponding increase in vehicular traffic, along the city’s major arterial streets.

(B) In order to minimize the number of street cuts, to preserve and prolong the integrity of the streets and public ways, the city requires that all telecommunications applicants will comply with all city street and public ways construction and management policies, including participation in joint trench projects as designated by the city.

(Ord. 03-842, passed 5-12-2003)


ARTICLE 22-2 Fiber Optic Cable Communications Systems

Section

22-2-1    Fiber optic cable license required

22-2-2    License terms and conditions

22-2-3    License revocation

22-2-4    Permit application process

22-2-5    Special terms and conditions for permit and/or license approval


22-2-1 FIBER OPTIC CABLE LICENSE REQUIRED.

(A) No person shall place, install, construct, operate or maintain any fiber optic equipment, facilities or system for fiber optic communication services, any interstate services or communication, conduction or transmission facilities excluded from the definition of telecommunications and telecommunications services as defined in A.R.S. § 9-581 in, upon or under the surface of any highway, public place, street or right of way, unless a fiber optic cable license has been obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In addition to obtaining the fiber optic cable license as provided herein, any person desiring to place, install, construct, operate or maintain such facilities in, upon or under any highway must also obtain a permit from the city’s Community Development Department.

(B) A fiber optic cable license pursuant to this chapter shall not authorize the use of the highways to provide any other service, nor shall the issuance of same invalidate any franchise, license or permit that authorizes the use of the highways for such other services; nor shall the fact that a person holds a franchise, license or permit to make any other use of the highway or to provide or operate any other service, authorize installation, maintenance, construction or operation of fiber optic cable, interstate services or other facilities required to be licensed by this section in any highway in the city or permit such licensee to provide fiber optic cable services by means of such facilities without obtaining a fiber optic cable license hereunder.

(C) Any license granted pursuant to this section shall not be exclusive.

(D) A person desiring a fiber optic cable license shall file an application with the city’s Community Development Department on forms prescribed by the Department, together with the nonrefundable application processing fee established by Council resolution.

(Prior Code, § 22-2-1) (Ord. 2000-706, passed 11-27-2000)


22-2-2 LICENSE TERMS AND CONDITIONS.

(A) The licensee shall maintain insurance of the types and amounts acceptable to the city; provide proof of insurance as required by the city; post performance bonds and security funds as required; pay any annual fees established in the license or annual fees established by Council resolution and shall agree to fully indemnify the city, its officers, agents, employees, boards and commissions, in a form satisfactory to the city and shall agree that it shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city, its officers, agents, boards, commissions or employees for any loss, costs, expense or damages arising out of any provision or requirement of the city because of the enforcement of the license or because of defects in this chapter; or the license issued or as a result of any damage that may result from the city’s exercise of its rights under the license or applicable provisions of law.

(B) The initial license term shall be for a period of five years and may be renewed for five year terms.

(C) Except as provided in the license, no transfer or change of control over the license (including but not limited to, forced or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership or any other means) shall occur unless prior application is made to the city and the city’s prior written consent is obtained, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld or delayed.

(D) Licensee shall produce books and records for the city’s inspection and copying, prepare reports, respond to questions and permit the city to have access to its facilities as the city may request in order to determine whether licensee has complied with its obligations under its license or other applicable law or regulation.

(E) The applicant shall agree to provide and maintain accurate maps of drawings showing the location of all its facilities, including all the facilities it will use in the streets, roads and rights of way within the city and to comply with such other mapping requirements that the city may establish from time to time.

(F) The applicant shall provide proof to the city that the applicant has received a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the Arizona Corporation Commission which authorizes applicant to provide telecommunications services within the city.

(G) The applicant shall agree to comply with the any requirements for using the city’s rights of way that the city may establish from time to time.

(H) In the event that there is a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions contained in a license granted by the city to an applicant, the provisions of the license shall prevail.

(Prior Code, § 22-2-2) (Ord. 2000-706, passed 11-27-2000)


22-2-3 LICENSE REVOCATION.

(A) A fiber optic license shall be subject to revocation after being given written notice by the city of the defect in performance and the licensee fails to cure the defect within 60 days of the receipt of the notice. However, if the city finds that the licensee’s performance is due to intentional misconduct, or is a violation of criminal law or part of a pattern of violations where the licensee has already had notice and an opportunity to cure, then the city may revoke the license without an additional written notice.

(B) A fiber optic license shall be subject to revocation for the following reasons:

(1) The licensee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the license or other applicable law;

(2) The licensee fails to make the payments in the amounts and at the times specified in the license agreement or in this chapter;

(3) The licensee fails to provide current, accurate as built plans and maps showing the location of all facilities installed or constructed in the city.

(Prior Code, § 22-2-3) (Ord. 2000-706, passed 11-27-2000)


22-2-4 PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS.

(A) Any person desiring a permit pursuant to this section shall file an application with the city’s Community Development Department on forms prescribed by the Community Development Department, together with the required application processing fee established by Council resolution.

(B) This permit shall not be construed to be a license as that term is used in the Constitution of the State of Arizona and the Goodyear City Code and is required in addition to the fiber optic license required herein.

(Prior Code, § 22-2-4) (Ord. 2000-706, passed 11-27-2000)


22-2-5 SPECIAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR PERMIT AND/OR LICENSE APPROVAL.

(A) At the request of the city, the permittee may be allowed to construct conduits, ducts and associated appurtenances such as pull boxes, which will become the property of the city upon completion of construction, in lieu of payment of annual license and/or permit fees. It is intended that the fees adopted by Council resolution may be waived by the city’s Community Development Department only to the extent of equal value received by construction in kind. The city may, at its option, rent or sell to others the conduits, duct(s) and other appurtenances that are determined to be in excess of its needs.

(B) In addition to the indemnification required in the permit terms and conditions, the permittee shall agree to indemnify, defend and save the city harmless from any losses, expenses or lost revenues incurred by the permittee other than the reasonable cost of repair to the permittee’s cable and appurtenances damaged as the result of negligence by employees of the city.

(Prior Code, § 22-2-5) (Ord. 2000-706, passed 11-27-2000)


ARTICLE 22-3 Wireless Providers Use of Public Right-of-Way

Section

22-3-1    Applicability

22-3-2    Definitions

22-3-3    Wireless provider; use of right-of-way, rates, fees, and terms

22-3-4    Permits; application; fee

22-3-5    General requirements for use of the right-of-way by wireless providers

22-3-6    Requirements for small wireless facilities; pole design and installation, replacement and new pole; clearances

22-3-7    Removal of original pole, equipment and pole foundation

22-3-8    Antennas, remote radio head (RRH)/remote radio unit (RRU), cables and mounting on pole

22-3-9    Ground-mounted equipment

22-3-10    Small wireless facilities on existing streetlight pole

22-3-11    Small wireless facilities on an existing traffic signal pole

22-3-12    Small wireless facilities on existing third-party owned utility poles in City right-of-way

22-3-13    Small wireless facilities on new utility poles

22-3-14    Monopoles

22-3-15    Dispute resolution


22-3-1 APPLICABILITY.

(A)    This article applies to the activities of a wireless provider within the right-of-way in accordance with State law and applicable City codes, regulations, and City regulatory processes. 

(B)    In accordance with A.R.S. §§ 9-591 through 9-599, the City shall enter into agreements, process necessary applications, charge fees, and issue permits concerning activities of wireless providers in the right-of-way.

(Ord. 18-1378, passed 1-8-2018)


22-3-2 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context otherwise requires a different meaning.

ANTENNA means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals and that is used in providing wireless services. 

ANTENNA MOUNTING BRACKET means the hardware required to secure the antenna to the pole.

ANTENNA MOUNTING POST means the vertical post or pipe that the antenna mounting bracket is mounted to in order for the antenna to be attached to the pole.

ANTENNA SHROUD means the three-sided cover that is mounted at the base of the antenna to conceal the appearance of the cables and wires from the hand-hole port on the pole to the bottom-fed antenna.

APPLICABLE CODES means applicable City code provisions and any applicable uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing or mechanical codes that are adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes that are enacted to address threats of destruction of property or injury to persons and to an extent that is not inconsistent with this article.

APPLICANT means any person that submits an application and that is a wireless provider.

APPLICATION means a request that is submitted by an applicant to the City for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities or to approve the installation, modification or replacement of a utility pole or wireless support structure.

AUTHORITY means City of Goodyear. 

AUTHORITY UTILITY POLE means a utility pole that is owned or operated by an authority and that is in a right-of-way. Authority utility pole does not include a utility pole for electric distribution.

CABLE OPERATOR means a person that is issued a license by the licensing authority to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system in public streets, roads and alleys. Cable operator does not include a special taxing district.

CANISTER ANTENNA means the canister or cylinder style housing used to conceal the antenna(s), amplifier(s), radio(s), cables, and wires at the top of a pole.

COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or replace wireless facilities on, within or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. 

COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT means any and all electronic equipment at the small wireless facility location that processes and transports information from the antennas to the wireless provider’s network.

COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE means cable service as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), information service as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), telecommunications service as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53) or wireless service.

DOG HOUSE means the plastic or metal attachment to the base of a pole that covers the transition point of underground cables and wires to the vertical section of the pole.

FEE means a onetime charge. 

GROUND-MOUNTED EQUIPMENT means any communications equipment that is mounted to a separate post or to a foundation on the ground.

LAW means any federal, state or local law, statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order or ordinance. 

LIGHT EMITTING DIODE also referred to as "LED" is a type of lighting fixture installed on City streetlight and traffic signal poles.

LIGHT FIXTURE means the lighting unit or luminaire that provides lighting during the evening hours or during the hours of darkness.

LUMINAIRE MAST ARM means the horizontal post that attaches the light fixture to the streetlight pole or traffic signal pole.

MONOPOLE means a wireless support structure that is not more than 40 inches in diameter at the ground level and that has all of the wireless facilities mounted on the pole or contained inside of the pole.

OMNI-DIRECTIONAL ANTENNA also referred to as an "OMNI ANTENNA." This antenna is round in shape, like a pipe, and may be about one-inch diameter up to about six inches diameter.

OUTSIDE DIAMETER is referred to as "OD" and means the points of measurement, using the outer edges of a pole, pipe or cylinder.

PERMIT means written permission required by the City to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or replace a utility pole or monopole, to collocate a small wireless facility on a utility pole or wireless support structure or to collocate wireless facilities on a monopole.

PERSON means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust or other entity or organization, including an authority.

PRIVATE EASEMENT means an easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and the grantor’s or grantee’s successors and assigns.

RATE means a recurring charge. 

REMOTE RADIO HEADS (RRH)/REMOTE RADIO UNITS (RRU) means the electronic devices that are used to amplify radio signals so that there is increased performance (farther distance) of the outgoing radio signal from the antenna. 

RF means "radio frequency."

RIGHT-OF-WAY means the area on, below or above a public roadway, highway, street, sidewalk, alley or utility easement. Right-of-way does not include a federal interstate highway, a state highway or state route under the jurisdiction of the department of transportation, a private easement, property that is owned by a special taxing district, or a utility easement that does not authorize the deployment sought by the wireless provider. 

SIGHT DISTANCE EASEMENTS or SIGHT VISIBILITY EASEMENTS (SDE or SVE) means the area of land adjacent to an intersection, driveway or roadway that has restrictive uses in order to preserve the view of oncoming or crossing vehicular and pedestrian traffic by drivers in vehicles attempting to merge with traffic or enter a roadway.

SIGHT VISIBILITY TRIANGLES (SVT) means the traffic engineering and safety concept that requires clear view by the driver of a vehicle to crossing traffic at a stop sign, driveway or intersection. In order to achieve clear visibility of the cross traffic, the land areas in the sight visibility triangle have specific maximum heights on landscaping, cabinets, and other potential view obstructions.

SIGNAL HEAD means the "Red, Yellow and Green" light signals at a signal-controlled intersection.

SIGNAL HEAD MAST ARM means the horizontal pole that has the signal heads mounted to it and attaches to the traffic signal pole.

SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY (SWF) means a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications:

(1) All antennas are located inside an enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of the antenna’s exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume.

(2) All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively not more than 28 cubic feet in volume, or 50 cubic feet in volume if the equipment was ground-mounted before August 9, 2017. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume pursuant to this subdivision:

(a) An electric meter.

(b) Concealment elements.

(c) A telecommunications demarcation box.

(d) Grounding equipment.

(e) A power transfer switch.

(f) A cutoff switch.

(g) Vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.

SPECIAL TAXING DISTRICT means a special district formed pursuant to A.R.S. Title 48, Chapter 11, 12, 17, 18, 19, 20 or 22. 

UTILITY POLE means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part for communications services, electric distribution, lighting or traffic signals. Utility pole does not include a monopole.

WIRELESS FACILITY.

(1) Means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including both of the following:

(a) Equipment associated with wireless communications.

(b) Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cables, regular and backup power supplies and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. 

(2) Includes small wireless facilities.

(3) Does not include the structure or improvements on, under or within which the equipment is collocated, wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to, or directly associated with, an antenna.

(4) Does not include Wi-Fi radio equipment described in A.R.S. § 9-506(I) or microcell equipment described in A.R.S. § 9-584(E).

WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER means any person that is authorized to provide telecommunications service in this state and that builds or installs wireless communications transmission equipment, wireless facilities, utility poles or monopoles but that is not a wireless services provider. Wireless infrastructure provider does not include a special taxing district. 

WIRELESS PROVIDER means a cable operator, wireless infrastructure provider or wireless services provider. 

WIRELESS SERVICES means any services that are provided to the public and that use licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, using wireless facilities. 

WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER means a person that provides wireless services. Wireless services provider does not include a special taxing district. 

WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE.

(1) Means:

(a) A freestanding structure, such as a monopole.

(b) A tower, either guyed or self-supporting.

(c) A sign or billboard.

(d) Any other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities.

(2) Does not include a utility pole. 

(Ord. 18-1378, passed 1-8-2018)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 9-591 with changes. 


22-3-3 WIRELESS PROVIDER; USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY, RATES, FEES, AND TERMS.

(A) The City may enter into an agreement with a wireless provider for the use of a right-of-way for any of the following:

(1) The construction, installation, maintenance, modification, operation or replacement of utility poles or monopoles.

(2) The collocation of small wireless facilities on utility poles or wireless support structures.

(3) The collocation of wireless facilities on monopoles.

(B) In accordance with State law, the City may charge a wireless provider a rate or fee for the use of a right-of-way for the construction, installation, maintenance, modification, operation or replacement of a utility pole in the right-of-way or the collocation of a small wireless facility in the right-of-way. 

(Ord. 18-1378, passed 1-8-2018)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 9-592 with changes. 


22-3-4 PERMITS; APPLICATION; FEE.

(A) In accordance with State law, the City may accept applications for, process, and issue permits for the use of City right-of-ways by wireless providers. 

(B) In accordance with State law, the City may charge an application fee. 

(Ord. 18-1378, passed 1-8-2018)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 9-593 with changes.


22-3-5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR USE OF THE RIGHT-OF-WAY BY WIRELESS PROVIDERS.

(A) Structures and facilities deployed by wireless providers pursuant to this article shall be constructed, maintained and located as to not obstruct, endanger or hinder the usual travel or public safety on the right-of-way, damage or interfere with any other utility facilities in the right-of-way or interfere with a utility’s use of the utility’s facilities in the right-of-way.

(B)    Construction and maintenance by the wireless provider shall comply with the national electrical safety code and all applicable laws and regulations for the protection of underground and overhead utility facilities. 

(C)    The City shall treat a wireless provider’s facilities located within a right-of-way on an equal basis with other utility facilities, except the City may adopt reasonable regulations to address the separation of the wireless provider’s facilities from the other utility facilities within the right-of-way to prevent any damage to or interference with such other utility facilities or interference with a utility’s use of the utility’s facilities located or to be located within the right-of-way.

(Ord. 18-1378, passed 1-8-2018)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 9-598 with changes.


22-3-6 REQUIREMENTS FOR SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES; POLE DESIGN AND INSTALLATION, REPLACEMENT AND NEW POLE; CLEARANCES.

(A) The following requirements shall be applied to all new small wireless facilities in the City’s right-of-way, whether for the collocation of a small wireless facility on an existing or replacement streetlight pole, an existing or replacement traffic signal pole, an existing or replacement utility pole, or installation on a new utility pole.

(B) All new poles, replacement poles and ground-mounted electrical equipment shall maintain the minimum horizontal clearances from all aboveground and underground utilities as follows:

(1) Clearance from water lines shall be at least six feet.

(2) Clearance from water service lines shall be at least three feet.

(3) Clearance from fire hydrants shall be at least seven feet.

(4) Clearance from sewer lines shall be at least six feet.

(5) Clearance from sewer service lines shall be at least three feet.

(6) Clearance from storm drain lines shall be at least two feet.

(7) Clearance from gas lines shall be at least six feet.

(8) Clearance from telecommunication lines shall be at least one foot.

(9) Clearance from cable television lines shall be at least one foot.

(10) Clearance from traffic signal poles and controllers shall be at least six feet.

(11) Clearance from a streetlight pole shall be at least six feet.

(12) Clearance from all other aboveground or underground infrastructure shall be at least six feet.

(13) Clearance from sidewalk shall be at least one foot.

(14) Clearance from back of curb shall be at least three feet.

(C) The City Engineer may allow a lesser horizontal clearance if the wireless provider demonstrates that, based on factors unique to the site, a lesser horizontal separation is necessary and will not adversely affect said facilities. The wireless provider may work with the affected utility to move lines, pipes, equipment or facilities to provide the minimum clearance; however, all costs associated with any relocation shall be at the sole expense of the wireless provider.

(D) The base height of an existing pole which is to be used in conjunction with the "increase in pole height" to determine the overall pole height shall be measured as follows:

(1) Streetlight Pole.

(a) For a streetlight with a separate luminaire mast arm mounted to the vertical pole, the base height shall be the distance from existing grade to the top of the vertical pole.

(b) For a streetlight with a luminaire mast arm integrated into the top vertical section of the pole (e.g., Streamline Steel Pole style), the base height shall be the distance from existing grade to point where the mast arm is connected plus 24 inches.

(2) Traffic Signal Pole.

(a) For a traffic signal pole with a luminaire mast arm that is mounted above the signal head mast arm, the base height shall be the distance from existing grade to the top of the vertical portion of the pole that supports the luminaire mast arm.

(b) For a traffic signal pole with no luminaire, the base height shall be the distance from existing grade to the top of the signal head mast arm.

(E) The minimum distance of the replacement pole from the original pole location shall be 60 inches or more so that construction can occur safely. The City Engineer may require a greater or lesser minimum distance based on factors unique to the site. 

(F) The new or replacement pole shall maintain 12-inch minimum clearance distance from sidewalks. The City Engineer may require a greater minimum distance based on factors unique to the site to ensure the safe use of the sidewalk and adjacent area.

(G) All new and replacement poles shall be installed in a location that does not impair or interfere with Sight Visibility Easements (SVE) or Sight Visibility Triangles (SVT) or SVE or SVT safety requirements.

(H) All cables for the wireless equipment and antennas – except where such cables or wires attach to the ports in the antenna – shall be located within a conduit and inside the caisson and pole. 

(1) There shall not be any "dog house" or externally visible conduit or entry point of the cables. 

(2) All electrical wires for the streetlight luminaire, traffic signal heads, and any City device on the pole shall be new and connected to the existing power source.

(I) All hand-hole locations shall be called out on the plans. All hand-holes near antennas shall have the top of the hand-hole no lower than the bottom height of the antennas. The bottom of the hand-hole should not exceed six inches below the bottom of the antenna.

(J) All wireless facilities shall display a four-inch by six-inch Radio Frequency Safety notice which may be mounted no less than 24 inches from the bottom of the antenna, facing away from traffic.

(K) The wireless provider may place a discreet site identification or number on the pole. The size, color and location of this identifier shall be similar to those used by the City or pole owner and approved by the City prior to installation.

(L) No wireless provider signs may be placed on a streetlight, traffic signal pole, wireless support structure, or a new or replacement pole except to the extent required by local, state or federal law or regulations.

(M) The City has certain wireless devices in a network that connects traffic signals, public buildings, water sites, and other locations for the City’s proprietary use. The selection of a location for a wireless site shall consider the potential interference of the City’s wireless network by RF from a wireless provider’s proposed site and avoid sites that would interfere with said wireless network.

(N) The materials and paint color of the cable chase and dog house shall match that of the pole, unless the City Engineer authorizes the use of a different material or color that is compatible with the pole and immediate area.

(Ord. 18-1378, passed 1-8-2018)


22-3-7 REMOVAL OF ORIGINAL POLE, EQUIPMENT AND POLE FOUNDATION.

(A) The City Engineer shall determine what City-owned equipment (e.g., original pole, mast arm, signal heads and luminaire, etc.) that is to be removed shall be retained by the City and such equipment shall be delivered to the City’s Public Works Yard by the wireless provider at no cost to the City.

(B) If the City elects to accept some, but not all, of the such equipment, then only that equipment shall be delivered by the wireless provider to the City’s Public Works Yard and the remaining equipment shall be disposed of by the wireless provider in an appropriate manner. 

(C) The concrete pole foundation for the original streetlight or traffic signal pole shall be removed by the wireless provider in one of the manners described below as determined by the City Engineer:

(1) Partial Removal – The original pole foundation shall be taken back to a level that is 12 inches below existing grade and covered with four inches of one-half-inch to three-quarter-inch rock materials. The remaining top eight inches shall be native soil.

(2) Complete Removal – If the entire original pole foundation must be removed, then all materials (concrete, rebar, metals, bolts, etc.) shall be removed. The City Engineer, or his/her designee, shall determine, on a case-by-case basis, the type of backfill material and compaction required – ranging from compacted native soil to a half sack slurry for the entire depth, or a combination of native soil and slurry.

(D) The above requirements shall be applied to all new small wireless facilities in the City’s right-of-way, whether for the collocation of a small wireless facility on an existing or replacement streetlight pole, an existing or replacement traffic signal pole, an existing or replacement utility pole, or installation on a new utility pole.

(Ord. 18-1378, passed 1-8-2018)


22-3-8 ANTENNAS, REMOTE RADIO HEAD (RRH)/REMOTE RADIO UNIT (RRU), CABLES AND MOUNTING ON POLE.

(A) All antennas shall be installed in a manner that minimizes the visual impact to the general public. All work shall be performed in a professional manner that is consistent with the highest standards of workmanship.

(B) The following specific criteria shall apply to antennas: 

(1) The number of canister antennas or sets of panel antennas on a single pole shall not exceed two. 

(2) Antenna Mounting Posts and Brackets.

(a) All panel antennas shall be mounted directly to the pole or onto a mounting pole so that the distance from the "face" of the pole to the back of the antenna does not exceed nine inches to reduce the overall visual profile as much as possible.

(b) All mounting posts shall be trimmed so that the poles do not extend higher than the top of the antenna or protrude lower than the antenna unless necessary to install the shroud.

(c) All pole-attached wireless equipment must be a minimum 10 feet above the sidewalk elevation.

(3) Panel Antennas.

(a) All panel antennas for a small wireless facility site shall fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-591(19)(a). This volume does not include antenna cable shrouds when required.

(b) All panel antennas with exposed cables from the bottom of the antenna shall have a shroud installed on the antenna or antenna mounting posts to conceal the cables.

(c) The type of shroud may be a 45-degree angle (away from the bottom of the antenna; toward the pole) or a 90-degree angle (parallel to the bottom of the antenna) depending on the location of the site. 

(d) The shroud shall extend from the bottom of the antenna to two inches below the bottom of the nearest hand-hole.

(4) Canister Antennas.

(a) All canister antennas shall fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume. This volume does not include the canister as it is a stealth device and not the antenna.

(b) The canister shall be no larger than 18 inches in diameter (OD). 

(c) All canister antennas shall be located in a canister that is mounted to a base plate at the top of the vertical section of the replacement pole.

(d) All cables protruding from the canister shall be concealed within the canister or by a shroud at the point where the canister is mounted to the base plate.

(5) According to A.R.S. § 9-591(19)(a), the RRH/RRU is not considered part of the antenna. If allowed, the RRH/RRU shall be calculated as part of all other wireless equipment associated with this facility and per A.R.S. § 9-591(19)(b) that is subject to the 28 cubic feet maximum size for small cell wireless facility sites. The City Engineer shall determine if the installation of an RRH/RRU on the pole will be allowed at the proposed location based on the compatibility of the unit with the landscape of the surrounding area, the location of the pole with regard to residential land uses and stealth options that could be implemented.

(C) The above requirements shall be applied to all new small wireless facilities in the City’s right-of-way, whether for the collocation of a small wireless facility on an existing or replacement streetlight pole, an existing or replacement traffic signal pole, an existing or replacement utility pole, or installation on a new utility pole.

(Ord. 18-1378, passed 1-8-2018)


22-3-9 GROUND-MOUNTED EQUIPMENT.

(A) All ground-mounted equipment shall be installed in a manner that minimizes the visual and ingress/egress impact to the general public. All work shall be performed in a professional manner that is consistent with the highest standards of workmanship.

(B) The following specific criteria shall apply to ground-mounted equipment:

(1) All ground-based wireless equipment shall be installed in a location that does not impair or interfere with SVE or SVT safety requirements. To ensure proper sight distance, all City of Goodyear Standard Details G-3228 and G-3232 shall apply.

(2) All ground-based wireless equipment, including but not limited to equipment cabinets or power pedestals, shall be placed as far as practical to the edge of the right-of-way while maintaining at least three feet of ingress/egress in the right-of-way or public utility easement around the equipment.

(3) All ground-mounted electrical equipment shall maintain minimum horizontal clearance from below-ground utilities:

(a) Clearance from water lines shall be at least six feet.

(b) Clearance from water service lines shall be at least three feet.

(c) Clearance from fire hydrants shall be at least seven feet.

(d) Clearance from sewer lines shall be at least six feet.

(e) Clearance from sewer service lines shall be at least three feet.

(f) Clearance from storm drain lines shall be at least two feet.

(g) Clearance from gas lines shall be at least six feet.

(h) Clearance from telecommunication lines shall be at least one foot.

(i) Clearance from cable television lines shall be at least one foot.

(j) Clearance from traffic signal poles and controllers shall be at least six feet.

(k) Clearance from a streetlight pole shall be at least six feet.

(l) Clearance from all other aboveground or underground infrastructure shall be at least six feet.

(m) Clearance from sidewalk shall be at least one foot.

(n) Clearance from back of curb shall be at least three feet.

(4) The City Engineer may allow a lesser horizontal clearance if the wireless provider demonstrates that, based on factors unique to the site, a lesser horizontal separation is necessary and will not adversely affect said facilities. The wireless provider may elect to work with the affected utility to move lines, pipes, equipment or facilities to provide the minimum clearance; however, all costs associated with any relocation shall be at the sole expense of the wireless provider.

(5) The ground equipment shall maintain a minimum 12-inch clearance distance from sidewalks. The City Engineer may require a more than the minimum clearance if necessary to ensure the safe use of the sidewalk and adjacent area.

(6) Where the proposed above-ground equipment or structure is to be over 36 inches in height, evidence or documentation shall be submitted demonstrating that the equipment or structure will comply with applicable City of Goodyear City Code and Zoning Ordinance requirements. 

(7) Ground-mounted equipment shall be either contained within a cabinet or similar enclosure, or be screened. The design and type of screening materials proposed shall match or otherwise be compatible with the design and colors of existing ground equipment, facilities or walls within the immediate area and shall be submitted for approval by the City Engineer. In cases where screening is not proposed or otherwise required, the equipment shall be painted to match the color of existing ground equipment, facilities or walls within the immediate area. An anti-graffiti finish shall be applied to all screening material.

(8) Ground-mounted equipment shall comply with the following identification requirements: 

(a) All equipment manufacturers’ decals, logos and other identification information shall be removed unless required for warranty purposes. 

(b) The owner of the ground equipment on the site shall affix an "Emergency Contact" decal or emblem to the ground equipment that includes the name of the site and a contact number for the owner of the equipment.

(c) A four-inch by six-inch Radio Frequency Safety sticker shall be mounted on the pole no less than 24 inches from the base of the antenna, on the side of the pole facing away from traffic.

(d) The ground-mounted equipment shall not have any flashing lights, sirens or regular noise other than a cooling fan that may run intermittently.

(C) The Wireless Equipment and Ancillary Equipment listed in A.R.S. § 9-591(19)(b) shall not exceed 36 inches in height in the right-of-way adjacent to the front yard of any property zoned single-family residential. 

(D) Unless otherwise specified by City, a wireless equipment cabinet with air-conditioning (not a fan only) shall be enclosed by walls and setback a minimum of 15 feet from lots where the existing or planned primary use is a residential single-family dwelling.

(E) Electric Company Meter.

(1) All electric company meters shall be installed in the right-of-way or public utility easement. The location of the meter equipment shall have minimum clearance of three feet from private property lines and driveways for ingress and egress purposes.

(2) All electric company meters shall maintain a minimum clearance of six feet from above-ground utility cabinets and below-ground utilities, unless a greater distance is specified by another code or regulation applicable to the location.

(3) All electric company meters shall be installed in a location that does not impair or interfere with the SVE or SVT safety requirements of the City.

(4) The electric company meters shall be installed within a pedestal cabinet that is similar or equal to those produced by "Myers" or "Milbank" and shall be painted to match the color of existing ground equipment, facilities or walls within the immediate area.

(5) In the case where screening is not required, the paint color of the electric company meter cabinet shall match or otherwise be compatible with the color of existing ground equipment, facilities or walls within the immediate area.

(F) The above requirements shall be applied to all new small wireless facilities in the City’s right-of-way, whether for the collocation of a small wireless facility on an existing or replacement streetlight pole, an existing or replacement traffic signal pole, an existing or replacement utility pole, or installation on a new utility pole.

(Ord. 18-1378, passed 1-8-2018)


22-3-10 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES ON EXISTING STREETLIGHT POLE.

(A) The following additional requirements shall apply to a small wireless facility proposed for collocation on an existing or replacement streetlight pole owned by the City or a third party in the City right-of-way. These requirements are not exhaustive and the City, as the owner of the right-of-way, retains the right to modify or adjust the requirements on a case-by-case basis.

(B) The primary purpose of the pole shall remain as a pole structure supporting a streetlight luminaire and related streetlight fixtures used to provide lighting to the City right-of-way. The attachment of wireless equipment to an existing streetlight pole or to a replacement pole that impedes this primary purpose will not be approved.

(C) A small wireless facility shall be designed to blend in with the surrounding streetscape with minimal, if any, visual impact. 

(1) A replacement pole shall match the City standard streetlight pole, as closely as possible, subject to more specific criteria below.

(2) As specified in the City of Goodyear’s Wireless Facilities Standard Terms and Conditions, for each individual pole type or style used to support the wireless equipment, one spare replacement pole shall be provided by the wireless provider to City in advance so the pole can be replaced promptly in case of a knockdown.

(3) All construction plans shall be signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Arizona.

(4) The small wireless facility design and construction shall comply with all other details in the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual, including Appendix A – Supplemental Standard Details for Public Works Construction.

(D) The following specific criteria shall apply to existing or replacement poles: 

(1) A new small wireless facility may be installed on an existing pole without zoning review if the following height requirements are met:

(a) It does not extend more than 10 feet above the base height of the existing pole; and

(b) Does not exceed 50 feet total (whichever is less), per A.R.S. § 9-592(J).

(2) A new small wireless facility may be installed on a replacement pole without zoning review pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-592(I) if the pole does not exceed the greater of either:

(a) Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, that is located within 500 feet of the new, replacement or modified utility pole and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the authority, but no more than 50 feet above ground level; or

(b) Forty feet above ground level where there are no other existing utility poles taller than 40 feet within 500 feet of the new pole. 

(3) Overall Height of Replacement Pole.

(a) The "base" height of an existing streetlight pole shall be the height of the vertical pole section from the existing grade. The height of the luminaire mast arm, if higher than the vertical pole section, shall not be used to determine the new overall height of the replacement pole.

(b) If the antennas are the highest vertical element of the site, then the new overall height of the replacement pole is measured from the existing grade to the top of the canister, top of the omni-directional antenna, or the top of the panel antenna.

(4) Increase in Size of Replacement Pole.

(a) Round Pole: For a non-tapered round replacement pole, the outside diameter (OD) of the base section shall be equal to the top section, and the OD shall not exceed eight and five-eighths inches (the pole manufacturing industry standard OD for an eight-inch diameter pole) or a 100% increase in diameter of the original pole, whichever is less.

(b) Square Pole: For a square tube pole, the dimensions of the square pole shall match the dimensions of the original pole being replaced (typically five inches by five inches) unless a larger pole is needed to support the additional equipment being attached to the pole, but in no case shall the size of the replacement pole exceed a 50% increase in the size of the original pole.

(5) Luminaire Mast Arms.

(a) All luminaire mast arms shall be the same length as the original luminaire arm, unless the City requires the mast arm to be different (longer or shorter) based upon the location of the replacement pole.

(b) Unless otherwise approved, all luminaire mast arms shall match the arc (if applicable) and style of the original luminaire arm.

(c) The replacement luminaire mast arm shall be at the same height above the ground as the existing luminaire.

(6) Luminaire Fixtures. All replacement poles shall have the City standard light-emitting diode (LED) light fixture installed per the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual Sections 4.1.10 and 4.1.12 and the G-3200 Series Supplemental Standard Details.

(7) All replacement light fixtures shall have a new City standard photo-cell or sensor provided by the wireless provider.

(8) Pole Foundation.

(a) All pole foundations shall conform to the City’s adopted standards and specifications on streetlight design and shall be modified for wireless communications equipment and cables.

(b) The City, in its sole discretion, may allow the pole foundation design to be "worst case" for all soil conditions.

(c) A separate, one-inch diameter conduit shall be installed in the pole foundation for the City’s luminaire wire and any additional City wires or cables. The City’s conduit shall be trimmed to three inches above the top of the pole foundation.

(d) The height of the pole foundation shall be two inches above finished grade. If the pole foundation encroaches into any portion of the sidewalk, then the pole foundation shall be flush with the sidewalk.

(e) Shrouds for the streetlight pole mounting bolts may be required for the replacement pole.

(9) Painting of Replacement Pole.

(a) For gray or unpainted galvanized type poles, the pole shall not be painted or have a finish applied unless otherwise specified by the City Engineer.

(b) For powder coated dark bronze type poles, the replacement pole shall be treated with the same powder coated color and/or color combination per the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual Sections 4.1.10 and 4.1.12 and the G-3200 Series Supplemental Standard Details.

(10) Painting Antennas and Mounting Equipment Associated with Poles.

(a) All antenna mounting brackets and hardware, antenna mounting posts, cables, shrouds and other equipment mounted on a new or replacement unpainted galvanized pole shall be painted Sherwin Williams "Web Grey" (SW7075) color or equivalent, unless specified otherwise by the City Engineer.

(b) All antenna mounting brackets and hardware, antenna mounting posts, cables, shrouds and all other equipment mounted on a painted new or replacement pole shall be painted a color that matches the replacement pole.

(11) Wireless provider shall install pole numbers on each replacement pole (identical to the number on the existing streetlight pole being replaced) per the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual Sections 4.1.10 and 4.1.12 and the G-3200 Series Supplemental Standard Details.

(12) The City may require the ground-mounted wireless equipment to be screened or concealed to reduce the visual impact to the surrounding area. The screening or concealment shall take into account the location of the site, the use of the immediate area, and the existing aesthetic elements surrounding the site. In cases where screening is not proposed or otherwise required, the equipment shall be painted to match the color of existing ground equipment, facilities or walls within the immediate area. An anti-graffiti finish shall be applied to all screening material. Any landscaping in the right-of-way that is disturbed as a result of the installation of the ground-mounted equipment shall be replaced or repaired and restored to its original condition by the owner of the equipment.

(Ord. 18-1378, passed 1-8-2018)


22-3-11 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES ON AN EXISTING TRAFFIC SIGNAL POLE.

(A) The following additional requirements shall apply to a small wireless facility proposed for collocation on a City-owned traffic signal pole in the City right-of-way. These requirements are not exhaustive and the City, as the owner of the right-of-way, retains the right to modify or adjust the requirements on a case-by-case basis.

(B) The primary purpose of the traffic signal pole shall remain as a pole structure supporting a traffic signal and related streetlight fixtures used to provide traffic control and lighting to the City right-of-way. The attachment of wireless equipment to a new or replacement traffic signal pole that impedes this primary purpose will not be approved.

(C) A small wireless facility shall be designed to blend in with the surrounding streetscape with minimal to any visual impact.

(1) A replacement pole shall match the City of Goodyear standard traffic signal pole, as closely as possible, subject to more specific criteria below.

(2) As specified in the City of Goodyear’s Wireless Facilities Standard Terms and Conditions, for each individual pole type or style used to support the wireless equipment, one spare replacement pole shall be provided by Company to City in advance so the pole can be replaced promptly in case of a knockdown.

(3) All construction plans shall be signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Arizona.

(4) The small wireless facility design and construction shall comply with all other details in the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual, including Appendix A – Supplemental Standard Details for Public Works Construction.

(D) The following specific criteria shall apply to existing or replacement traffic signal poles: 

(1) A new small wireless facility may be installed on an existing traffic signal pole without zoning review if the following height requirements are met:

(a) It does not extend more than 10 feet above the base height of the existing pole; and

(b) Does not exceed 50 feet total (whichever is less), per A.R.S. § 9-592(J).

(2) A new small wireless facility may be installed on a replacement traffic signal pole without zoning review pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-592(I) if the pole does not exceed the greater of either:

(a) Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, that is located within 500 feet of the new, replacement or modified utility pole and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the authority, but no more than 50 feet above ground level; or

(b) Forty feet above ground level where there are no other existing utility poles taller than 40 feet within 500 feet of the new pole. 

(3) Increase in Size of Replacement Pole.

(a) Round Pole: For a non-tapered round replacement pole, the outside diameter (OD) of the base section shall be equal to the top section, and the OD shall not exceed eight and five-eighths inches (the pole manufacturing industry standard OD for an eight-inch diameter pole) or a 100% increase in diameter of the original pole, whichever is less.

(b) Square Pole: For a square tube pole, the dimensions of the square pole shall match the dimensions of the original pole being replaced unless a larger pole is needed to support the additional equipment being attached to the pole, but in no case shall the size of the replacement pole exceed a 50% increase in the size of the original pole or eight inches, whichever is smaller.

(4) Signal Head Mast Arms.

(a) The traffic signal head mast arms shall be the same length as the original signal head mast arm unless the City requires the mast arm to be different (longer or shorter) based upon the location of the replacement pole.

(b) All signal head mast arms shall match the arc (if applicable) and style of the original signal head mast arm. 

(5) Luminaire Mast Arms.

(a) All luminaire mast arms shall be the same length as the original luminaire arm unless the City requires the mast arm to be different (longer or shorter) based upon the location of the replacement pole.

(b) All luminaire mast arms shall match the arc (if applicable) and style of the original luminaire arm. 

(6) Signal Heads.

(a) All existing signal heads shall be replaced, at no cost to City, with new light-emitting diode (LED) signal heads, per the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual Section 4.2 and the G-3200 Series Supplemental Standard Details.

(b) All signal heads shall be procured from a City-approved signal heads supplier or manufacturer.

(7) Luminaire Fixtures.

(a) All replacement poles shall have the City standard LED light fixture installed per the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual Sections 4.1.10 and 4.1.12 and the G-3200 Series Supplemental Standard Details.

(b) All replacement light fixtures shall have a new photo-cell or sensor installed to City standard.

(8) All existing emergency signal detection units, video detection cameras, video cameras, crosswalk service buttons, cross walk signals, and any other pedestrian or traffic devices shall be replaced with new units by wireless provider and installed at no cost to the City. All equipment shall be procured from a list of City approved suppliers.

(E) All street name plates or signs, directional signs and any other City approved signs shall be replaced with new signs at no cost to the City. All signs and attachments shall be procured from a list of City approved suppliers. 

(F) All pole foundations shall conform to the City’s standards and specifications for traffic signal pole design per the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual Section 4.2 and the G-3200 Series Supplemental Standard Details and shall be modified for wireless communications equipment, hand holes and cables.

(G) The wireless provider shall install a three-inch diameter (OD) conduit in the pole foundation for the City’s cables and wires for the signal heads, luminaire and devices on the signal mast arm and luminaire mast arm. The City’s conduit shall be trimmed to three inches above the top of the pole foundation. In addition to the conduits for the City’s use inside the pole, the wireless provider shall install its cables and wires using one of the following options:

(1) One six-inch diameter (OD) conduit in the pole foundation; or

(2) Two four-inch diameter (OD) conduits in the pole foundation. The length of the conduit shall extend from the pole foundation to six inches above the signal head mast arm. 

(H) Pole Foundation – Height Above Ground Level.

(1) If the pole foundation is in a landscaped or unimproved area, the height of the caisson shall be two inches above finished grade. However, if the pole foundation is adjacent to or within a sidewalk or ramp, the height of the pole foundation shall be flush with the surface of the immediate area.

(2) Shrouds for the traffic signal pole mounting bolts may be required for the replacement pole.

(I) Painting of Traffic Signal Pole, Antennas and Mounting Equipment.

(1) For gray or unpainted galvanized type poles, the pole shall not be painted or have a finish applied unless otherwise specified by the City Engineer.

(2) For powder coated dark bronze type poles, the replacement pole shall be treated with the same powder coated color and/or color combination per the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual Sections 4.1.10 and 4.1.12 and the G-3200 Series Supplemental Standard Details.

(3) All antenna mounting brackets and hardware, antenna mounting posts, cables, shrouds and other equipment mounted on a new or replacement unpainted galvanized pole shall be painted Sherwin Williams "Web Grey" (SW7075) color or equivalent, unless specified otherwise by the City Engineer. All antenna mounting brackets and hardware, antenna mounting posts, cables, shrouds and all other equipment mounted on a painted new or replacement pole shall be painted a color that matches the replacement pole.

(J) The installation work of the replacement traffic signal pole, including mast arms, signal heads and devices, must be performed by an Arizona licensed Traffic Signal Contractor with a minimum of five years of experience installing traffic signals. 

(K) The City may require the ground-mounted wireless equipment to be screened or concealed to reduce the visual impact to the surrounding area. The screening or concealment shall take into account the location of the site, the use of the immediate area, and the existing aesthetic elements surrounding the site. In cases where screening is not proposed or otherwise required, the equipment shall be painted to match the color of existing ground equipment, facilities or walls within the immediate area. An anti-graffiti finish shall be applied to all screening material. Any landscaping in the right-of-way that is disturbed as a result of the installation of the ground-mounted equipment shall be replaced or repaired and restored to its original condition by the owner of the equipment.

(Ord. 18-1378, passed 1-8-2018)


22-3-12 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES ON EXISTING THIRD-PARTY OWNED UTILITY POLES IN CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY.

(A) The following additional requirements shall apply to a small wireless facility proposed for collocation on a third party-owned utility pole in the City of Goodyear right-of-way. These requirements are not exhaustive and the City, as the owner of the right-of-way, retains the right to modify or adjust the requirements on a case-by-case basis.

(B) The primary purpose of the utility pole shall remain as a pole structure supporting cables and wires used to provide communication services and electric distribution in the City right-of-way. The attachment of wireless equipment to an existing third-party owned utility pole that impedes this primary purpose will not be approved.

(C) A SWF shall be designed to blend in with the surrounding streetscape with minimal to any visual impact.

(1) A SWF mounted on an existing third-party owned utility pole is subject to more specific criteria below.

(2) All plans shall be signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Arizona.

(D) The following specific criteria shall apply to existing or replacement third-party owned utility poles: 

(1) A new small wireless facility may be installed on an existing utility pole without zoning review if the following height requirements are met:

(a) It does not extend more than 10 feet above the base height of the existing pole; and

(b) Does not exceed 50 feet total (whichever is less), per A.R.S. § 9-592(J).

(2) A new small wireless facility may be installed on a replacement utility pole without zoning review pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-592(I) if the pole does not exceed the greater of either:

(a) Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the effective date of this section, that is located within 500 feet of the new, replacement or modified utility pole and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the authority, but no more than 50 feet above ground level; or

(b) Forty feet above ground level where there are no other existing utility poles taller than 40 feet within 500 feet of the new pole. 

(3) Overall Height of Replacement Utility Pole.

(a) The "base" height of an existing third-party owned utility pole shall be the height of the vertical pole section from the existing grade. 

(4) If the antennas are the highest vertical element of the site, then the new overall height of the replacement pole is measured from the existing grade to the top of the canister or the top of the panel antenna.

(5) Use of Existing Pole – Wood.

(a) An existing wood pole used for a small wireless facility shall have the antennas contained within an 18-inch (OD) canister mounted at the top of the pole.

(b) Unless otherwise approved, the cables and wires from the base of the pole to the antennas shall be installed in a conduit or cable chase outside of the pole, facing away from the street or away from oncoming traffic.

(c) If a "dog house" is required as a transition point connecting the underground cables and wires from the ground-mounted equipment to the pole, the City shall provide the maximum size, dimension and shape of the dog house on a case-by-case basis.

(6) Use of Existing Pole – Metal.

(a) An existing metal pole used for a small wireless facility shall have the antennas contained within an 18-inch (OD) canister mounted at the top of the pole.

(b) Panel antennas on a metal pole shall have the same "RAD center" (center of radiation) so the antennas will be at the same height on the pole.

(c) The cables and wires from the base of the pole to the antennas shall be installed in a conduit or cable chase on the outside of the pole, facing away from the street or away from oncoming traffic. 

(d) If a "dog house" is required as a transition point connecting the underground cables and wires from the ground-mounted equipment to the pole, the City shall provide the maximum size, dimension and shape of the dog house on a case-by-case basis.

(7) Painting of Pole and Dog House.

(a) If the replacement pole is an unpainted galvanized pole, the pole shall not be painted or have a finish unless otherwise specified by the City.

(b) If the existing or replacement pole includes a dog house for the transition of the cables and wires to the pole, the dog house shall be painted the same color as the pole or a color that is compatible with the color of existing ground equipment, facilities or walls within the immediate area.

(8) Painting Antennas and Mounting Equipment.

(a) All antenna mounting brackets and hardware, antenna mounting posts, cables, shrouds and other equipment mounted on a new or replacement unpainted galvanized pole shall be painted Sherwin Williams "Web Grey" (SW7075) color or equivalent, unless specified otherwise by the City.

(b) All antenna mounting brackets and hardware, antenna mounting posts, cables, shrouds and all other equipment mounted on a painted new or replacement pole shall be painted a color specified by the City.

(c) If the antenna is mounted on a wood pole, the color of the antenna, antenna canister, mounting brackets and posts, shrouds and cable chases shall be painted a color specified by the City that will closely match the color of the wood.

(9) The City may require the ground-mounted wireless equipment to be screened or concealed to reduce the visual impact to the surrounding area. The screening or concealment shall take into account the location of the site, the use of the immediate area, and the existing aesthetic elements surrounding the site. In cases where screening is not proposed or otherwise required, the equipment shall be painted to match the color of existing ground equipment, facilities or walls within the immediate area. An anti-graffiti finish shall be applied to all screening material. Any landscaping in the right-of-way that is disturbed as a result of the installation of the ground-mounted equipment shall be replaced or repaired and restored to its original condition by the owner of the equipment.

(Ord. 18-1378, passed 1-8-2018)


22-3-13 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES ON NEW UTILITY POLES.

(A) The following additional requirements shall apply to a small wireless facility proposed for installation on a new utility pole that is neither a replacement pole for an existing streetlight, nor a replacement pole for an existing traffic signal. A new utility pole shall incorporate the highest level of stealth and concealment of the antennas and wireless equipment in order to minimize the visual impact of the site to the public. The installation of a new utility pole does not include the installation of monopoles. These design standards are not exhaustive and the City, as the owner of the right-of-way, retains the right to modify or adjust the requirements on a case-by-case basis.

(B) The primary purpose of utility pole is to support communication services, electric distribution, lighting, or traffic signals. The utility pole may be used for the provision of wireless services by a wireless provider in the City’s right-of-way.

(C) The new utility pole shall be architecturally integrated and compatible with the use of the surrounding area and any existing utility poles, including streetlights and traffic signal poles, and shall be designed to blend in with the surrounding streetscape, either by stealth design or camouflage so as to have little to no visual impact on the surrounding area.

(D) All plans shall be signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Arizona.

(E) The following specific criteria shall apply to new utility poles: 

(1) A new small wireless facility may be installed without zoning review on a new utility pole pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-592(I) if the pole does not exceed the greater of either:

(a) Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the effective date of this section, that is located within 500 feet of the new, replacement or modified utility pole and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the authority, but no more than 50 feet above ground level; or

(b) Forty feet above ground level where there are no other existing utility poles taller than 40 feet within 500 feet of the new pole. 

(c) The height of the new utility pole is measured from grade to top of the antenna canister, or the top of the panel antenna if the antennas are the highest elements of the site. Otherwise, the measured height shall be from existing grade to the highest point of the new utility pole. 

(d) As part of the stealth and concealment elements of the new utility pole, the City may require the wireless provider to install street name plates, directional signs, and other decorative signs or artistic elements on the structure. The wireless provider is solely responsible for the cost of all stealth and concealment elements and the installation of other elements required by the City.

(2) The wireless provider is responsible for the performance of and any costs incurred for regular up-keep, maintenance and replacement (if necessary) of these stealth and concealment elements. 

(3) Pole Foundation.

(a) The pole foundation for the new utility pole, if required, shall conform to civil and structural engineering standards acceptable to the City, with design modifications for wireless communications equipment and cables.

(b) The height of the pole foundation shall be two inches above finished grade. However, if the pole foundation is adjacent to or within a sidewalk or ramp, the height of the pole foundation shall be flush with the surface of the immediate area.

(c) Shrouds for the pole mounting bolts may be required.

(4) The City shall identify the paint colors, location of paint and any decorative work that may be painted onto the new utility pole.

(5) The City shall identify the paint colors for the antennas, antenna mounting brackets and posts, antenna shrouds, and cables.

(6) The City may require the new utility pole to be painted using a powder-coat process to match existing facilities in the immediate area, such as streetlights or traffic signals.

(7) The City may require the ground-mounted wireless equipment to be screened or concealed to reduce the visual impact to the surrounding area. The screening or concealment shall take into account the location of the site, the use of the immediate area, and the existing aesthetic elements surrounding the site. In cases where screening is not proposed or otherwise required, the equipment shall be painted to match the color of existing ground equipment, facilities or walls within the immediate area. An anti-graffiti finish shall be applied to all screening material. Any landscaping in the right-of-way that is disturbed as a result of the installation of the ground-mounted equipment shall be replaced or repaired and restored to its original condition by the owner of the equipment.

(Ord. 18-1378, passed 1-8-2018)


22-3-14 MONOPOLES.

Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-592(H)(3), monopoles are subject to zoning review and are not permitted by right. 

(Ord. 18-1378, passed 1-8-2018)


22-3-15 DISPUTE RESOLUTION.

A court of competent jurisdiction in this state shall determine all disputes arising under this article, including the local municipal court.

(Ord. 18-1378, passed 1-8-2018)

Statutory reference:

A.R.S. § 9-597 with changes.


CHAPTER 23: Historical Preservation

Article

23-1.    HISTORICAL PRESERVATION IN GENERAL


ARTICLE 23-1 Historical Preservation in General

Section

23-1-1    Title

23-1-2    Purpose

23-1-3    Definitions

23-1-4    Historic Preservation Commission

23-1-5    Historic Preservation Officer

23-1-6    Temporary restraint of demolition

23-1-7    Procedure to establish Historic Preservation District

23-1-8    Landmark designation

23-1-9    Procedure to remove HP zoning designation

23-1-10    Permitted uses; suffix HP and HP L

23-1-11    Effect of HP zoning designation

23-1-12    Review process on application for certificate of no effect or certificate of appropriateness

23-1-13    Demolition or moving of structures

23-1-14    Economic hardship

23-1-15    Goodyear Historic Property Register

23-1-16    Enforcement; violations; penalties


23-1-1 TITLE.

This article shall be known as the Historic Preservation Ordinance of the City of Goodyear.

(Ord. 2001-748, passed 6-25-2001)


23-1-2 PURPOSE.

(A) It is declared as a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement and preservation of properties and areas of historical, cultural, archaeological and aesthetic significance are in the interests of the health, prosperity and welfare of the people of the City of Goodyear. It is further recognized that communities have from time to time experienced past needless losses of historic properties which had substantial value to the historical and cultural heritage of their citizens. The Council wishes of Goodyear to take reasonable measures to prevent similar losses in the city future. Therefore, this article is intended to provide for the establishment of Historic Districts in order to:

(1) Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement and preservation of improvements and landscape features of landmarks, districts and archaeological resources which represent distinctive elements of the city’s cultural, educational, social, economic, political, architectural and archaeological history;

(2) Safeguard the city’s historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such districts;

(3) Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past;

(4) Protect and enhance the city’s attraction to visitors and the support and stimulus to the economy thereby provided;

(5) Promote the use of Historic Preservation Districts and properties for the education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the City of Goodyear.

(B) It is further declared that the purposes of this article are:

(1) With respect to an historic property and the properties in Historic Preservation Districts:

(a) To retain and enhance those properties which contribute to the character of the Historic Preservation District and to encourage their adaptation for current use;

(b) To encourage that alterations of existing structures maintain compatibility with the character of the Historic Preservation District;

(c) To provide encouragement and incentives so that new construction and subdivision of lots in an Historic Preservation District are compatible with the character of this Historic Preservation District;

(d) To recognize the value of Historic Preservation Districts and the contributions which they make to the cultural, educational and historic values of the city and to encourage the maintenance and preservation of Historic Preservation Districts for future generations by appropriate changes to historic properties;

(e) To retain and enhance historic properties in the City of Goodyear and to encourage their adaptation for current use;

(f) To encourage the restoration of historic properties;

(2) With respect to archaeological resources:

(a) To encourage identification of the location of both pre historic and historic archaeological resources;

(b) To assist with the preservation of these resources, within developments where appropriate, and with recovery of the resources where applicable;

(c) To encourage recognition of the fact that archaeological resources found on public land are the property of all citizens and are not private property. Archaeological resources found on city owned lands are the property of the city.

(C) The adoption of this article is declared to be in the public interest and is for a public purpose.

(Ord. 2001-748, passed 6-25-2001)


23-1-3 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

ALTER. Any architectural, mechanical or structural change to an historic property which requires a permit under the Building Code of the city.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES. Any material remains of past human life, activities or habitation which are of historic or pre historic significance. Such material includes, but is not limited to, pottery, basketry, bottles, weapons, utensils, weapon projectiles, tools, structures or portions of structures, pit houses, rock paintings, rock carvings, intaglios, graves, skeletal remains, personal items and clothing, household or business refuse, printed matter, manufactured items or any piece of any of the foregoing items.

AREA. Two or more parcels of land, sites, houses, buildings or structures which may include streets and alleys.

BUILDING CODE. The Building Code of the city which regulates construction in the city and requires building permits, electrical permits, plumbing permits and other permits to do work regulated by the Building Code.

BUILDING OFFICIAL. The person or his or her designee authorized to grant permits for construction, alterations and demolitions pursuant to the Goodyear Building Code and to make interpretations thereof.

CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. An official form of the city stating that proposed work on historic property is compatible with the historic character of the property, and therefore:

(1) May be completed as specified in the certificate; and

(2) Any building permits or other Building Code permits needed to do the work specified in the certificate may be issued by the city’s Building and Safety Department; and

(3) Any other permits required by other city ordinances, such as grading and drainage may be issued.

CERTIFICATE OF NO EFFECT. An official form of the city stating that proposed work on historic property will have no significant detrimental effect on the historic character of the property and therefore may proceed as specified in the certificate without obtaining further authorization under this ordinance and authorizing the issuance of any permits required by the City Building Code for said proposed work.

CITY AT LARGE. All land within the corporate limits of the city.

CITY COUNCIL. The Mayor and City Council of the City of Goodyear, Arizona.

DEMOLISH. Any act or process which requires a permit under the Building Code of the city and which destroys in part or in whole a house, building or other structure within an Historic District other than solely interior elements or demolition that does not alter exterior features or demolition that is not visible from outside the house, building or other structure.

DEMOLITION APPROVAL. Authorization for removal of all or part of a structure which is located within an Historic District or an area subject to one or more applications for historic preservation designation.

DEVELOPMENT. Any modification, alteration, remodeling, new construction or excavation which requires a permit under the Building Code of the city or which affects the historical character of an historic property.

GOODYEAR HISTORIC PROPERTY REGISTER. The list of contributing resources, including sites, structures, buildings, districts and objects within Historic Districts in the City of Goodyear as compiled and kept by the Historic Preservation Officer of the City of Goodyear.

HISTORIC DISTRICT. A zoning district in the form of an overlay zone, in which property retains the uses of and is subject to the regulations of the underlying zone, but which property is also subject to the provisions of the Historic Preservation Ordinance.

HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION. The Commission created by this article.

HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER. The city official who administers this article and maintains the Goodyear Historic Property Register.

HISTORIC PROPERTY. One or more parcels of land, sites, houses, buildings, structures, objects or areas which have been zoned HP.

HP. Historic Preservation.

HP COMMISSION. Historic Preservation Commission of the City of Goodyear.

LANDMARK. A structure or site which contains an outstanding or unique example of an architectural style, which contains or is associated with a major historic event or activity, which contains important, intact archaeological resources, which is a site or structure of unique visual quality and identification or which is a site of general historic or cultural recognition by the community. A LANDMARK shall also meet all criteria for designation as an HP District.

MINOR WORK. Any change modifying, restoring, rehabilitating, renovating, surfacing or resurfacing of the features of historic property which does not materially change the historic characteristics of the property.

MOVE. Any relocation of a structure on its site or to another site.

OWNER. The owner as shown on the records of the property records section of the Goodyear City Clerk’s office on the date of the filing of an application.

PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Goodyear, Arizona.

RECORD OWNER. Same as OWNER.

REMODEL. Same as ALTER.

REPLACEMENT/REUSE PLAN. A plan for redevelopment of a site within an HP District, indicating a proposed development which shall be in accordance with existing zoning, adopted specific plans and HP design guidelines. Such plans shall consist of a plot plan illustrating building locations, parking, walls and landscaping. They shall also include general elevation drawings of structures including roofs, doors and windows and other openings.

(Ord. 2001-748, passed 6-25-2001)


23-1-4 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.

(A) Creation of Commission; members; terms; vacancies. The Historic Preservation Commission is created, to consist of five members who are residents of the city at large, to be appointed by the City Council within 60 days of the adoption of this article. The members shall serve for terms of three years, except that the members of the first Commission shall serve as designated by the City Council for the following terms: two members for one year, three members for two years and two members for three years. Any vacancy shall be filled by the City Council within a reasonable time after the vacancy occurs, for the unexpired term. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed. The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for out of pocket expenses.

(B) Qualifications of members. Members of the HP Commission shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, knowledge or experience in historic preservation.

(C) Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Secretary, rules. The HP Commission shall elect its Chairperson and Vice Chairperson who shall have the power to administer oaths and take testimony. The Historic Preservation Officer or his or her designee shall serve as Secretary to the HP Commission. The HP Commission shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its business.

(D) Member’s failure to attend meetings, successor. If a member of the HP Commission fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the HP Commission, or fails to attend 50% or more of the regular meetings of the HP Commission during a calendar year, unless excused by the Chairperson, the City Council may declare such member’s seat vacant and appoint a new member to serve the balance of the unexpired term.

(E) Powers and duties. The HP Commission shall work with City Council on matters of historic preservation; take the initiative in bringing people together on historic preservation issues; review proposed alterations to historic properties; historic districts and archaeological resources through the certificate of appropriateness process; and develop, maintain and from time to time amend a plan for historic preservation in the city. The Commission shall establish and maintain a Goodyear Historic Property Register, survey historic properties, including archaeological resources, recommend to the City Council designations for Historic Preservation Districts and utilize guidelines or criteria for evaluation of historic properties and districts, including archaeological resources; preservation districts and establish guidelines for evaluation of historic properties, districts including archaeological resources; provide public information and education on preservation, coordinate resources and provide technical assistance, develop criteria and review procedure, promote revitalization through preservation and make recommendations to the City Council and citizens of the city regarding historic preservation. The HP Commission may also confer and work in concert with other city, county, regional, state and national historic preservation boards and Commissions. The HP Commission shall work with and assist departments of the city in matters affecting historic preservation. The HP Commission shall recommend plans for the restoration or rehabilitation of city owned buildings and shall advocate and recommend plans for the restoration or rehabilitation of privately owned buildings and the preservation or archaeological resources. The HP Commission shall discourage and work with city departments to prevent unwanted demolition of historic buildings and structures and the destruction of archaeological resources.

(F) Conflict of interest. Conflict of interest of HP Commission members is controlled by the Arizona Revised Statutes and judicial decisions on conflict of interest.

(Ord. 2001-748, passed 6-25-2001)


23-1-5 HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER.

(A) The position of Historic Preservation Officer is created in the Planning Department to work under the direction of the Planning Director.

(B) The Historic Preservation Officer shall:

(1) Perform administrative acts required by the Historic Preservation Ordinance, including giving notice, researching background material, preparing reports and recommendations, receiving and processing appeals, attending meetings of the HP Commission and rendering such assistance to the HP Commission as is required;

(2) Work with and assist departments of the city in matters affecting historic preservation;

(3) In conjunction with policy as established by the Historic Preservation Commission shall establish and maintain a program of incentives. These incentives shall be used to encourage owners of historic properties to obtain HP designation and to assist owners of designated property in recognition, restoration and maintenance of their historic, architectural or archaeological resources;

(4) Issue certificates of determination of potential eligibility for Historic Preservation District designation. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate, the Historic Preservation Officer shall determine whether the property could qualify for designation as a HP District or could qualify for inclusion in a HP District based on the criteria set forth in §§ 23-1-7(D), 23-1-7(E) and 23-1-8. A determination made by the Historic Preservation Officer pursuant to this subsection shall be advisory only and shall not limit future consideration of HP designation in accordance with the provisions of this article. Certificates shall be issued within 30 days of receipt of applications;

(5) Perform such other acts as are required by this article or by the HP Commission.

(Ord. 2001-748, passed 6-25-2001)


23-1-6 TEMPORARY RESTRAINT OF DEMOLITION.

A process is established for the review of proposed demolitions of structures which are located in areas where an application for HP designation is under consideration.

(A) It is the purpose of this article to preserve structures of historic or architectural significance, but it is recognized that all areas of significance cannot be identified, analyzed and designated at one time. However, it is important to protect properties with potentially qualifying buildings from inappropriate demolitions until review and hearings can be completed for possible HP designation.

(B) The following procedures are established to ensure a review of all proposed demolitions of structures within areas under application for HP designation.

(C) No demolition permit shall be issued by the Building Official within the designated areas unless a demolition approval is issued by the HP Officer, the HP Commission or the City Council.

(D) These procedures shall apply to any building that is located within an area of an application for an HP District between such time as the application is initiated or filed and the time action is taken on the application by the City Council.

(E) Procedures for review of applications for a demolition permit:

(1) All applications for a demolition permit within these areas will be sent by the Building Official to the HP Officer. A demolition approval shall be issued by the HP Officer and the application returned to the Building Official if:

(a) The subject building is not 40 years old; or

(b) It is determined that the building contains no historic or architectural significance, nor is an essential contribution to other historic features in the area.

(2) Standards of review by the HP Officer shall include:

(a) The architectural or historical value or significance of the structure or feature and its relationship or contribution to the historic value of the property;

(b) The relationship of the exterior architectural features or landscape features to the remainder of the structure, site or property;

(c) The relation of historic or architectural features found on the site to other such features within the surrounding area;

(d) Any other factors, including aesthetic, which may be relevant to the historical or architectural aspects of the property;

(3) If a demolition approval is not issued then the application shall be set for a public hearing and decision according to the following procedures:

(a) The HP Officer shall review the application and shall conduct a public hearing within 14 days of the filing of an application for a demolition permit. Notice of the application shall be posted on the property at least five days before the date set for the public hearing. The HP Officer shall review the application in light of the standards set forth in subsection (E)(5) below and the evidence presented at the hearing and shall either grant or deny the application;

(b) Any person aggrieved by the HP Officer’s decision may, within five days of his or her action decision, appeal to the HP Commission. If appealed, the matter shall be set on the next available agenda of the Commission. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the applicant at least seven days prior to the hearing and shall be posted on the property five days prior to the hearing;

(c) The Commission’s decision shall be final unless appealed by either the applicant or any aggrieved person within five days of the action decision. If appealed, the matter shall be set for a public hearing before the City Council at its next available meeting. The hearing shall be noticed and the property posted in accordance with subsection (E)(3)(b);

(d) In the event the initial hearing on an appeal to the HP Commission is not held within 60 days of the date the demolition permit application was filed, the application shall be deemed approved;

(4) In the event a demolition approval is denied, no permit for demolition shall be issued for one year from the date of the HP Officer’s initial hearing on the subject property unless a subsequent demolition approval has been requested and granted or until adoption of HP zoning for the property:

(a) If HP zoning has not been placed on the property at the time of expiration of the one year, the HP officer shall grant a demolition approval for the subject property;

(b) At the time of adoption of HP zoning, the temporary restraint of demolition and any stays of demolition in effect shall expire. Demolition approvals at that time shall be regulated by § 23-1-13. Requests for demolition approvals shall be filed in accordance with the procedures of that section;

(5) A demolition permit shall only be granted if the applicant demonstrates:

(a) That the building is of minimal historic significance because of its location, condition, modifications or other factors and its demolition shall be inconsequential to historic preservation needs of the area; or

(b) If the building is determined to have historic or architectural significance that the denial of the demolition permit will result in an economic hardship to the property owner. Such hardship shall be determined in accordance with § 23-1-14;

(6) An application for a demolition permit shall be exempt from these demolition review requirements if the City Manager or his or her designee notifies the HP Officer in writing that the building has been ordered to be demolished in whole or in part by the City Manager or his or her designee;

(7) The provisions of this section apply to all areas of the city under application for HP designation on the effective date of this article and to all areas of the city for which applications for HP designation are initiated after the effective date of this article;

(8) A demolition approval may be conditioned on stipulations which provide for rights of access to the property for the purposes of documentation or for agreed upon removal of artifacts.

(Ord. 2001-748, passed 6-25-2001)


23-1-7 PROCEDURE TO ESTABLISH HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT.

(A) Applications to establish Historic Preservation Districts shall be filed with the Planning Department.

(B) The Planning Department shall transmit the application to the Historic Preservation Officer of the City of Goodyear who shall compile and transmit to the HP Commission a complete report on the property in the application, including the location, condition, age, historical features and other relevant information, together with a recommendation to grant or to deny the application and the reasons for the recommendation.

(C) The HP Commission shall set a date for public hearing on the application. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the property owner and to the applicant, if different from the owner, at least 30 days prior to the hearing. The notice shall clearly state the implications of HP zoning to the property owner. Notice of the hearing shall be posted at least ten days prior to the hearing on or near the property in one or more locations so that the notice is visible to persons living or working in the neighborhood and to persons passing through the neighborhood.

(D) The HP Commission shall evaluate each parcel of property within an area that is included in the application for a demonstrated quality of significance in local, regional, state or national history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture and integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association according to the following criteria:

(1) Associated with events that have made significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history;

(2) Associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;

(3) Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction or that represent the work of a master or that possess high artistic values or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction;

(4) Have yielded or may be likely to yield information important in the understanding of our pre history or history of Goodyear; and/or

(5) Are at least 50 years old or have achieved significance within the past 50 years if the property is of exceptional importance.

(E) The HP Commission shall, when applying the evaluation criteria in subsection (D) of this section, draw the boundaries of an historic district as carefully as possible to ensure that:

(1) The district contains documented historic, architectural or archaeological resources; and

(2) The district boundaries coincide with documented historic boundaries such as early roadways, canals, subdivision plats or property lines;

(3) Other district boundaries coincide with logical physical or manmade features and reflect recognized neighborhood or area boundaries; and

(4) Other non historic resources or vacant land is included where necessary to create appropriate boundaries to assist in meeting the criteria of subsection (D) of this section.

(F) Following the hearing, the HP Commission shall transmit to the Planning Commission, the HP Commission’s decision, report and recommendations.

(G) Upon receipt of the decision, report and recommendation of the HP Commission, the Planning Commission shall schedule a hearing on the application in the same manner and with the same notice requirements as are used for public hearings on other zoning applications by the Planning Commission. Notice of hearings shall be sent to each real property owner, as shown on the last assessment of the property, of the area to be designated HP and all property owners, as shown on the last assessment of the property, within 300 feet of the property, to be designated HP.

(H) The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing at which the property owner, parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. After such public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a report and recommendation to City Council.

(I) City Council may set a public hearing on the application or may adopt the Planning Commission’s recommendations without holding another public hearing unless:

(1) The property owner, member of the public or a City Council member, within seven calendar days after the Planning Commission announces its recommendations, either:

(a) Objects in writing to adoption of the recommendation without a City Council hearing; or

(b) Requests in writing that a public hearing be held on the application; or

(2) In the event that a public hearing before the City Council is to be held, the date, time and place of such hearing and the nature of the application shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Goodyear at least 15 days before the hearing and notice of the hearing shall be sent first class mail to each real property owner, as shown on the last assessment of the property, of the area to be designated HP and all property owners, as shown on the last assessment of the property within 300 feet of the property, to be designated HP. The date, time and place of such hearing and application shall be posted within the area included in the application so as to give at least 15 days’ notice of such Council hearing. In the case of a continuance, at least seven days’ posting is required but no publication is required.

(J) If a public hearing is held by City Council, then City Council may do one of the following:

(1) Adopt the recommendation of the Planning Commission;

(2) Modify the decision of the Planning Commission and adopt it as modified;

(3) Deny the application; or

(4) Remand the application to the Planning Commission of the HP Commission for further proceedings.

(K) Designation of property by City Council as historic preservation shall be followed by City Council adoption of a supplemental zoning map adding the suffix HP to the zoning classification of the property.

(L) The HP Commission may elect to first transmit its decision, report and recommendations to the Zoning Hearing Officer.

(1) In the event the HP Commission elects to first transmit its decision, report and recommendations to the Zoning Hearing Officer, the proceedings, including any hearings by the Planning Commission and the City Council, shall be governed by the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance governing rezoning matters.

(2) Notices of hearings held pursuant to this section shall be sent by first class mail to each real property owner, as shown on the last assessment of the property, of the area to be designated HP and all property owners, as shown on the last assessment of the property, within 300 feet of their property, to be designated HP.

(Ord. 2001-748, passed 6-25-2001)


23-1-8 LANDMARK DESIGNATION.

A classification of historic preservation zoning landmark is created to recognize that there are some historic properties that possess historic or architectural significance, integrity, distinctive visual character and quality that is a level of exceptional significance among historic properties. Designation by this category gives public recognition of the importance of these properties.

(A) Landmark designation can occur for a property already within an HP District or in conjunction with designation as an HP District.

(B) Review and hearing procedures for designation as a landmark shall be as set forth in § 23-1-7.

(C) At the time of recommendation for landmark designation, the HP Commission shall adopt a set of findings documenting the uniqueness and significance of the subject building or site.

(Ord. 2001-748, passed 6-25-2001)


23-1-9 PROCEDURE TO REMOVE HP ZONING DESIGNATION.

The procedure to remove the HP zoning district designation from property shall be the same procedure specified by this article to establish Historic Preservation District zoning.

(Ord. 2001-748, passed 6-25-2001)


23-1-10 PERMITTED USES; SUFFIX HP AND HP L.

(A) Any uses permitted by the existing zones over which Historic Preservation District zoning is superimposed shall be permitted. The property will be designated by its underlying zoning classification and any other overlay zone, plus the suffix HP. Property designated by the HP suffix is subject to the Historic Preservation provisions of this article, as well as being subject to those provisions of the zoning ordinance which are applicable to property in the underlying classification.

(B) Landmark designation shall be indicated by the suffix HP L for the property affected by such designation.

(Ord. 2001-748, passed 6-25-2001)


23-1-11 EFFECT OF HP ZONING DESIGNATION.

(A) From and after the adoption by City Council of a supplemental zoning map designating property with the Historic Preservation HP suffix, any removal or demolition of structures or construction, alteration or remodeling of structures or signs or any landscaping on such property or development of archaeological sites are subject to the provisions of this article.

(B) The owners of HP property shall maintain and preserve buildings, structures and sites at such a level that they are not a safety hazard to the occupants thereof or to the public.

(C) The HP Commission shall adopt design guidelines which shall apply to the exterior features of structures in all HP Districts. The guidelines are intended to offer assistance to property owners when building or modifying structures in the district, as well as to establish a set of standards to be used in reviewing proposals for certificates of appropriateness. The guidelines shall be a set of principles that give direction on how the parts and details of a building’s scheme or plan should be assembled involving the following categories of work in historic districts or on historic structures:

(1) Rehabilitation of historic structures;

(2) Additions or alterations to historic structures;

(3) New construction on vacant land located in historic districts or adjacent to historic structures.

(D) Design guidelines may contain provisions which modify the standards for signs contained in the Goodyear Zoning Ordinance. Such modifications may not change the safety or permit provisions of that article, but may specify size, height, placement, numbers, materials and lighting of signs. Further, these guidelines may specify the location of off street parking areas, driveways, screening or landscaping or parking areas and the required number of off street parking or loading spaces as contained in the Goodyear Zoning Ordinance. If any of these provisions are to be contained in design guidelines, the guidelines shall be approved according to the procedures contained in § 23-1-7.

(E) No building, permanent sign or other structure within an HP District may be erected, demolished, moved, restored, rehabilitated, reconstructed, altered or changed in exterior appearance until plans for such activities have been submitted to and approved by the Historic Preservation Officer or the HP Commission and a Certificate of No Effect, a Certificate of Appropriateness or a demolition approval is issued. Failure to comply with a stipulation, guideline or plan made a part of any of these approvals shall constitute a violation of this article. An approved plan shall be binding upon the applicant, the owner and their successors and assignees. No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure not in accord with the plan except that temporary facilities may be permitted in conjunction with construction. No structure or other element specified on the plan shall be eliminated or altered or provided in another manner, unless an amendment is approved in conjunction with the procedures for original approval.

(F) Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of any structure in the HP District which does not alter or modify the historic character of the structure. Demolition of a structured without obtaining a demolition approval shall constitute a violation of this article.

(Ord. 2001-748, passed 6-25-2001)


23-1-12 REVIEW PROCESS ON APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF NO EFFECT OR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.

(A) When a building permit or other permit is sought from the city to demolish, alter, remodel, move, build or otherwise develop or landscape property or archaeological sites in the HP District, issuance of the permit shall be deferred until after a Certificate of No Effect or a Certificate of Appropriateness is obtained from the Historic Preservation Officer or the HP Commission.

(B) In the event work requiring a Certificate of Appropriateness is being performed without such a certificate, the Historic Preservation Officer shall contact the person performing the work and ask that all work cease. If work continues, the Historic Preservation Officer shall ask that a Stop Work Order be issued by the Building Official. In the event work is being performed that is not in accordance with a Certificate of Appropriateness issued by the HP Commission, the Historic Preservation Officer shall ask that a Stop Work Order be issued by the Building Official. The city may seek an injunction to enforce a Stop Work Order.

(C) The Building Official shall refer requests for building permits located within an HP District to the HP Officer.

(1) The HP Officer shall issue a Certificate of No Effect if:

(a) It is determined the proposed work is minor and clearly within adopted design guidelines; and

(b) If modifications to the proposed work are requested by the HP Officer, they are agreed to by the applicant; and

(c) In any case the proposed work will not diminish, eliminate or adversely affect the historic character of the subject property or its affect on the district.

(2) If a certificate of no effect is not issued, a certificate of appropriateness shall be required.

(3) The review and decision on certificates of appropriateness shall be conducted in the following manner:

(a) The HP Officer shall review the application and shall conduct a public hearing within 14 days of the filing of an application for a building permit. Notice of the application shall be posted on the property at least five days before the date set for the public hearing. The HP Officer shall review the application in light of the standards set forth in subsection (D) below and the evidence presented at the hearing and shall either grant or deny the application or grant it with stipulations;

(b) Any person aggrieved by the HP Officer’s decision may, within five days of his or her action, appeal to the HP Commission. If appealed, the matter shall be set on the next available agenda of the Commission. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the applicant at least seven days prior to the hearing and shall be posted on the property five days prior to the hearing;

(c) The HP Commission may uphold, reverse or modify the decision of the HP Officer. The Commission’s decision shall be final unless appealed by either the applicant or any aggrieved person within five days of the action. If appealed, the matter shall be set for a public hearing before the City Council at its next available meeting. The hearing shall be noticed and the property posted in accordance with subsection (3)(b) of this subsection;

(d) In the event the initial hearing on an appeal to the HP Commission is not held within 60 days of the date the building permit application was filed, the application shall be deemed approved.

(D) Standards for consideration of a Certificate of Appropriateness:

(1) The proposed work will be compatible with the relevant historic, cultural, educational or architectural qualities characteristic of the structure, site or district and shall include but not be limited to elements of size, scale, massing, proportions, orientation, surface textures and patterns, details and embellishments and the relation of these elements to one another;

(2) Conformance with the guidelines approved by the HP Commission.

(E) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the City Council on a Certificate of No Effect or a Certificate of Appropriateness may file a special action in Superior Court in accordance with the law to have the court review that decision.

(F) No change shall be made in the approved plans of a project after issuance of a Certificate of No Effect or a Certificate of Appropriateness without resubmittal to the Historic Preservation Officer and approval of the change in the same manner as provided above.

(G) A Certificate of Appropriateness expires one year from the date of issuance unless work is started within that time.

(Ord. 2001-748, passed 6-25-2001)


23-1-13 DEMOLITION OR MOVING OF STRUCTURES.

It is the intent of this article to preserve the historic and architectural resources within HP Districts. However, it is recognized that there can be circumstances beyond the control of the owner or situations involving public health, safety and welfare which may result in the necessary demolition of a structure within an HP District. These situations include a building which constitutes a danger to the public health, safety and welfare, which involves a resource whose loss does not diminish or adversely affect the integrity of the district or which imposes an economic hardship on its owners.

(A) No permit shall be issued by the Building Official to move or demolish all or any part of a house, building or other structure in an Historic Preservation District without a Certificate of Demolition Approval.

(B) Requests for demolition approval shall be considered in the following manner:

(1) The Building Official shall refer an application for a demolition permit to the HP Officer;

(2) Within three days the HP Officer shall make a determination if a demolition approval can be issued. Criteria used to make this determination shall be:

(a) The structure is of no historic or architectural value or significance and does not contribute to the historic value of the property; and

(b) Loss of the structure would not adversely affect the integrity of the HP District or the historic, architectural or aesthetic relationship to adjacent properties and its demolition shall be inconsequential to historic preservation needs of the area;

(3) If a demolition approval cannot be granted, the applicant for the demolition permit may request a public hearing. If filed, such application shall contain a completed request for Certification of Economic Hardship;

(4) Upon receipt of a request for demolition approval hearing, the HP Officer shall review the application and shall conduct a public hearing within 14 days. Notice of the application shall be posted on the property at least five days before the date set for the public hearing. The HP Officer shall review the application in light of § 23-1-14 and subsections(B)(2)(a) and (b) above and the evidence presented at the hearing and shall either grant or deny the demolition approval;

(5) Any person aggrieved by the HP Officer’s decision may, within five days of his or her action, appeal to the HP Commission. If appealed, the matter shall be set on the next available agenda of the Commission. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the applicant at least seven days prior to the hearing and shall be posted on the property five days prior to the hearing;

(6) The Commission’s decision shall be final unless appealed by either the applicant or any aggrieved person within five days of the action. If appealed, the matter shall be set for a public hearing before the City Council at their next available meeting. The hearing shall be noticed and the property posted in accordance with subsection (B)(5) above;

(7) In the event the initial hearing on an appeal to the HP Commission is not held within 60 days of the date the request for a demolition approval hearing was filed, the application shall be deemed approved;

(8) The City Manager or his or her designee shall give written notice to the HP Officer that a building located in an HP District is the subject of a proposed demolition pursuant to a legal hearing process. The City Manager or his or her designee shall provide such notice at the same time that notice of a hearing on the demolition is given to the owner and any lienholders of the building. Upon receipt of such notice, the HP Officer shall give notice to any person who has requested to be notified of such pending demolition hearings. The HP Officer shall also place an item on each agenda of the HP Commission to discuss any demolition notices in an HP District. The notice provisions of this section shall not apply if the City Manager or his or her designee is entitled as a matter of law to order that a building be demolished in whole or in part without notice and hearing because the condition of the building is so dangerous, and harm to the public is so imminent that time will not permit a notice and hearing process. The City Manager or his or her designee shall also give notice to the HP Officer in writing that a demolition order has been issued for the building by the City Manager or his or her designee because the building constitutes a danger to the public health, safety and welfare;

(9) An application for a demolition permit shall be exempt from the demolition review requirements of subsections (A) and (B) of this section. If the City Manager or his or her designee notifies the HP Officer in writing as required in subsection (B)(8).

(C) If a demolition approval is not granted, then no demolition permit shall be issued for a period of one year from the date on which the request for demolition approval was denied by the Historic Preservation Officer, unless a subsequent demolition approval has been requested and granted pursuant to subsection (B)(2) of this section:

(1) Upon denial of a demolition approval, the HP Officer shall contract the property owner to determine what available assistance might be feasible to place the property into productive use;

(2) If a feasible rehabilitation or use is not found for the property, the HP Officer shall investigate methods of private or public acquisition of the property.

(D) For properties designated as landmarks, the restraint of demolition shall be three years. Review upon request by the owner may be made after two years. Procedures shall be as follows: two years after denial of a demolition approval, if no feasible use or ownership is found for the structure, the owner may request of the HP Commission a waiver of all or a part of the balance of the restraint of demolition. Factors to be considered by the Commission shall include:

(1) Efforts made by the property owner to make necessary repairs, to find an appropriate user or to find a purchaser for the property; and

(2) Efforts made by the HP Officer to locate available assistance and make that known to the owner as well as the use which was made by the owner of that assistance.

(E) If a demolition approval is granted on any basis other than that of economic hardship or denied and the restraint of demolition under subsections (C) or (D) above has expired, then the Building Official shall not issue a demolition permit until a redevelopment or reuse plan for the property has been filed with the HP Officer. The plan may be filed at any time following denial of the demolition request and shall be in compliance with existing zoning, the General Plan and any adopted Specific Plan, and the HP design guidelines applicable to the property. Vacant land or non use shall not be considered responsive to this requirement. Upon notification from the HP Officer that an approved reuse or redevelopment plan has been filed, the Building Official may issue a demolition permit at any time within one year from the date of the expiration of the demolition restraining or the grant of approval for demolition by the HP Officer. If the applicant fails to obtain a demolition permit within the one year period authorized above, the HP Officer may grant an extension of up to six months due to unforeseeable conditions preventing or inhibiting demolition. If demolition is not completed within the one year period, or any extension thereof, the Building Official shall not issue a demolition permit until the applicant has made a new application for demolition approval as provided in subsection (B) of this section.

(1) The filing of a reuse or redevelopment plan shall not be required when demolition of the building in whole or in part will occur pursuant to an order of the City Manager or his or her designee to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

(2) The requirement for filing a redevelopment or reuse plan shall be waived by the HP Officer if, following demolition, no historic feature will remain in the HP District and upon a finding that such requirement is unnecessary to assure compatibility with other HP designated properties in the vicinity.

(3) The HP Officer shall make a decision on a request for a waiver within three days of receipt of the request. The applicant or an aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the HP Officer within five days of the action. Upon receipt of an appeal, it shall be placed on the next available agenda of the HP Commission which shall conduct a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be posted on the property at least five days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, the Commission shall either grant or deny the request. The Commission’s decision shall be final unless appealed by the applicant or an aggrieved person within five days of the action. If appealed, the matter shall be set for a public hearing before the City Council on its next available agenda. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the applicant at least seven days prior to the hearing and shall be posted on the property at least five days prior to the hearing. If a waiver is approved, the Commission shall, upon demolition or removal of the structure, initiate an application to remove the HP designation from the property.

(F) Any new development on the property shall be in conformance with the plan submitted in conjunction with the demolition approval. Any changes from the plan shall require a certificate of appropriateness.

(G) A demolition approval may be conditioned on stipulations which provide for rights of access to the property for the purposes of documentation or for agreed upon removal of artifacts.

(Ord. 2001-748, passed 6-25-2001)


23-1-14 ECONOMIC HARDSHIP.

Separate standards for obtaining a Certification of Economic Hardship are established for investment or income producing and non income producing properties. Non income producing properties shall consist of owner occupied single family dwellings and non income producing institutional properties.

(A) The basis to establish economic hardship for an income producing property shall be that a reasonable rate of return cannot be obtained from a property that retains its historic features or structures in either its present condition or if its features or structures are rehabilitated.

(B) Economic hardship in regard to a non income producing property shall be found when the property owner demonstrates that the property has no beneficial use as a single family dwelling or for an institutional use in its present condition or if rehabilitated.

(C) Demonstration of an economic hardship shall not be based on or include any of the following circumstances:

(1) Willful or negligent acts by the owner;

(2) Purchase of the property for substantially more than market value;

(3) Failure to perform normal maintenance and repairs;

(4) Failure to diligently solicit and retain tenants;

(5) Failure to provide normal tenant improvements.

(Ord. 2001-748, passed 6-25-2001)


23-1-15 GOODYEAR HISTORIC PROPERTY REGISTER.

(A) The Goodyear Historic Property Register is established for the purpose of recording the historic sties, structures, buildings, objects and areas which exist in the City of Goodyear.

(B) The Register shall consist of historic sites, structures, buildings, objects and areas which are zoned Historic Preservation District by the City Council and shall forthwith be listed on the Goodyear Historic Property Register by the Historic Preservation Officer.

(Ord. 2001-748, passed 6-25-2001)


23-1-16 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.

Any violation of the provisions of this article is a violation of the Zoning Ordinance and is subject to enforcement and penalties prescribed by the Zoning Ordinance.

(Ord. 2001-748, passed 6-25-2001)


CHAPTER 24: Public Improvements Cost Recovery

Article

24-1.    PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS COST RECOVERY IN GENERAL


ARTICLE 24-1 Public Improvements Cost Recovery in General

Section

24-1-1    Title

24-1-2    Purpose

24-1-3    Definitions

24-1-4    Construction of special public improvements

24-1-5    Authorization of reimbursement agreements

24-1-6    Reimbursement agreements; terms; collections, and costs

24-1-7    Reimbursement amounts payable to city

24-1-8    Notice of intention to approve special public improvements

24-1-9    Assessment Districts, Improvement Districts; general obligation bond projects; cost apportionment


24-1-1 TITLE.

This article shall be known as the Public Improvements Cost Recovery Ordinance.

(Ord. 03-853, passed 8-11-2003; Am. Ord. 04-903, passed 6-14-2004)


24-1-2 PURPOSE.

This article is intended to provide for the extension of special public improvements into undeveloped areas of the city by supporting the extension of the improvements and providing for recovery of the costs of the improvements from the owners of parcels who specifically benefit from the improvements and who are not subject to any other assessments or special charges for the benefit which they receive from the special public improvement. This article further creates a procedure whereby the party or parties who have advanced the funds for the extension of special public improvements may enter into agreements with the city to be reimbursed by the city.

(Ord. 03-853, passed 8-11-2003; Am. Ord. 04-903, passed 6-14-2004)


24-1-3 DEFINITIONS.

The following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

BENEFITTED PARTY. The person or entity creating a demand for or otherwise utilizing special public improvements resulting in a special benefit for which the benefitted party has not specifically contributed to the costs of providing the special public improvements.

CITY. The City of Goodyear, Arizona.

COSTS. The actual cost of:

(1) Land or real property, right-of-way or easement acquisition if allowed by law and approved by the city;

(2) Construction of the special public improvements as determined by the construction contract price or by the actual costs, such construction to include, but shall not be limited to construction and installation of water pipes, lines, tanks and wells, sanitary, irrigation and storm sewer lines and systems, asphaltic and concrete paving, curb, gutter and sidewalks, street lights, traffic signals, bus bays, drainage structures, bridge structures, public park improvements and public landscaping and public facilities such as police and fire stations, all to the extent allowed by law;

(3) Inspection, testing and permit fees;

(4) Engineering and design fees required for preparation of plans and specifications;

(5) Administrative charges paid to the city by the developer or owner;

(6) Incidental fees, expenses and charges approved by the city.

DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. An agreement between one or more parties and the city pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-500.05.

GENERAL PUBLIC BENEFIT. That portion of the expense of the special public improvement which is deemed by the city to indirectly benefit the entire city not withstanding the fact that the special public improvement specially benefits the property subject to reimbursement.

REIMBURSEMENT AMOUNT. The charge which must be paid to the city and imposed upon the owner or developer of property which has or will receive the benefit of special public improvements benefitting their property.

SPECIAL BENEFIT. A benefit to a specific parcel of real property from a special public improvement based on criteria established by the city.

SPECIAL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. Any publicly dedicated rights of way, any street, drainage, water or sewer improvements or facilities or any other improvements of facilities which are financed by bonds, general funds, private development funds, water utility funds or sewer utility funds, or a community facilities district or improvement district and for which reimbursement is requested under this article.

(Ord. 03-853, passed 8-11-2003; Am. Ord. 04-903, passed 6-14-2004)


24-1-4 CONSTRUCTION OF SPECIAL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.

Prior to a permit being issued for construction of special public improvements for which a reimbursement amount is being requested, the following requirements shall be met:

(A) A map, drawing or diagram describing all property which will be benefitted by any special public improvements to be installed shall be provided to the Community Development Department and the Public Works Department.

(B) The field engineering, plans and specifications required for the special public improvement may be prepared by the party seeking reimbursement or the city. If prepared by the party seeking reimbursement they must be approved by the Director of Community Development or his/her designee. The engineering costs for preparation of plans and staking of the special public improvements only, which are incurred by the party seeking reimbursement, may be included as determined by the Director of Community Development or his/her designee in the agreed construction costs as provided in this section.

(C) For any special public improvements which are constructed, the party seeking reimbursement shall cause to be furnished and installed to city standards and specifications all facilities within the boundary of the designated area of the development.

(D) Detailed plans and specifications for special public improvements which are extensions to existing public facilities must be approved by the Director of Community Development or his/her designee prior to construction. The costs for preparation of plans and specifications, diagrams, legal descriptions and other information required to comply with this article shall be assumed by the party seeking reimbursement but are subject to reimbursement under terms of this article.

(E) The project shall be procured, financed and constructed in accordance with Arizona law, city code requirements and as determined by the city. The burden is on the initial person, whether it be an owner, developer, contractor or other, to prove costs associated with the improvements. The costs shall be formally presented to the City Council for its approval, modification or rejection. Thereafter the approved costs shall be termed "Reimbursement Amount".

(F) The city will perform inspections during the construction of the special public improvements and will charge the owner for such inspections. The costs of such inspections may be included in any repayment agreement.

(G) Upon acceptance by the city, ownership of special public improvements that meet city standards shall be vested in the city.

(Ord. 03-853, passed 8-11-2003; Am. Ord. 04-903, passed 6-14-2004; Am. Ord. 05-965, passed 9-12-2005)


24-1-5 AUTHORIZATION OF REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS.

(A) In conjunction with the planning or development of any property for which a special public improvements project will be constructed, the developer or owner paying the costs of the special public improvements may request the city to enter into an agreement to collect reimbursement amounts from the developers and owners of parcels specially benefitted by the project.

(B) Upon completion of construction of special public improvements the cost of which were financed by bonds issued by the city or a community facilities district, including improvement or assessment bonds or private development funds, the city may impose upon and collect reimbursement amounts pursuant to the terms of this article.

(C) The City Council or its designee shall be authorized to enter into reimbursement agreements under this article for the purpose of reimbursing the party or parties paying the cost of the special public improvements where the costs for such special public improvements exceed the proportionate share of the parties paying for the special public improvements. The agreements shall become effective when recorded in the office of the Maricopa County Recorder.

(D) No improvements constructed pursuant to this article shall be subject to both reimbursement agreements under this article and assessments pursuant to law.

(E) Any costs advanced by the party or parties paying for special public improvements or for the general public benefit which all or part of such improvements are provided for in the city’s Capital Improvement Program ("CIP") Master Utility Service Plans and/or Impact Fee Ordinances shall be reimbursed to the party or parties paying of such improvements through Impact Fee Credits. Any portion of the cost for special public improvements or improvements which benefit the general public which is not provided for in the city’s CIP shall be reimbursed to the party or parties who incurred the cost through a reimbursement agreement with the city.

(Ord. 03-853, passed 8-11-2003; Am. Ord. 04-903, passed 6-14-2004)


24-1-6 REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS; TERMS; COLLECTIONS, AND COSTS.

(A) The reimbursement agreement shall designate the parcels and persons who are entitled to reimbursement amounts and shall include a map, drawing or diagram of the properties and respective amounts from which reimbursement amounts may be collected. In the event bonds of the city, including Improvement District, or Community Facilities District or assessment bonds, have been issued to finance the construction of the special public improvements and related facilities, the city shall receive all reimbursement amounts and apply such amounts to the debt service funds of the applicable bond issue.

(B) The reimbursement agreement shall set forth the total of the reimbursement amount to be paid to the city, which shall repay such reimbursement amounts to the person or entity entitled thereto, including a community facilities district. The total of the reimbursement amounts shall not exceed that portion of the agreed construction costs of the special public improvement allotted to property outside the area of the owner. The reimbursement agreement shall terminate in 15 years from the effective date of the reimbursement agreement or when the total amount provided for by this article is repaid, whichever is earlier.

(C) The approved construction costs as described in § 24-1-4(E) will be used for calculation of all reimbursement amounts.

(D) Upon entry into a reimbursement agreement with the city, the owner shall have the right to connect into the special public improvement in consideration for entry into the reimbursement agreement.

(E) The field engineering, plans and specifications required for a special public improvement shall be prepared by the developer and approved by the Engineering Department prior to completion of construction. The engineering costs for preparation of plans and staking of the special public improvements on the property which are incurred by the owner may be included as determined by the engineering department as provided in this article. The city, or its designated representative, will perform the inspections during construction.

(F) The city shall have sole and exclusive control of connections to the special public improvement. Connections to the special public improvement may only be made upon issuance of a written permit from the Community Development Department. It shall be unlawful to make a connection to a special public improvement without a permit. The unlawful connections may be removed by the city and the costs of removal assessed to the party making connection.

(G) Upon final plat or site plan approval (at city’s option) the owners of the benefitted property shall pay 100% of the benefitted property’s share of the cost of the special public improvement to the city.

(H) An annual charge will be assessed pursuant to a procedure adopted by the city for the administration of each reimbursement agreement. This annual charge shall be the greater of $100 per year or 0.5% of the outstanding balance due under the agreement.

(I) Any owner may assign the benefits arising out of any reimbursement agreement with the city. The assignments alone shall not relieve the owner from its duties and obligations under the agreement. The assignment shall require prior written notice to the city.

(Ord. 03-853, passed 8-11-2003; Am. Ord. 04-903, passed 6-14-2004)


24-1-7 REIMBURSEMENT AMOUNTS PAYABLE TO CITY.

(A) When a special public improvement is constructed by the city or a developer or their contractors to provide service or benefit to a parcel of an owner, which owner or their predecessors in interest did not pay for any of the costs of the special public improvement, the city may impose and collect a reimbursement amount. The reimbursement amount shall be based on the benefitted parcel’s share of the benefit received as compared to the total cost of the special public improvement. The reimbursement amount shall be paid to the city prior to the issuance of final plat or site plan approval at the city’s option.

(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to extend service from a special public improvement to his or her property for which a reimbursement amount has been imposed without first paying the reimbursement amount and obtaining a permit issued by the Community Development Department.

(C) The reimbursement obligation under this section shall terminate in 15 years from the effective date of the reimbursement agreement or when the total amount provided for by this article is repaid, whichever is sooner.

(D) The city shall collect reimbursement amounts for any special public improvements provided by the developer or financed by improvement district assessment district bonds, a community facilities district, water utility funds, sewer utility funds, development fee funds and general obligation bond funds which were specifically designated as subject to reimbursement from special public improvement reimbursements.

(E) To the extent the developer advances funds to construct under this article which are for the general public benefit, the developer shall receive repayment under the provisions of this article.

(Ord. 03-853, passed 8-11-2003; Am. Ord. 04-903, passed 6-14-2004)


24-1-8 NOTICE OF INTENTION TO APPROVE SPECIAL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.

(A) After the determination of the Director of Community Development or his/her designee that public health, safety and welfare requires the construction of special public improvements prior to the development of the adjacent or nearby property but for which the adjacent or nearby property will be specially benefited, a resolution of intention to approve the special public improvements shall be submitted to the City Council. The resolution shall include supporting materials which explain the methodology used for determining which property was benefited and the amount or extent of the benefit of the special public improvements to those designated benefitted properties.

(B) Prior to acting on the resolution of intention to order the special public improvements, the City Council shall hold a public hearing. The public hearing shall be for the purpose of receiving comment on whether the proposed special public improvements are required for the public health, safety, welfare and convenience. Those owners of real property within the area subject to reimbursement for special public improvements shall receive notice in writing of the public hearing and any continued public hearing not less than 30 days prior to the public hearing or continued public hearing. Any notice shall include a copy of any supporting materials which explain the methodology used by the engineering department for determining which property was benefitted and the cost or extent of the special public improvement to the benefitted property. The party requesting the agreement shall pay the cost of providing the information.

(C) After the public hearing is concluded, the City Council shall determine whether the public health, safety and welfare require the special public improvements. If the City Council so determines, then the City Council shall adopt the resolution of intention to approve the special public improvement. The determination shall include a statement that the owners of specially benefited property from the improvements shall be required to reimburse the city for the benefit received from the special public improvement.

(D) The resolution of intention to order the special public improvement shall contain:

(1) A description of the special public improvement.

(2) A description of the estimated total cost of the special public improvement.

(3) A general description of the estimated total cost and cost per frontage foot or cost per acre of the proposed special public improvement.

(4) A description of the special public improvement project area and a map and list of all owners of real property who will be receiving a special benefit from the construction of the special public improvement.

(5) A determination of that portion of the special public improvement which is for general obligation bonds, special assessments or improvement which is for general public benefit and that portion which is for special benefit of the owners.

(6) A preliminary estimate of the portion of the special public improvement which will be financed with general obligation bonds, special assessments, a community facilities district, or improvement district assessments and the portion which will be financed with reimbursements for special public improvements.

(E) The City Council’s decision on necessity for special public improvements shall be final and conclusive.

(Ord. 03-853, passed 8-11-2003; Am. Ord. 04-903, passed 6-14-2004; Am. Ord. 05-965, passed 9-12-2005)


24-1-9 ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS, IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS; GENERAL OBLIGATION BOND PROJECTS; COST APPORTIONMENT.

(A) Upon collection of reimbursement amounts pursuant to any special public improvement which is located in a municipal district and financed by assessments, including a community facilities district, such funds shall be deposited with the finance director. The funds shall be applied against the outstanding indebtedness for which bonds are to be or have been issued.

(B) Reimbursements for special improvements may be used in combination with any bond issue, permitted by law, provided that the bond issue question submitted to the qualified electors indicates that such reimbursements may be required of benefitted property owners. All amounts collected from the reimbursements shall be deposited in the appropriate bond fund from which the special public improvement project is financed.

(Ord. 03-853, passed 8-11-2003; Am. Ord. 04-903, passed 6-14-2004)


CHAPTER 25: Agricultural Protection

Article

25-1.    AGRICULTURAL PROTECTION IN GENERAL


ARTICLE 25-1 Agricultural Protection in General

Section

25-1-1    Title

25-1-2    Purpose

25-1-3    Establishment of Agricultural Protection Commission

25-1-4    Agricultural Protection Fund

25-1-5    Qualifying applicant for funding the acquisition of agricultural easements

25-1-6    Application process and establishing priorities for funding

25-1-7    Public participation


25-1-1 TITLE.

This article shall be known as the Agricultural Protection Ordinance of the City of Goodyear.

(Ord. 04-904, passed 6-14-2004)


25-1-2 PURPOSE.

It is hereby declared that the purpose of this article is to preserve and protect agricultural land in the city.

(Ord. 04-904, passed 6-14-2004)


25-1-3 ESTABLISHMENT OF AGRICULTURAL PROTECTION COMMISSION.

There is hereby established the Goodyear Agricultural Preservation Commission.

(A) The members of the Commission shall be comprised as follows:

(1) Five members appointed by the Mayor and Council which shall include one representative of business in the city and one member of a conservation or environmental organization.

(2) A Vice Chairman and a Chairman selected by the five members appointed by the Mayor and Council.

(3) Two non voting ex officio members, one from the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service and one city staff liaison.

(4) At the inception two members shall be appointed for one year; two members shall be appointed for two years and three will be appointed for three years.

(B) Commission shall:

(1) Recommend to the City Manager/City Attorney adoption of rules necessary to perform its duties and functions.

(2) Recommend to the City Manager on issues related to grants, donations, dedicated funding sources, contracts, and the like, entered into pursuant to this section.

(3) Identify and develop for implementation funding sources.

(4) Identify interested landowners and number of acres for consideration.

(5) Identify qualified land trust organizations and appraisers.

(6) Conduct citizen outreach for education purposes.

(7) Report to designated staff as deemed necessary.

(Ord. 04-904, passed 6-14-2004)


25-1-4 AGRICULTURAL PROTECTION FUND.

(A) Establish a fund consistent with city requirements.

(B) Authorize the acceptance of federal, state, local, gifts, donations, fund raising proceeds, monies and in kind services or resources.

(C) Develop specific criteria for expenditures for the acquisition of conservation of agricultural land, easements and related expenses (including transactions costs).

(D) Any acceptance of monies and authorized expenditures are subject to approval of the City Manager.

(Ord. 04-904, passed 6-14-2004)


25-1-5 QUALIFYING APPLICANT FOR FUNDING THE ACQUISITION OF AGRICULTURAL EASEMENTS.

(A) The City Manager, on approval from the Mayor and Council, shall grant monies from the city’s Agricultural Protection Fund for the express purpose of acquiring conservation easements on eligible lands in perpetuity, or for a renewable term of not less than 25 years.

(B) The grants may be made only to:

(1) A nonprofit organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under § 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code and that has the purpose of preserving agriculture, open space or natural resources.

(2) A political subdivision or agency or instrumentality of a political subdivision, including the city itself.

(Ord. 04-904, passed 6-14-2004)


25-1-6 APPLICATION PROCESS AND ESTABLISHING PRIORITIES FOR FUNDING.

(A) The Commission shall establish procedures for submitting applications and granting monies each year from the city’s Agricultural Protection Fund with requirements and guidelines adopted which ensure that the city meets eligibility and priority criteria of both the state and federal agricultural protection programs.

(B) Priorities will be given to organizations and entities with successful experience in acquisition, implementation and oversight of conservation easements. Furthermore, priorities will be given to funding projects that obligate definitive funding, landowner contributions, in kind donations or services, or other land use benefits or resources (for example, the project is located within the Southern Department Corridor of Luke AFB, or unique agricultural lands, or the farming operation provides quantifiable employment benefits).

(C) Applications to the Commission will be submitted and evaluated in a timely manner (establish schedule consistent with state and federal requirements for submission of proposals). The applicant shall submit the following information as part of the application for funding an agricultural conservation easement proposal:

(1) The names of all owners of title to and interests in the land being proposed for the conservation easement.

(2) The holders of any mortgages, deeds of trust, easements, liens, pledges of collateral and any other security interests in the land.

(3) Any lessees, holders of mineral rights, holders of water rights, or other persons who have an interest in the use, occupancy or access to the land.

(4) A legal description of the land.

(5) The name of the proposed easement holder.

(6) The total cost of the proposed agricultural conservation easement.

(7) A description of how the proposed easement meets the stated public policy of the ordinance, and of other state or federal public policy purposes.

(8) Other information the applicant deems necessary to obtain funding for the proposal, including the landowners commitment to donate the required percentage of project cost.

(9) A copy of the proposed easements, with terms and conditions in their entirety, including provisions for disposition of the easement if violations of the terms and conditions occur.

(10) If the proposed easement holder is a private nonprofit organization, that organization will allow for a qualifying governmental entity to hold the second position on the easement agreement authorizing the governmental entity the ability to enforce terms and conditions of the easement, if the qualified easement holder falls to do so.

(11) A statement of specific duties of the easement holder, and a schedule for reporting periodically on all matters pertaining to the easement.

(12) Annual review of this process to ensure consistency with federal and state agricultural protection law, regulation and procedure will be conducted.

(Ord. 04-904, passed 6-14-2004)


25-1-7 PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.

(A) The city and the Agricultural Protection Commission will provide for public involvement regarding any application submitted to the Commission.

(B) Notification consistent with city requirements will be given, including publication of agendas, names of commissioners and meeting dates.

(C) Reasonable opportunity to public comment on applications for processing of at least 30 days will be required.

(D) Consideration of all public comment, both written and oral, will be given. Reasonable time limits for oral public comments are to be established (number of minutes per speaker, and exceptions for "expert" or "critical" testimony as deemed appropriate).

(E) All recommendations will be submitted to the City Manager, with supporting documentation and analysis provided.

(F) The Commission shall develop a mediation program to resolve disputes between landowners and the holder of the agricultural conservation easement, including an appropriate appeals process.

(G) Arizona’s public meeting law requirements apply to the business of the Commission. Commission members will receive open meeting law training as a condition of their service.

(Ord. 04-904, passed 6-14-2004)


CHAPTER 26: Special Events

Article

26-1.    GENERAL PROVISIONS

26-2.    PERMIT APPLICATION AND REVIEW

26-3.    ENFORCEMENT


ARTICLE 26-1 General Provisions

Section:

26-1-1    Intent and purpose

26-1-2    Definitions

26-1-3    Permit required

26-1-4    Exceptions

26-1-5    Responsible City departments

26-1-6    General requirements and terms

26-1-7    Special Events on City property


26-1-1 INTENT AND PURPOSE.

(A) This Chapter shall be known as the Special Event Ordinance and may be cited as such.

(B) The City recognizes the need to encourage and promote events for the greater good, cultural diversity, and promotion of the City.

(C) The City finds that there are increased demands on City resources from outdoor events in the City streets, sidewalks and parks and for certain outdoor gatherings on private property, and that these events can also create unreasonable adverse impacts to neighboring property owners, businesses, City residents and the general public. In order to conserve and allocate City resources and to provide protections for the public safety of the event participants, neighboring property owners and businesses, the City and its residents, and the general public, it is necessary to regulate the use of the City’s parks, streets, and public areas by those desiring to hold events on public property and to regulate certain outdoor events on private property.

(D) The intent of this Chapter is to promote Special Events while providing minimum standards for the protection of event participants, neighboring property owners and businesses, the City and its residents, and the general public.

(Ord. 14-1301, passed 6-23-2014)


26-1-2 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

(A) APPLICANT means the individual who submits the Special Event Application.

(B) BLOCK PARTY means an organized neighborhood or public gathering on a street, whether public or private, on a specified date at a specific time and place.

(C) CITY means the City of Goodyear, an Arizona municipal corporation.

(D) CITY CLERK means the City Clerk of Goodyear or his/her designee.

(E) CITY MANAGER means the City Manager of Goodyear or his/her designee.

(F) CITY SPONSORED EVENT means an event that is conducted in whole or in part by the City or that is conducted on behalf of the City by third parties pursuant to a written contract with the City.

(G) EVENT ORGANIZER means any person who conducts, manages, promotes, organizes, aids, or solicits attendance at a special event.

(H) FIRE WORKS means any combustible or explosive composition, substance or combination of substances or any article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation except for Consumer Fireworks as defined by Arizona State Statute Section 36-1601.

(I) FIRST AMENDMENT ACTIVITY means all expressive and associative activity conducted on private property or Public Forums that is protected by the United States and Arizona Constitutions, including speech, press, assembly and the right to petition but does not include commercial advertising or speech.

(J) FIRST AMENDMENT EVENT means an event where the sole activity is First Amendment Activity.

(K) GOODYEAR SPRING TRAINING COMPLEX means the land and improvements owned by the City that support Cactus League Spring Training in the City, including the stadium known as the Goodyear Ballpark, the Reds and Indians Clubhouses, the practice facilities and all of the City owned parking parcels.

(L) NON-PERMITTED SPECIAL EVENT means an event for which a Special Event Permit was required, but not obtained.

(M) NON-DOMESTICATED ANIMALS means any wild animal, reptile or fowl that is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or disposition and that because of its size, vicious nature or other characteristics would constitute a danger to human life or property.

(N) PARADE means a procession of pedestrians, vehicles, or animals or any combination thereof, traveling in unison along or upon a street, road, or highway, organized and conducted for the purpose of attracting the attention of the general public that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic. A Parade shall not mean a funeral procession.

(O) PERMITTEE means the Person to whom a Special Event Permit is issued.

(P) PERSON means an individual, agent, representative, firm, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, joint venture, organization, contractor, subcontractor, affiliate, association or other legal entity of any kind but shall not mean the City.

(Q) PROMOTER means any person who produces or conducts a Special Event on behalf of a Special Event Sponsor.

(R) PUBLIC FORUM means state, local, and federal property that has traditionally been open to the public for speech, assembly and debates. Public Forums do not include public streets.

(S) SPECIAL EVENT means:

(1) any gathering, use, event, or activity that is held wholly indoors that does not exceed three consecutive days and that meets all of the following criteria:

a. the location of such gathering, use, event or activity is not zoned for such use.

(2) any gathering, use, event or activity that is held in whole or in part outdoors, that does not exceed three consecutive days, and that meets any of the following criteria:

a. has more than 250 people at the event as attendees, participants, operators, vendors, or in any other capacity; or

b. involves the closing or partial closing of a public street or right-of-way; or that restricts the use of a public street or right-of-way, which includes by way of example, but not limitation, races over public streets and/or sidewalks; or

c. will block or restrict access to the property of others; or

d. involves the use of Fireworks, special effects, large open flames such as bonfires, explosions, or other potentially dangerous displays or actions; or

e. involves any activity or use on property that deviates from the current legal land use or legal nonconforming use of the property; or

f. involves the installation of mechanical amusement rides and/or temporary or portable buildings; or

g. involves the display of non-domesticated animals; or

h. requires a State-issued temporary extension of liquor license premises or a special event liquor license; or

i. meets the definition of Parade set forth in Section 26-1-2(N) above; or

j. meets the definition of Block Party set forth in Section 26-1-2(B) above.

(T) SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT means the written authorization from the City allowing a Promoter and/or Special Event Sponsor to hold a Special Event pursuant to this Chapter.

(U) SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT CONDITIONS means the terms, conditions, and/or stipulations imposed as a condition of granting a Special Event Permit.

(V) SPECIAL EVENT SPONSOR means a Person who conducts a Special Event on the Person’s own behalf, or the person on whose behalf a Special Event is conducted.

(W) VENDOR means a Person, other than a Promoter and/or Special Event Sponsor, who occupies a space, cell, booth, or other temporary structure or location for the purpose of retail sales of goods or services to the public in connection with a Special Event. 

(Ord. 14-1301, passed 6-23-2014; Ord. 15-1322, passed 5-11-2015)


26-1-3 PERMIT REQUIRED.

(A) Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter 26, it is unlawful for any Person to conduct, hold, sponsor or cause to be held a Special Event without first having obtained a Special Event Permit from the City Clerk.

(B) Any Person who conducts, holds, sponsors, or causes to be held a Special Event, shall comply with all Special Event Conditions, and the failure to do so is unlawful.

(C) All events that require a Special Event Permit pursuant to this Chapter shall comply with: the requirements of this Chapter; the City of Goodyear Zoning Ordinance; all other applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, policies and procedures, including, but not limited to, all rules, regulations, policies and procedures adopted by the City Manager related to the permitting and regulation of Special Events; and with all Special Event Permit Conditions.

(D) The issuance of a Special Event Permit is not deemed evidence or proof that the Permittee has complied with the provisions of this Chapter, the City of Goodyear Zoning Ordinance or any other applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, rules and/or regulations, nor shall it prevent prosecution by the City for any violations of this Chapter, the City of Goodyear Zoning Ordinance or any other applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, rules and/or regulations.

(Ord. 14-1301, passed 6-23-2014)


26-1-4 EXCEPTIONS.

The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to the following:

(A) School events unless the event involves any of the activities identified in Section 26-1-2(S)(2)(b), (c), (d), (g), (i) and/or (j); or

(B) First Amendment Events; or

(C) City Sponsored Events; or

(D) Events held at the Goodyear Spring Training Complex pursuant to a written agreement with the City that addresses the event.

(Ord. 14-1301, passed 6-23-2014)


26-1-5 RESPONSIBLE CITY DEPARTMENTS.

(A) The City Clerk, with the assistance of the Special Event Review Committee, shall be responsible for processing applications for Special Events.

(B) Special Event Review Committee

(1) A Special Event Review Committee consisting of representatives of City departments/divisions that could be affected by proposed Special Events shall be established. The City Clerk shall be the chair of the Special Event Review Committee. The committee shall include, at a minimum, representatives from the following areas of operation: code enforcement, planning and zoning, building safety, fire inspection (post-occupancy), fire plan review and inspection (pre-occupancy), traffic operations, streets, police, and risk management. The City Clerk may require additional representation on the Special Event Review Committee on a permanent or on an ad hoc basis, at his/her discretion.

(2) The Special Event Review Committee will confer as needed to review Special Event Applications and shall have the authority to procure from the Applicant such clarifications and additional information necessary for the approval or denial of an application for a Special Event permit.

(3) The City Clerk, based on the recommendations of the Special Event Review Committee or any member thereof, may impose terms, conditions, and/or stipulations as a condition of granting a Special Event Permit ("Special Event Permit Conditions"). These conditions include, but are not limited to the following:

a. Requiring law enforcement personnel to be hired for traffic control and/or public safety; 

b. Requiring parking attendants;

c. Requiring that temporary fencing or barricades be installed;

d. Imposing requirements for the clean-up and restoration at the Special Event site;

e. Requiring first aid stations be available;

f. Requiring that sanitary facilities be provided, including handicap accessible facilities;

g. Adjusting the hours of operation of the Special Event and/or restricting the noise levels generated by the Special Event to alleviate the potential of complaints from adjacent businesses or residents;

h. Imposing conditions on the manner by which alcohol sales and service, if any, shall be conducted at the Special Event;

i. Hiring and providing for any and all traffic control devices and/or traffic personnel as deemed necessary by the City Traffic Engineer;

j. Imposing dust control measures when unpaved surfaces or lots are used;

k. Requiring the payment to the City of all costs of City services, including unforeseen costs, associated with the Special Event; the payment of deposits in the estimated amount of such costs; and/or the posting of financial security in a form acceptable to the City to insure such payment; and

l. Any other condition or requirement reasonably necessary to provide for the health, safety and/or welfare of the event participants, neighboring property owners and businesses, the City and its residents, and the general public.

(C) The City Manager is hereby authorized to approve and adopt administratively, additional rules, regulations, policies and procedures governing the requirements for the issuance of permits for Special Events and the operation of Special Events, including insurance requirements for Special Events held on property owned or controlled by the City, provided such rules, regulations, policies and procedures are not inconsistent with specific ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City Council. Such rules and regulations shall be based on the public health, safety and welfare concerns of Special Event attendees, persons involved in the operation of the Special Event, and the City and its residents.

(D) The City Traffic Engineer shall have the authority to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street constituting a part of a route of a Parade when reasonably necessary for the protection of the general public. The City Traffic Engineer shall post signs of any such parking prohibitions or restrictions and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No Person shall be liable for a violation of this section for parking on a street that has not been posted as required herein.

(Ord. 14-1301, passed 6-23-2014)


26-1-6 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND TERMS.

(A) Neither the words "City of Goodyear" nor the City’s Logo, or any combination thereof, shall be used by the Special Event in any manner that would imply an official endorsement of the Special Event by the City without the written authorization of the City Manager.

(B) The Special Event Sponsor and/or the Promoter shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for all applicable fees and costs associated with the Special Event, and the failure to pay such fees and costs shall be unlawful.

(C) Special Event Permits shall remain on the site of the permitted Special Event and shall be shown to City personnel upon request.

(D) Special Event activities shall be confined to the premises listed on the Special Event Permit.

(E) City code compliance officers, police officers and fire inspectors shall have the right to enter permitted Special Events or Non-Permitted Special Events free of charge to insure compliance with the Special Event Permit Conditions, the provisions of this Chapter, the City of Goodyear Zoning Ordinance and any other applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, rules and/or regulations.

(F) Any Special Event that involves the use of Fire Works, special effects, large open flames such as bonfires, explosions, or other potentially dangerous displays or actions shall carry insurance that provides separate coverage for bodily injury and property damage resulting from such activities in an amount no less than $5,000,000 per occurrence with a $5,000,000 aggregate.

(G) The Permittee shall be responsible for insuring that all Vendors have Transaction Privilege Tax numbers.

(H) The Special Event Sponsor and/or the Promoter shall obtain all other licenses, permits, certificates and the like required by federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, rules and/or regulations, including the City of Goodyear’s laws, ordinances, rules and/or regulations. This includes, by way of example, Traffic Control Permits and Fire Safety Inspection Permits, which may be required based on the nature of the Special Event. The issuance of a Special Event Permit shall not be evidence that the City knew, or should have known, that another license, permit, certificate or the like was required or was otherwise improperly issued. Both the Special Event Sponsor and the Promoter shall be responsible for violations of this provision.

(I) The issuance of a Special Event Permit pursuant to this Chapter does not obligate or require the City to provide City services, equipment or personnel in support of the permitted Special Event, although the City may provide such services, equipment or personnel if such are reasonably available and the event organizer makes provisions to reimburse the City for the costs thereof.

(J) Fees and costs will be assessed if supplemental permits are required by other City departments through the Special Event Application review process or if City-provided services are required. All expenses incurred by the City for public safety, sanitation, and traffic control personnel and resources required along with any other expenses or costs incurred by the City as a result of the Special Event are the joint and several liability of the Special Event Sponsor and the Promoter, and the failure to pay such fees and costs shall be unlawful.

(K) Off-duty City of Goodyear police officers shall be used for all Special Events requiring law enforcement personnel for traffic control on public roadways and public rights of way. If off-duty City of Goodyear police officers are not available, sworn off-duty law enforcement officers from other jurisdictions may be used.

(L) Neither the approval of an application for a Special Event permit, the issuance of a Special Event Permit, nor the imposition of Special Event Permit Conditions are intended to guarantee the health, safety, or welfare of any Person or the value or security of any real property, or to create liability on the part of or a cause of action against the City of Goodyear or any of its officers, elected and appointed officials, employees, agents, representatives, and volunteers for any damages that may result from the Special Event. The provisions of this Chapter and the Special Event Conditions imposed pursuant to this Chapter are intended as minimum standards for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare. The Promoter and the Special Event Sponsor are responsible for undertaking all measures necessary for the protection of the health, safety or welfare of any Person who may be injured, or whose property may be damaged as a result of the Special Event.

(M) The type of coverage and limits of insurance required by the City for Special Events on City owned or controlled property and required for any Special Events that involves the use of Fire Works, special effects, large open flames such as bonfires, explosions, or other potentially dangerous displays or actions represent minimum amounts of insurance that must be carried and do not represent a determination that the required coverage and limits are adequate to cover claims and/or losses that may be asserted in connection with the Special Event. The lack of insurance requirements for other types of Special Events does not represent a determination that there is no risk of claims or losses for bodily injury or property damage arising from the Special Event. The Promoter and the Special Event Sponsor are responsible for determining the type of insurance coverage and the amount of such coverage needed to cover claims and/or losses that may be asserted in connection with a Special event and for carrying such insurance coverage.

(N) Subject to Council appropriation for the cost of such waivers, and except as otherwise provided herein, fees for other permits required in connection with a Special Event shall be waived for events that are sponsored by public schools and organizations that have obtained tax-exempt status under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. In addition, and except as otherwise provided herein and subject to Council appropriation for the cost of such waivers, fees for permits required in connection with gatherings, uses, events, or activities held in whole or in part outdoors that do not exceed three consecutive days and have less than 250 people at the event as attendees, participants, operators, vendors or in any other capacity that are sponsored by public schools or organizations that have obtained exemptions under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be waived. The waivers provided herein apply only to the fees for the permit, not the fees that may be charged for additional services that may be required in connection with a special event, such as cost of off-duty personnel, cost of traffic barricades, cost of sanitation services, rental fees, etc. The fee waivers provided herein shall be provided on a first-come basis. 

(Ord. 14-1301, passed 6-23-2014; Ord. 15-1322, passed 5-11-2015)


26-1-7 SPECIAL EVENTS ON CITY PROPERTY.

(A) If required by the City, the Promoter and Special Event Sponsor for any Special Event that is to be held on City owned property shall execute an agreement on a form provided by the City under which the Promoter and Special Event Sponsor agrees to waive and release the City of Goodyear and its officers, elected and appointed officials, employees, agents, representatives, and volunteers from and against any and all claims, costs, liabilities (including bodily injury or illnesses), expenses or judgments, including attorney’s fees and court costs (collectively "Claims"), arising out of or related to the activities of the permitted Special Event and also agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City from and against any and all Claims arising out of or related to the activities of the permitted Special Event unless such Claims are caused solely by the negligence, gross negligence or willful misconduct of the City, its officers, elected and appointed officials, employees, agents, representatives, and/or volunteers.

(B) For any Special Event that is to be held on property owned or controlled by the City, the Special Event Sponsor, the Promoter, and all Persons, including by way of example, but not limitation, Vendors, contractors and sub-contractors who will be performing any activity associated with the setup, tear down, clean-up, and/or operation of the Special Event, shall, if required by the City, carry and provide proof of insurance in the amounts and types of coverage as determined by rules and regulations adopted by the City Manager subject to the following:

(1) All required insurance coverage shall be primary and any insurance maintained by the City, its officers, elected and appointed officials, employees, agents, representatives and volunteers shall be excess and non-contributory.

(2) All required insurance coverage shall be provided on a "per occurrence" form. If coverage is only available on a "claims made" form, the City Clerk shall deny the application for the Special Event except as follows. The Risk Manager may require and obtain proof that the insured has obtained extended reporting coverage for a period of time deemed sufficient by the Risk Manager to protect the City from any unforeseen losses and in such a case, a "claims made" policy may be allowed.

(3) The City, its officers, elected and appointed officials, employees, agents, representatives, and volunteers shall be included as additional insureds on insurance policies as required by the Risk Manager. The City, its officers, elected and appointed officials, employees, agents, representatives, and volunteers shall be named as additional insured by endorsement and not solely as a listed party on a certificate of insurance. The City, its officers, elected and appointed officials, employees, agents, representatives, and volunteers are to be covered as additional insureds to the full limits of coverage purchased even if those limits are in excess of the minimum amounts of insurance required by the City.

(C) The Promoter and Special Event Sponsor shall execute any agreements and pay all applicable fees required by the City, including the Parks and Recreation Department, for the use of the City’s parks, parks facilities, or other City owned and/or controlled property. 

(Ord. 14-1301, passed 6-23-2014; Ord. 15-1322, passed 5-11-2015)


ARTICLE 26-2 Permit Application and Review

Section:

26-2-1    Permit application and processing

26-2-2    Granting or denying a Special Event Permit

26-2-3    Revocation of a Special Event Permit

26-2-4    Appeals


26-2-1 PERMIT APPLICATION AND PROCESSING.

(A) The application for a permit to conduct or engage in any Special Event shall be filed with the City Clerk. The application shall be on a form furnished by the City Clerk, and the application shall include full, complete and detailed information as requested in the application. The fully completed application shall be accompanied by all supporting documentation specified in the application.

(B) If the person who files the Special Event application is not the Special Event Sponsor, the Special Event Sponsor shall provide the City Clerk written authorization authorizing the Applicant to apply for the Special Event Permit on the Special Event Sponsor’s behalf and certifying that the Special Event Sponsor shall be responsible for all City fees, charges, and costs associated with the Special Event.

(C) Special Event applications shall be filed at least 45 calendar days before the proposed date(s) of the Special Event unless the event involves the closures of all or part of any public roadways. For Special Events involving the closure of all or part of up to 10 kilometers of public roadways located entirely within the City of Goodyear, a Special Event application shall be filed at least 90 days before the day of the event. For Special Events involving the closure of all or part of more than 10 kilometers of public roadways located entirely within the City of Goodyear, a Special Event application shall be filed at least 120 days before the day of the event. For Special Events involving the closure of all or part of public roadways in multiple jurisdictions, a Special Event application shall be filed at least 180 days before the day of the event. The City Clerk, at his/her sole discretion, may process a Special Event application that is received less than the time frames set forth herein if good cause is shown and the nature of the application can reasonably be processed prior to the proposed date(s) of the Special Event.

(D) Following the receipt of a Special Event application, the City Clerk shall:

(1) distribute the application to the members of the Special Event Review Committee whose members shall: advise the City Clerk if additional clarifications and/or additional information is required; recommend Special Event Conditions that should be imposed; recommend that the application be granted, with or without conditions or denied based on the findings as set forth in Section 26-2-2; and provide the City Clerk any additional information requested by the City Clerk; and

(2) based on the recommendations of the Special Event Review Committee, either issue an Approval of the application with all recommended Special Event Conditions, or deny the application.

(E) The City Clerk shall issue an approval or denial of a Special Event application within the most reasonable time possible based on the scale of the Special Event. The City Clerk shall provide written notification to the Applicant informing them of the approval or denial. The written notification shall be mailed to the Applicant’s address as stated on the application.

(F) Depending upon the amount of time that has lapsed between the approval and the event, the City Clerk may require the Applicant to confirm in writing that there have been no changes in circumstances that would have warranted a different response on the application. If the Applicant cannot provide this confirmation because there were changes that would have warranted a different response on the application, the Applicant shall provide the City Clerk the updated information, and the City Clerk shall forward the updated information to the Special Event Review Committee and based on the recommendations of the Special Event Review Committee, may deny a final approval or impose additional Special Event Conditions as needed to address the change in circumstances.

(G) If the City Clerk denies a Special Event Application, the City Clerk shall provide the Applicant written notification of such denial, which notification shall include the reasons for the denial and a reference to the appeal procedures set forth in Section 26-2-4 below. The written notification requirement set forth herein shall be deemed satisfied on the date the written notice is either hand delivered to the Applicant at the address shown on the permit application or placed, postage prepaid, in the United States mail, certified mail, return receipt requested and addressed to the Applicant at the address shown on the permit application, whichever is earlier. 

(Ord. 14-1301, passed 6-23-2014; Ord. 15-1322, passed 5-11-2015)


26-2-2 GRANTING OR DENYING A SPECIAL EVENT APPLICATION.

(A) The City Clerk shall issue a Special Event Permit under this Chapter if the City Clerk finds that the issuance of the permit, with or without conditions, meets all of the following criteria:

(1) The Special Event application has not been denied for any of the conditions for denial as set forth in Section 26-2-2(B) below.

(2) The issuance of a Special Event Permit will not violate any of the requirements of this Chapter, the City of Goodyear Zoning Ordinance, or any other applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, rules and/or regulations.

(3) All conditions imposed during the application process for the issuance of a Special Event Permit have been met.

(4) The expected attendance at the event will not exceed the lawful capacity of the Special Event venue site under the City’s fire code.

(5) There is adequate parking available to accommodate the expected attendance at the Special Event.

(6) The Special Event will not have an unreasonable adverse impact upon nearby residential neighborhoods or businesses for such things as traffic circulation, parking shortages, excessive noise levels or other nuisances.

(7) The Special Event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the City.

(8) The Special Event will not require the diversion of public safety or other City employees from their normal duties so as to unreasonably reduce adequate levels of service to any other area of the City.

(9) The Special Event will not unreasonably interfere with access to police or fire stations, or other public safety facilities or will not unreasonably interfere with the movement of police, fire, ambulances, and other public safety or emergency vehicles on the streets.

(10) The Special Event will not present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the Applicant, spectators, City employees, or members of the public.

(11) The Special Event will not conflict with construction or development in the public right-of-way or at a public facility.

(12) The Special Event will not unreasonably interfere with any other special event for which a permit has already been granted or with the provision of City services in support of other scheduled events or scheduled government functions.

(13) The Special Event will not have a significant adverse environmental impact.

(B) The City Clerk shall deny any application for a Special Event Permit if the City Clerk finds any of the following conditions exist:

(1) If any of the criteria set forth in Section 26-2-2(A) above have not been met; or

(2) If the Special Event application is incomplete and the Applicant failed to provide any additional information requested; and/or if the application contains a false or material misrepresentation; or

(3) If the Applicant, Promoter, and/or Special Event Sponsor fails to comply with all requirements of this Chapter including, but not limited to, failing to provide proof of insurance and/or an indemnification agreement as required by this Chapter; failing to pay all applicable fees and costs; failing to obtain additional permits as may be required; or

(4) The proposed time and place for the Special Event conflicts with another earlier application for a Special Event Permit that will be issued; or

(5) Required insurance coverage is not available on an occurrence basis and the Risk Manager, in his/her discretion, concludes that the lack of an occurrence policy presents an undue risk of liability to the City.

(C) The City Clerk may deny any application for a Special Event Permit if the City Clerk finds any of the following conditions exist:

(1) If there has been a history of significant complaints generated from similar prior Special Events; or

(2) The Applicant, Promoter and/or the Special Event Sponsor have, on prior occasions, damaged City property and has not paid in full for such damage, or has other outstanding and unpaid debts to the City.

(3) If the Special Event application was not received within the time frames set forth in Section 26-2-1.

(Ord. 14-1301, passed 6-23-2014; Ord. 15-1322, passed 5-11-2015)


26-2-3 REVOCATION OF A SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT.

(A) A Special Event Permit may be revoked as follows:

(1) The City Clerk may revoke a Special Event Permit prior to the date(s) of the Special Event if the City Clerk discovers the application contained false or misleading information.

(2) The Police Chief or his/her designee shall have the authority to revoke a Special Event Permit instantly and close down a Special Event if any of the Special Event Permit Conditions are violated or if any provisions of this Chapter are violated and the Police Chief or his/her designee concludes that the violations create an unreasonable and adverse effect upon the health, welfare and/or safety of the public.

(3) The Fire Chief or his/her designee shall have the authority to revoke a Special Event Permit instantly and close down a Special Event if any of the Special Event Permit Conditions are violated or if any provisions of this Chapter are violated and the Fire Chief or his/her designee concludes that the violations create an unreasonable and adverse effect upon the health, welfare and/or safety of the public. 

(B) The revocation of a Special Event Permit shall not prevent the City from pursuing any other penalties or remedies for violations of the requirements of this Chapter, the Special Event Permit Conditions, the City of Goodyear Zoning Ordinance or any other applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, rules and/or regulations.

(Ord. 14-1301, passed 6-23-2014)


26-2-4 APPEALS.

(A) The Applicant may appeal a denial of an application for a Special Event Permit, may appeal any of the Special Event Permit Conditions or appeal the revocation of a Special Event Permit to the City Manager by filing a written statement with the City Clerk within five business days of the date of the City Clerk’s letter denying the application, approving the application subject to the Special Event Permit Conditions, or revoking the Special Event Permit. The written statement shall fully describe the grounds for the appeal and shall include all supporting documentation.

(B) The City Manager shall, as soon as practicable but not later than 10 business days, issue a written decision setting forth the findings and grounds for the decision and shall mail the written decision to the applicant. The written notification requirement set forth herein shall be deemed satisfied on the date the written notice is either hand delivered to the address shown on the permit application or placed, postage prepaid, in the United States mail, certified mail, return receipt requested and addressed to the Applicant at the address shown on the permit application, whichever is earlier.

(C) If the timing of a decision on an appeal is of the essence and the City Manager’s schedule will not permit an expedited review of the appeal, the City Manager may delegate responsibility for deciding an appeal to a Deputy City Manager.

(D) The decision of the City Clerk shall remain in full force and effect until and unless a decision on the appeal that reverses or modifies the City Clerk’s decision has been rendered. If the proposed date(s) of the Special Event have passed before a decision on the appeal has been rendered, the appeal will be deemed moot and the appeal process will terminate without a decision.

(E) The City Manager’s decision on an appeal or the Deputy City Manager’s decision on an appeal that was delegated to the Deputy City Manager shall be final.

(Ord. 14-1301, passed 6-23-2014)


ARTICLE 26-3 Enforcement

Section:

26-3-1    Violations

26-3-2    Penalties

26-3-3    Other remedies


26-3-1 VIOLATIONS.

(A) A Person commits an offense under this Chapter if the Person commences or conducts a Special Event or causes a Special Event to be commenced or conducted:

(1) without first having obtained a Special Event Permit from the City Clerk; and/or

(2) in violation of any of the Special Event Conditions and provisions of this Chapter; any rules, regulations, policies and procedures adopted by the City Manager related to the regulation of Special Events; and/or any other applicable federal, state, and/or local laws, ordinances, rules and/or regulations.

(B) A Person commits an offense under this Chapter if the Person violates any provision of this Chapter.

(C) A Person commits an offense under this Chapter if the Person knowingly makes a false statement in connection with an application for a Special Event Permit.

(D) A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this Chapter except for the offense referred to in subsection (C) of this section.

(E) Each violation shall constitute a separate offense, and each day or part of a day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.

(Ord. 14-1301, passed 6-23-2014)


26-3-2 PENALTIES.

(A) All violations of this Chapter are subject to the criminal penalties set forth in Article 1-8-1 and the civil penalties provided herein.

(B) If a Person pleads responsible or is found to be responsible for a civil violation of this Chapter, the court shall impose a civil sanction for each violation in accordance with the following guidelines: for a first time offense, the civil sanction shall be in an amount of not less than $50 but not more than $500; for a second time offense, the civil sanction shall be in an amount of not less than $500 but not more than $750; and for a third offense or subsequent offense, the civil sanction shall be in an amount of not less than $750 but not more than $1,500.

(C) All violations of this Chapter are subject to the enforcement provisions pursuant to this Chapter, Article 1-8 and Article 18-1.

(Ord. 14-1301, passed 6-23-2014)


26-3-3 OTHER REMEDIES.

(A) Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as affecting the ability to initiate or continue concurrent or subsequent civil or criminal prosecution for any violations of the City of Goodyear Zoning Ordinance, or any other applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, rules and/or regulations.

(B) A finding of responsibility for a civil violation of this Chapter or a conviction for a violation of this Chapter shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any permit fee or penalty due and unpaid at the time of such finding or conviction.

(Ord. 14-1301, passed 6-23-2014)



-----------------------------

The Goodyear Code of Ordinances is current through Ordinance 19-1416, passed January 14, 2019.

Disclaimer: The City Clerk's Office has the official version of the Goodyear Code of Ordinances. Users should contact the City Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.goodyearaz.gov/ City Telephone: (623) 882-7830

Code Publishing Company

______________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear i Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF GOODYEAR, ARIZONA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 1-1
ARTICLE 1-1 TITLE AND PURPOSE 1-1
1-1-1 Title 1-1
1-1-2 Purpose 1-2
1-1-3 Establishment of Districts 1-2
1-1-4 Location of Boundaries of Districts 1-3
1-1-5 Transition Procedures 1-3
1-1-6 Regulations Governing Newly Annexed Areas 1-4
1-1-7 Exceptions and Modifications 1-5
ARTICLE 1-2 ADMINISTRATION 1-7
1-2-1 Repeal, Severability, and Application 1-7
1-2-2 Zoning Administrator - Enforcement, Interpretation and Conflict 1-7
1-2-3 Violations and Penalties 1-8
1-2-4 Injunction 1-8
1-2-5 Planning and Zoning Commission 1-9
1-2-6 Development Review Committee 1-11
1-2-7 Board of Adjustment 1-12
ARTICLE 1-3 PROCEDURES 1-16
1-3-1 Amendments 1-16
1-3-2 Use Permits 1-21
1-3-3 Variances 1-24
1-3-4 Special Use Permits 1-25
1-3-5 Site Plan Requirement and Review Process 1-28
1-3-6 Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy 1-32
1-3-7 Zoning Permits 1-32
1-3-8 Citizen Review Process 1-33
1-3-9 Public Hearings 1-35
1-3-10 Applications and Fees 1-35
______________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear ii Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
ARTICLE 1-4 DESIGN GUIDELINES MANUAL AND 1-37
DESIGN REVIEW PROCESS
1-4-1 Establishment and Purpose of Design Guidelines Manual 1-37
1-4-2 Administration of Manual 1-37
1-4-3 (Reserved) 1-40
1-4-4 Appeal Process 1-40
ARTICLE 1-5 CITY CENTER GATEWAY STREETSCAPE 1-42
PLAN MANUAL AND DESIGN REVIEW PROCESS
1-5-1 Establishment and Purpose of the City Center Streetscape Plan Manual 1-42
1-5-2 Administration of Streetscape Plan Manual 1-42
ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS 2-1
ARTICLE 2-1 MEANINGS OF WORDS AND TERMS 2-1
ARTICLE 2-2 DEFINITIONS 2-1
ARTICLE 3 ZONING DISTRICTS 3-1
ARTICLE 3-1 APPLICATION OF DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS 3-1
ARTICLE 3-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 3-1
3-2-1 Purpose 3-1
3-2-2 Permitted Uses 3-3
3-2-3 Development Standards for Single Family Residential 3-6
3-2-4 Single Family—Additional Use Definitions and Regulations 3-13
3-2-5 Development Standards for Multi-Family Residential District 3-16
3-2-6 Multi-Family—Additional Use Definitions and Regulations 3-19
3-2-7 Supplemental Standards Applicable to All Residential Districts 3-21
ARTICLE 3-3 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 3-23
3-3-1 CO – Commercial Office District 3-23
3-3-2 C-1 – Neighborhood Commercial District 3-24
3-3-3 C-2 – General Commercial District 3-26
3-3-4 Central Business (CBD) District 3-30
3-3-5 Public Facilities (PFD) District 3-32
______________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear iii Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
3-3-6 Commercial District Standards 3-33
ARTICLE 3-4 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 3-37
3-4-1 I-1 – Light Industrial Park 3-37
3-4-2 I-2 – General Industrial Park 3-39
3-4-3 Industrial District Standards 3-43
ARTICLE 3-5 PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 3-47
3-5-1 Planned Area Development Applicability 3-47
3-5-2 Permitted Uses 3-47
3-5-3 Planned Area Development Procedures 3-48
3-5-4 Development Standards 3-53
3-5-5 Amenity Expectations 3-55
ARTICLE 4 SPECIAL USES, USES REQUIRING ADDITIONAL 4-1
EVALUATION, NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS
ARTICLE 4-1 SPECIAL USES 4-1
4-1-1 Procedure and Conditions of Approval 4-1
4-1-2 Special Uses Considered in Any District 4-2
4-1-3 Special Uses Considered in Specified Districts 4-2
ARTICLE 4-2 USES REQUIRING ADDITIONAL EVALUATION 4-6
4-2-1 Adult Businesses 4-6
4-2-2 Convenience Uses 4-7
4-2-3 Service Stations, Automotive 4-9
4-2-4 Wireless Communications Facilities (Commercial) 4-10
4-2-5 Restaurants, Bars/Cocktail Lounges, Breweries, Brewpubs and
Microbreweries subject to Special Use Permit for Live Music and
Entertainment Activities 4-13
4-2-6 Teen Entertainment Centers 4-14
4-2-7 Large Retail Users 4-15
4-2-8 Non-Chartered Financial Institutions 4-20
4-2-9 Freeway Pylon Signs 4-20
4-2-10 Massage Establishments, Tattoo Studios, and Body Piercing Studios 4-24
4-2-11 Medical Marijuana Dispensary 4-25
4-2-12 Medical Marijuana Cultivation Location 4-28
______________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear iv Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
4-2-13 Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation and Medical
Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation 4-31
4-2-14 Brewery 4-32
4-2-15 Brewpub 4-33
4-2-16 Microbrewery 4-33
ARTICLE 4-3 NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS 4-35
ARTICLE 4-4 TEMPORARY USES 4-36
4-4-1 Purpose 4-36
4-4-2 General Regulations and Applicability 4-36
4-4-3 Application Process 4-36
4-4-4 Permitted Temporary Uses 4-38
4-4-5 Temporary Uses Not Requiring a Permit 4-39
4-4-6 Development Standards 4-39
ARTICLE 5 PROPERTY IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 5-1
ARTICLE 5-1 LANDSCAPE STANDARDS 5-1
5-1-1 General Applicability 5-1
5-1-2 Property Owner Maintenance 5-2
5-1-3 Landscape Plan and Design Standards 5-3
5-1-4 Single Family and Two Family Landscape Design Standards 5-9
ARTICLE 5-2 WALLS, FENCES 5-10
5-2-1 Placement Regulations 5-10
5-2-2 Design, Construction, Maintenance and Development Standards 5-10
ARTICLE 5-3 POOLS AND SPAS 5-13
5-3-1 Enclosure Required 5-13
5-3-2 Design and Enclosure Details 5-13
5-3-3 Zoning Districts: Placement 5-14
5-3-4 Permit, Inspection, Maintenance 5-14
ARTICLE 6 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 6-1
ARTICLE 6-1 PURPOSE 6-1
______________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear v Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
ARTICLE 6-2 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS 6-1
6-2-1 Off-Street Parking Spaces 6-1
6-2-2 Residential Vehicular Access 6-2
ARTICLE 6-3 PARKING DESIGN STANDARDS 6-3
6-3-1 Parking Standards Pertaining to All Districts 6-3
6-3-2 Parking Standards for Single Family, Two Family and 6-5
Manufactured Home Residential Uses
6-3-3 Parking Standards for Multi-Family Residential, Commercial, 6-6
Industrial and Mixed –Use Development
ARTICLE 6-4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS 6-8
6-4-1 Determination of Required Spaces 6-9
6-4-2 Parking Requirements 6-9
ARTICLE 6-5 OFF-STREET LOADING 6-11
6-5-1 Spaces Required 6-11
6-5-2 Standards for Off-Street Loading Facilities 6-12
ARTICLE 6-6 BICYCLE PARKING 6-12
ARTICLE 7 SIGN REGULATIONS 7-1
ARTICLE 7-1 PURPOSE 7-1
ARTICLE 7-2 DEFINITIONS 7-2
ARTICLE 7-3 REQUIREMENT OF PERMIT 7-9
ARTICLE 7-4 REQUIREMENT OF CONFORMITY 7-9
ARTICLE 7-5 EXEMPTIONS 7-10
ARTICLE 7-6 GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS 7-11
ARTICLE 7-7 SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT 7-12
______________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear vi Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
ARTICLE 7-8 PERMITTED SIGNAGE BY ZONING DISTRICT 7-14
ARTICLE 7-9 TEMPORARY SIGNS 7-24
ARTICLE 7-10 SPECIAL SIGN AREAS 7-29
ARTICLE 7-11 PROHIBITED SIGNS 7-31
ARTICLE 7-12 NONCONFORMING AND UNSAFE SIGNS 7-32
ARTICLE 7-13 VIOLATIONS 7-35
ARTICLE 7-14 APPEALS 7-35
ARTICLE 7-15 CONFLICTS AND SEVERABILITY 7-37
ARTICLE 8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 8-1
ARTICLE 8-1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 8-1
ARTICLE 8-2 DETACHED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, GUEST HOUSES 8-5
VENTILATION COURTS, AND PORTABLE STORAGE
CONTAINERS
ARTICLE 8-3 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS 8-9
ARTICLE 8-4 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 8-10
ARTICLE 8-5 MISCELLANEOUS 8-11
ARTICLE 9 SPECIAL DISTRICTS 9-1
ARTICLE 9-1 FREEWAY DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT 9-1
9-1-1 Purpose 9-1
9-1-2 Applicability 9-1
9-1-3 Sound Attenuation Plan 9-2
______________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear vii Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
9-1-4 Sound Attenuation Improvements 9-3
9-1-5 Administration 9-3
ARTICLE 9-2 MCDOWELL ROAD BUSINESS AND 9-5
ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT
9-2-1 Purpose 9-5
9-2-2 Applicability 9-5
9-2-3 Supplemental Sign Regulations 9-5
ARTICLE 10 OUTDOOR LIGHTING STANDARDS 10-1
ARTICLE 10-1 PURPOSE 10-1
ARTICLE 10-2 APPLICABILITY 10-2
ARTICLE 10-3 LIGHTING ZONES 10-3
ARTICLE 10-4 OPERATING HOURS 10-4
ARTICLE 10-5 LIGHT SOURCES AND FIXTURE SHIELDING 10-4
ARTICLE 10-6 FIXTURE MOUNTING HEIGHT AND EQUIPMENT 10-5
FINISHES
ARTICLE 10-7 ILLUMINANCE LEVELS 10-6
ARTICLE 10-8 LIGHTING STANDARDS MATRIX 10-7
ARTICLE 10-9 NON-RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS 10-8
ARTICLE 10-10 PARKING CANOPIES 10-8
ARTICLE 10-11 PARKING STRUCTURES 10-8
ARTICLE 10-12 GAS STATIONS/CONVENIENCE STORES 10-8
ARTICLE 10-13 DRIVE-THROUGHS 10-9
______________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear viii Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
ARTICLE 10-14 BANKS/ATMS 10-9
ARTICLE 10-15 RELIGIOUS FACILITIES 10-9
ARTICLE 10-16 AUTOMOTIVE DEALERSHIPS 10-9
ARTICLE 10-17 FLAGPOLE LIGHTING 10-10
ARTICLE 10-18 SPORTS LIGHTING FOR ALL PRIVATE AND 10-10
PUBLIC FACILITIES
ARTICLE 10-19 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCES, ATTACHED 10-11
AND DETACHED
ARTICLE 10-20 UTILITY EXCEPTIONS 10-11
ARTICLE 10-21 OTHER EXCEPTIONS 10-12
ARTICLE 10-22 EQUIPMENT SUBSTITUTIONS 10-12
ARTICLE 10-23 VERIFICATION 10-12
ARTICLE 10-24 OTHER TYPES OF LIGHTING 10-12
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-1 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
ARTICLE 1 ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
1-1 Title and Purpose
1-2 Administration
1-3 Procedures
1-4 Design Guidelines Manual and Design Review Process
1-5 City Center Gateway Streetscape Plan Manual and Design Review Process
ARTICLE 1-1 TITLE AND PURPOSE
1-1-1 Title
1-1-2 Purpose
1-1-3 Establishment of Districts
1-1-4 Location and Boundaries of Districts
1-1-5 Transition Procedures
1-1-6 Regulations Governing Newly Annexed Lands
1-1-7 Exceptions and Modifications
Section 1-1-1 Title
The ordinance embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated
“The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Goodyear, Arizona,” and may be so cited. Such
ordinance may also be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance.”
Section 1-1-2 Purpose
This Article establishes duties and responsibilities necessary to exercise zoning and planning
authority for the City of Goodyear pursuant to State of Arizona municipal planning and zoning
enabling legislation.
This Ordinance of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Goodyear, Maricopa County,
Arizona, (hereafter "City") is hereby adopted for the following purposes:
A. To promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of
Goodyear and to establish land use classifications; dividing the City into districts;
imposing regulations, prohibitions and restrictions for the promotion of health, safety,
convenience, aesthetics, and welfare; governing the use of land for residential and
non-residential purposes; regulating and limiting the height and bulk of buildings and
other structures; limiting lot occupancy and the size of yards and other open spaces;
establishing standards of performance and design; adopting a map of said districts;
prescribing penalties for violations of said Ordinance; and repealing all Ordinances in
conflict therewith.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-2 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Further, such regulations are deemed necessary to lessen congestion in the streets; to
provide adequate open space for light and air; to conserve property values; to assure
orderly growth; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water sewer,
schools, parks and other improvements; and to promote public health, safety, and welfare.
B. This Ordinance shall be considered the minimum requirements necessary for the
promotion of the General Plan, as amended from time to time, and for the protection of
the citizens of Goodyear and the general public.
Compliance with all other ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, policies and guidelines
adopted by the Goodyear City Council, such as, but not limited to, International Fire
Codes, International Building Codes, hazardous materials regulations, City of
Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policy Manual, or PAD standards approved
by the City of Goodyear shall be adhered to, and where differences occur, the more
restrictive shall prevail.
Section 1-1-3 Establishment of Districts
In order to promote the orderly development of the City and carry out the provisions of
this Ordinance and in order to classify, regulate, restrict, and separate the use of land,
buildings and structures, the City is hereby divided into the following districts:
A. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
Agricultural AG
Agricultural-Urban AU
Single Family Residential R1-10
Single Family Residential (Detached) R1-7
Single Family Residential (Detached) R1-6
Single Family Residential (Detached) R1-4
Single Family Residential (Attached) R1-A
Single Family Residential (Court Home) R1-C
Two Family Residential R2
Multi-Family Residential MF-18
Multi-Family Residential MF-24
Manufactured Home Subdivision MHS
Manufactured Home Park or Recreational Vehicle Park MH/RVP
B. COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS:
Commercial Office C-O
Neighborhood Commercial C-1
General Commercial C-2
Central Business District CBD
Public Facilities District PFD
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-3 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
C. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
Light Industrial Park I-1
General Industrial Park I-2
D. PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS:
Preliminary Planned Area Development P-PAD
Final Planned Area Development F-PAD
Section 1-1-4 Location and Boundaries of Districts
The locations and boundaries of zoning districts are established on the City of Goodyear Zoning
Map, dated and signed by the Mayor and City Clerk, which map accompanies and is hereby
declared a part of this Zoning Ordinance.
A. The Zoning District boundary lines are intended to follow street, alley, lot, or property
lines, as they exist at the effective date of this Ordinance except where such district
boundary lines are fixed by dimensions shown on the Zoning Map, in which case such
dimensions shall govern. Where a zoning district boundary line is indicated as
approximately following streets or highway rights-of-way, the zoning district of the
adjacent property shall be extended to the centerline of such street or highway right-ofway.
In no case, however, is the Zoning Map intended to be used as a precise, legal
narrative of any zoning district boundary.
B. Where a Zoning District boundary is not clearly defined on the Zoning Map, the location
of such boundary shall be determined administratively by the Zoning Administrator.
Section 1-1-5 Transition Procedures
In order to ensure the orderly adoption and enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance, the following
transition rules shall govern the applicability of this Ordinance.
A. The provisions of this Ordinance and any amendments shall not apply to those
developments for which a building permit has been issued prior to the adoption of this
Ordinance, provided said building permit remains in full force and effect. In the event the
building permit expires, said permit may not be extended or renewed unless all provisions
of this Ordinance are met.
B. A parcel of land zoned subject to a plan of development, standards or stipulations adopted
prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be developed in accordance with that
approved plan of development, standards or stipulations but shall comply with these
regulations to the maximum extent possible. In the event of a conflict between provisions
of these regulations and the approved plan of development, standards or stipulations, the
approved plan of development, standards or stipulations shall control.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-4 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
1. Development agreements or design themes adopted or established prior to the effective
date of this Ordinance shall, likewise, control.
2. If the rezoning was subject to a schedule for development, the time period for which
has expired, then the development of that parcel of land shall be subject to all applicable
provisions of this Ordinance.
C. Any uses of land, structures, or parcels which existed on the effective date of this
Ordinance and which do not meet the standards and regulations of this Ordinance, shall
be deemed nonconforming and shall be controlled by the provisions of Article 4-3, except
that the City may require a nonconforming use to be brought into compliance by a specific
date if such compliance is mandated by State Law and only after the new requirement has
been made part of this Zoning Ordinance through an amendment adopted pursuant to the
amendment procedures specified herein.
Section 1-1-6 Regulations Governing Newly Annexed Areas
A. INITIAL ZONING. Within newly annexed areas, the City shall initially adopt zoning
classifications which permit densities and uses no greater than those permitted by Maricopa
County immediately prior to annexation, unless an amendment of the Zoning District
boundary is processed concurrently with such annexation, pursuant to the procedures
required for such an amendment. Areas, when annexed to the City, shall, until officially
zoned by the City Council, be considered to be zoned to City classification closest to that
shown on the official zoning map of Maricopa County at the time of annexation. Such
County Zoning shall apply for not more than six (6) months. Subsequent changes in zoning
of the annexed territory shall be made according to procedures established by this
Ordinance.
B. CONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING PERMITS.
1. Maricopa County building permits or Use Permits validly issued pursuant to County
requirements not more than sixty (60) days prior to the effective date of annexation,
shall be accepted by the Chief Building Official, or his designee, as valid permits for a
period of sixty (60) days after the effective date of annexation. If construction has not
commenced on or before the sixtieth (60th) day after the effective date of annexation,
a City building or Use Permit shall be required.
2. For buildings under construction with a valid building or Use Permit issued by
Maricopa County prior to the effective date of an annexation ordinance, a City building
permit shall not be required, but the Chief Building Official, or his designee, shall
require that buildings constructed under such County building or Use Permit shall be
structurally safe and shall conform to pertinent County zoning regulations in effect at
the time the County permit was issued.
C. EXISTING USE, ACTIVITY OR STRUCTURE.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-5 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
1. Any use or activity conducted contrary to County zoning regulations at the effective
date of annexation and not constituting a nonconforming use under the County zoning
regulations shall not be considered a nonconforming use, and shall constitute a
violation of this Ordinance.
2. Any use, activity or structure that is existing at the effective date of annexation, under
a Maricopa County Use Permit with a time limit imposed, shall not be a
nonconforming use, but may, unless considered a permitted use under subsequentlyestablished
City zoning, continue for the extent of the time limit. Such Use Permits
may be extended with subsequent City Use Permit approval in accordance with this
Ordinance.
3. Any lot or parcel of land duly recorded in the Maricopa County Recorder's Office prior
to the effective date of this Ordinance and having an area, width or depth less than that
required in the Zoning District regulations in which such lot or parcel is situated, shall
be deemed to be a lot and may be used as a building site, provided that applicable use,
setback, height and lot coverage, parking, signage, landscaping, and Site Plan criteria
for the Zoning District shall apply.
D. LAND USE MAP TO BE PREPARED.
Upon annexation, the property owners requesting annexation shall prepare a land use map
which shall depict the manner in which buildings and/or lands were being used at the time
of annexation.
Section 1-1-7 Exceptions and Modifications
Regulations specified in this Ordinance shall be subject to the following exceptions, modifications
and interpretations:
A. EXTENSION OF TIME. Under special conditions, the City Council may grant extensions
of time unless otherwise set forth in this Ordinance.
B. USE OF EXISTING LOTS OF RECORD. In any district where dwellings are permitted,
a single-family dwelling may be located on any lot or plot of official record that existed
on the effective date of this Ordinance, which does not meet area and/or width
requirements of this Ordinance.
C. STRUCTURES PERMITTED ABOVE THE HEIGHT LIMIT. Building height
limitations of this Ordinance may be modified as follows: Public, semi-public or public
service buildings, sanitariums, schools, churches, and temples, when permitted in a
district, may have the applicable height limit waived by City Council, provided that each
setback is increased one foot for each foot of additional building height above the height
limit otherwise provided in that district.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-6 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
D. AREA REQUIREMENTS. In any residential district where neither the public water
supply nor public sanitary sewer is accessible, lot area and frontage requirements shall be
consistent with County or State health requirements, and meet the minimum requirements
of the zone district in which located.
E. OTHER EXCEPTIONS TO YARD REQUIREMENTS. Every part of a required yard
shall be open to the sky, unobstructed by any structure, except for permitted accessory
buildings, and except for ordinary projections of sills, bay windows, cornices and other
features permitted elsewhere in this Ordinance (Article 5-2: Walls, Fences). Such
projection shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches, except for portals as noted in Article
8-1 F. 4.
F. MIXED-USE YARD REQUIREMENTS. When buildings are erected containing two (2)
or more uses housed vertically, required side yards for the first floor use shall control.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-7 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
ARTICLE 1-2 ADMINISTRATION
1-2-1 Repeal, Severability, and Application
1-2-2 Zoning Administrator - Enforcement, Interpretation and Conflict
1-2-3 Violations and Penalties
1-2-4 Injunction
1-2-5 Planning and Zoning Commission
1-2-6 Development Review Committee
1-2-7 Board of Adjustment
Section 1-2-1 Repeal, Severability, and Application
A. REPEAL. All other City of Goodyear Zoning Ordinances or parts in conflict with this
Ordinance are hereby repealed.
B. SEVERABILITY. Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be decided by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or part thereof, other than
the part so decided to be unconstitutional or invalid.
C. APPLICATION. Repeal of any Ordinance or parts thereof by this Ordinance shall not:
1. Affect suits pending or rights existing prior to the date of this Ordinance; or
2. Affect any grant or conveyance made, or right acquired, or cause of action now existing
under any repealed Ordinance or amendment thereto; or
3. Affect the validity of any bond or other obligation issued or sold (constituting a valid
obligation of the issuing authority) prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
Section 1-2-2 Zoning Administrator - Enforcement, Interpretation and Conflict
A. The office of Zoning Administrator is hereafter established and such Zoning
Administrator shall have the responsibility for enforcement and interpretation of the
Zoning Ordinance and the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny site plan
and design review applications, pursuant to the processes set forth in this Ordinance, the
Administrative Process Manual, and the Engineering Standards. The Development
Services Department Director of the City shall serve as the Zoning Administrator.
B. In interpretation and application, provisions of this Ordinance shall be considered the
minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety and general welfare.
C. Provisions of this Ordinance are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
ordinance, rule, regulation or permit not in conflict with this Ordinance. This Ordinance
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-8 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other
agreement between parties.
D. A property owner and/or occupant shall allow the Zoning Administrator, or authorized
agents, access to private property for such inspections as are necessary to ensure that
requirements of this Ordinance are met.
Section 1-2-3 Violations and Penalties
A. It is unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter, change, maintain, use or to permit the
construction, erection, installation, alteration, change, maintenance, or use of any house,
building, structure, sign, landscaped area, parking lot or fence, or to permit the use of
any lot or land contrary to, or in violation of any provisions of this Ordinance, or of any
conditions, stipulations or requirements included as a condition of any applicable approval.
Any land use that is specifically prohibited by this Ordinance or is unspecified and not
classified by the Zoning Administrator is prohibited in any district.
B. Responsible Party. The responsible party for any violations hereunder is the owner of
personal property improvements or real property and/or person in possession or control of
any personal property improvements or real property (Person). The responsible party shall
be responsible for any violations hereunder whether or not the responsible party or its agent
committed the prohibited act(s) or neglected to prevent the commission of the prohibited
act(s) by another.
C. Every Responsible Party shall be deemed responsible or guilty of a separate offense for
each and every day during which any violation is committed or continued.
D. Penalty. Any Person who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance and any
amendments there to and/or any conditions, stipulations or requirements included as a
condition of any applicable approval shall be:
1. Subject to civil sanctions of not less than one hundred dollars ($100) nor more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000) per offense; or,
2. Guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500), or by a term of probation not exceeding three (3) years, or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or punishable by a combination
of fine, probation or imprisonment. The City Prosecutor is authorized to file a criminal
misdemeanor complaint in the City of Goodyear Municipal Court for violations
hereunder.
Section 1-2-4 Injunction
A. If any building or structure is constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or
maintained, or any building, structure or land is used, in violation of this Ordinance, or
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-9 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
of a condition upon which approval of any amendment, Use Permit or Site Plan is based,
any owner or tenant of real property in the same zoning district or the Zoning
Administrator or any duly authorized representative thereof may institute an appropriate
action:
1. To prevent unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance, or use of the land, whether improved or otherwise;
2. To prevent occupancy of the building, structure or land whether improved or
otherwise;
3. To prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the premises; or,
4. To restrain, correct or abate the violation.
B. When any action is instituted pursuant to this Section 1-2-4, notice shall be served upon
the City Attorney when suit is begun, and by personally serving a copy of the complaint to
the owner and/or tenant.
C. In any such action under this Section 1-2-4 the court with jurisdiction, in its discretion, may
issue a temporary restraining order, a preliminary injunction, or a permanent injunction
upon such terms and conditions as will do justice and enforce this Ordinance.
Section 1-2-5 Planning and Zoning Commission
A. PURPOSE. The Planning and Zoning Commission (hereinafter "Commission") is created
to provide analysis and recommendation of the City's General Plan, proposed
developments, rezonings, and Ordinance amendments to the City Council. Its purpose is
to review all aspects of a proposed and future development including, but not limited to
present and projected growth of the City, site planning and the relationship of the
development to the surrounding environment and community. The Commission
recognizes the interdependence of land values, aesthetics and good site planning by
promoting harmonious, attractive and compatible development that is therefore considered
to be in furtherance of the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. ORGANIZATION. There is created a Planning and Zoning Commission to consist of
seven (7) members, each of whom shall be a resident of the City, to be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Four members shall constitute a quorum, or
as otherwise specified in the Commission’s By-Laws. The members of the City Planning
and Zoning Commission shall serve for three (3) year terms unless sooner removed by the
Council, provided nothing herein shall effect the expiration of the current terms of said
City Planning and Zoning Commission. All members shall hold office until their
successors are appointed and qualified. Any member of the Commission may be removed
by the Mayor with the consent of a majority vote of the City Council for inefficiency,
neglect of duty, malfeasance in any office, or other good and sufficient cause. Any vacancy
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-10 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
shall be filled within a reasonable time and by appointment by the Mayor with approval of
the City Council for the unexpired term.
The members of the Commission may be compensated for the time spent in performance
of official duties at such rates and schedules as the Council may establish. Individuals may
not serve more than three (3) consecutive three-year terms, subsequent to the effective date
of this Ordinance.
1. The Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from among its own
members.
2. Meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public. The minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member and records of its examinations and
other official actions shall be kept and filed in the office of the City Clerk as a public
record.
3. The Commission shall adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Ordinance for the conduct of its business and procedure.
4. The concurring vote of four members of the Commission shall be necessary to
recommend approval of any application. Any other motion shall be governed by
Robert's Rules of Order.
5. The Zoning Administrator shall serve ex-officio as Secretary of the Commission, but
shall have no vote.
6. The Commission may hold closed executive sessions or like sessions for the purposes
and the manner provided by law.
7. When any Commission member has direct pecuniary or proprietary interest in any
matter before the Commission, said member shall declare same, be excused, and refrain
from participating in voting on any matters over which the conflict occurs while being
considered by the Commission.
C. POWERS. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the following powers:
1. Hear requests for amendments, which include planned area developments, of the
text of this Ordinance or the Zoning Map of the City, and recommend approval, denial,
or approval with revisions of such requests to the City Council.
2. Hear requests for the granting of special uses or Use Permits required and stipulated
by this Ordinance and recommend approval, denial, or approval with revisions of such
requests to the City Council.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-11 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
3. Hear requests for planned area developments and subdivisions and recommend
approval, denial, or approval with revisions of such requests to the City Council.
4. To promulgate rules of procedure and to supervise the enforcement of rules so
promulgated by the Commission and approved by the City Council.
5. To advise the City Council in all such matters that may pertain to planning and zoning.
6. To oversee, and conduct requisite public hearings for the adoption, updating and
processing of amendments to the General Plan.
Section 1-2-6 Development Review Committee
A. CREATION, COMPOSITION, AND MEETINGS.
1. A Development Review Committee (hereinafter "Committee") is created which shall
include the Zoning Administrator, City Engineer, Chief Building Official, Police
Chief, Fire Chief, and City Utilities Managers, or their respective designees, and any
other City staff as deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator.
2. When any Committee member has direct pecuniary or proprietary interest in any
matter before the Committee, said member shall be excused and refrain from
participating in the review of any matters over which the conflict occurs while being
considered by the Committee.
3. Meetings shall be at the call of the, Zoning Administrator or on an as-needed basis.
4. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for coordinating and directing the
meetings of the Committee and issuing all written decisions.
B. PURPOSE. The primary purpose of the Development Review Committee is to review
development plans and proposals and provide technical review, guidance and direction to
the Zoning Administrator in making a decision to approve, conditionally approve, or
deny an application for site plan review or design review. The Development Review
Committee may also provide a prospective developer or builder with advice or direction
for the purpose of achieving site development that conforms with Goodyear's General Plan,
City Code and regulations, and the City’s goals for quality development in the community.
C. POWERS, DUTIES, JURISDICTION.
1. The Committee shall advise the Zoning Administrator whether to approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove any application for Site Plan review or design
review. The applicant shall be responsible for proving that the intent and purpose of
this Ordinance and other applicable provisions of the Goodyear City Code will be
satisfied.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-12 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
2. The Committee, upon reviewing an application for site plan review or design review,
may recommend to the Zoning Administrator reasonable conditions to carry out the
intent of this Ordinance.
3. The Committee shall also provide technical review and recommendations to the
Zoning Administrator for transmittal to the Planning and Zoning Commission and
City Council on zoning amendments, Use Permits, Special Use Permits, preliminary
and final subdivision plats, General Plan amendments, and all other land use and
development applications that require Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City
Council review and action.
Section 1-2-7 Board of Adjustment
A. CREATION, COMPOSITION, TERMS OF MEMBERS.
1. The Board of Adjustment is created to provide for relief from the terms of this
Ordinance, and to hear and decide appeals from decisions of the Zoning
Administrator.
2. A Board of Adjustment (“Board”) shall consist of five (5) members, each of whom
shall be a resident of the City of Goodyear. The members of the Board shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council for three (3) year terms,
unless sooner removed by the Council, provided nothing herein shall affect the
expiration of the current terms of said Board. Members may be appointed to shorter
terms at the discretion of the Mayor and City Council as necessary to provide for
staggered terms. Any member of the Board may be removed by the Mayor with the
consent of a majority vote of the City Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty,
malfeasance in office, or other good and sufficient cause. Vacancies shall be filled for
the unexpired term of the member whose position has become vacant. The members
of the Board shall serve without compensation.
3. If the legislative body is established as the Board, it shall exercise all of the functions
and duties of the Board in the same manner and to the same effect as provided in this
Section.
4. The Board shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from among its own members who
shall have power to administer oaths and to take evidence.
5. Meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member and records of its examinations and other official
actions shall be kept and filed in the office of the City Clerk as a public record.
6. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Ordinance for the conduct of its business and procedure.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-13 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
7. The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be necessary to grant a
variance, reverse any order or decision of the Zoning Administrator, or to decide in
favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to act.
8. When any Board member has direct pecuniary or proprietary interest in any matter
before the Board, said member shall be excused and refrain from participating in
discussion and voting on any matter in which such conflict exists.
9. The Zoning Administrator shall serve ex-officio as the Secretary of the Board, but
shall have no vote.
10. The Board may hold closed executive sessions or like sessions for the purposes and in
the power provided by Arizona law.
B. POWERS.
1. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Ordinance, the Board shall hear and
decide appeals in which it is alleged there is an error in an order, requirement or
decision made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of this Ordinance.
2. The Board, in connection with its consideration of an appeal, may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement or decision of the Zoning
Administrator being appealed and may impose conditions as the Board deems
necessary to fully carry out the provisions and intent of this Ordinance. The violation
of any conditions of approval or other condition imposed by the Board shall be a
violation of this Ordinance.
3. The Board shall hear and decide requests for variances as more fully provided in this
Ordinance.
4. The Board of Adjustment may not make any changes in the uses permitted in any
zoning classification or zoning district, or make any changes in the terms of the Zoning
Ordinance, provided the restriction in this paragraph shall not affect the authority of
the Board to grant variances as provided in this Ordinance.
5. The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or
modify a decision of the Zoning Administrator, or to grant a variance.
6. The decision of the Board shall be final on such matters for which it has jurisdiction
under this section.
C. APPEALS OF DECISION OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. Persons with standing
who are aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Administrator, except for decisions on
applications for a Site Plan or Design Review, shall be entitled to appeal such decision by
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-14 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
filing a written notice of appeal within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date the decision
was issued. The appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator and shall be
processed in accordance with the procedures generally described herein and more fully
described in the Administrative Process Manual.
1. The notice of appeal shall be filed on a form(s) provided by the Development Services
Department and shall include all of the information identified in such form(s) and the
additional information below. The appeal shall be signed by the aggrieved person and
all applicable fees shall be paid when the appeal form is submitted.
a. The appeal form(s) shall be accompanied by: a statement describing the
decision of the Zoning Administrator that is the subject of the appeal; citations
to any applicable laws, ordinances, codes, policies or regulations the appellant
alleges have been improperly interpreted, applied, or violated and appellant’s
interpretation of such laws, ordinances, codes, policies or regulations;
documentation and evidence supporting appellant’s interpretation and/or
position that the Zoning Administrator’s decision improperly applied or
violated applicable laws, ordinances, codes, policies or regulations; and any
other documentation the appellant would like the Board to consider.
2. The party filing the appeal bears the burden of proof.
a. The party challenging the interpretation(s) of the Zoning Administrator of the
Ordinance and/or provisions of the Goodyear Code of Ordinances bears the
burden of proving that the Zoning Administrator’s interpretation is clearly
contrary to legislative intent or that it is without rational basis.
b. The party challenging factual determinations by the Zoning Administrator
bears the burden of proving that no reasonable person could have made such
factual determination.
3. The filing of an appeal to the Board shall stay all proceedings in the matter appealed
from unless the Zoning Administrator certifies in writing to the Board that in the
Zoning Administrator’s opinion, based on the facts presented in the Zoning
Administrator’s certification, the stay would cause imminent peril to life or property.
Upon such certification, the proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining
order granted by the Board or court of record upon on application and notice to the
Zoning Administrator.
4. The Board shall hold a hearing, at which time all interested persons shall be given the
opportunity to be heard.
5. The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or
modify any decision of the Zoning Administrator.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-15 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
D. SPECIAL ACTION IN SUPERIOR COURT. A person aggrieved by a decision of the
Board may, at any time within thirty days after a decision has been rendered, file a
complaint for special action in the superior court of Maricopa County to review the
decision. Filing the complaint does not stay proceedings on the decision sought to be
reviewed, but the court may, on application, grant a stay and on final hearing may affirm
or reverse, in whole or in part, or modify the decision reviewed.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-16 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
ARTICLE 1-3 PROCEDURES
1-3-1 Amendments
1-3-2 Use Permits
1-3-3 Variances
1-3-4 Special Use Permits
1-3-5 Site Plan Requirement and Review Process
1-3-6 Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy
1-3-7 Zoning Permits
1-3-8 Citizen Review Process
1-3-9 Public Hearings
1-3-10 Applications and Fees
Section 1-3-1 Amendments
A. Regulations set forth in this Ordinance and boundaries of Zoning Districts established by
the City may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed when deemed
necessary to best serve the public interest, health, comfort, convenience, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the City.
B. APPROVAL AUTHORITY. Amendments of this Ordinance; and amendments
establishing or changing the zoning district applicable to property within the City through
the amendment of the boundaries of a Zoning District (“Rezoning Ordinances”) and any
amendments of any terms, conditions, stipulations or other type of requirements set forth
in an ordinance amending the boundaries of a Zoning District (collectively referred to as
“amendments” and individually referred to “amendment”) shall be decided by the City
Council following receipt of recommendations from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
C. APPLICATION PROCESS. Applications for amendments shall be processed and
reviewed in accordance with the procedures generally described below and more
particularly described in the Administrative Process Manual and in this Ordinance,
which procedures shall comply with the posting requirements, publication requirements
and Citizen Review Process as required by law.
1. Applications for an amendment shall be filed with the Development Services
Department on form(s) provided by the Development Services Department and shall
include all of the information identified in the application form(s) and in the
Administrative Process Manual and any other data that may be required by the
Zoning Administrator needed for the review of the application.
2. Applications for an amendment shall be signed by the property owner(s) or an
authorized agent of the property owner(s) and all applicable fees shall be paid when the
application is submitted.
D. REVIEW PROCESS FOR AMENDMENTS TO ZONING MAP.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-17 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
1. The Development Review Committee shall review the application submittal for an
amendment of the boundaries of a Zoning District. Following the completion of the
review by Development Review Committee and the Citizen Review Process specified
in Section 1-3-8, the Zoning Administrator shall forward the application submittal
with a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions or denial to the Planning
and Zoning Commission for review at a public hearing for which due and proper notice
has been provided in accordance with Section 1-3-9.
2. Requests for amendments shall be considered by the Planning and Zoning
Commission at a public hearing for the purpose of making a written recommendation
to City Council. Following a public hearing at which parties of interest and citizens
have been heard, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall issue a recommendation
to be forwarded to City Council recommending approval, approval with conditions or
denial of the amendment and the reasons for such recommendations. Such
recommendation may or may not be consistent with the Committee’s
recommendations.
3. The Development Review Committee’s and Planning and Zoning Commission’s
reviews and recommendations shall be guided by the following considerations:
a. consistency with the goals, objectives, policies and future land use map of City’s
General Plan; consideration of current market factors, demographics,
infrastructure, traffic, and environmental issues; and if conditions have changed
significantly since the Plan was adopted;
b. suitability of the subject property’s physical and natural features for the uses
permitted under the proposed zoning district;
c. compatibility of all potential uses allowed in the proposed zoning district with
surrounding uses and zoning in terms of such things as land suitability,
environmental impacts, density, nature of use, traffic impacts, aesthetics,
infrastructure, and potential impact on property values;
d. proposed zoning district’s consistency with other land uses within the immediate
area and whether uses allowed under proposed zoning district would be better
suited to the subject property than the uses allowed under current zoning;
e. demand for the types of uses permitted in the proposed zoning district in relation
to amount of land currently zoned and available to accommodate the demand;
f. demands for public services that will be generated by the uses permitted in the
proposed zoning district and requirements for meeting such demands in terms of
public infrastructure and facilities and other capital equipment, such as water
supplies, water treatment, storage, and distribution facilities, wastewater treatment,
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-18 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
recharge and distribution facilities, streets, bridges, schools and emergency services
facilities and equipment;
g. potential adverse fiscal impacts that will result from providing services to areas not
in proximity to where existing public services are provided;
h. general public’s concerns;
i. whether the amendment promotes orderly growth and development; and,
j. any other factors related to the impact of the amendment on the general health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the City and the general public.
4. Following the completion of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s review, the
Zoning Administrator shall forward the application submittal and the Planning and
Zoning Commission’s recommendation to the City Council for final review and
decision.
a. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application
for amendment. Such recommendation may or may not be consistent with the
recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The City Council may
decide the application for an amendment without a second public hearing if the
City Council intends to adopt the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning
Commission without change and there has been no written request for a public
hearing by the applicant, by a person appearing in opposition to the amendment at
the Planning and Zoning Commission or by any person who filed a written protest
to the amendment in accordance with state law. If a public hearing is requested as
provided herein, the City shall hold a public hearing before deciding the application
for amendment. If the City Council does not intend to adopt the recommendations
of the Planning and Zoning Commission without change, the City Council shall
continue the matter until a public hearing can be scheduled before the City Council
decides the matter.
b. Adoption of an amendment may be subject to such conditions as the City Council
deems applicable to enforce this Ordinance. If one condition is a schedule for
development of specific uses for which zoning is requested, and at expiration of
that period the property has not been developed according to said schedule, it may
be reverted to its former zoning classification by action of the City Council after
conducting a public hearing for which public notice has been posted and published
in accordance with the requirements of Arizona law.
c. If the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the area of the lands included in a
proposed ordinance or zoning map change, or those immediately adjacent in the
rear or any side extending one hundred fifty (150) feet therefrom, or those directly
opposite extending one hundred fifty (150) feet from the street frontage of
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-19 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
opposite lots, file a protest in writing against a proposed ordinance amendment,
such amendment shall not become effective except by favorable vote of
three-fourths (3/4) of the Council. If any member of Council is unable to vote
because of a conflict of interest, then the required number of votes shall be
three-fourths (3/4) of the remaining Council members (provided that required
number of votes shall not be less than a majority of the full Council).
5. If an application for amendment to amend the boundaries of a Zoning District or to
amend any terms, conditions, stipulations or other type of requirements set forth in and
ordinance amending the boundaries of a Zoning District is denied by the City Council,
or the application is withdrawn after the Planning and Zoning Commission hearing, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall not consider an application for the same
amendment within one (1) year from the date of the original hearing.
6. Commencing vertical construction in the rezoned area within two (2) years of City
Council approval of a rezone request. Failure to commence shall be cause for the City
Council to rescind the zoning, unless an extension of time is granted by the City
Council.
E. REVIEW PROCESS FOR TEXT AMENDMENT
1. The Development Review Committee shall review the application submittal for an
amendment to this Ordinance. Following the completion of the review by
Development Review Committee, the Zoning Administrator shall forward to the
Planning and Zoning Commission the application submittal along with a
recommendation to approve, to approve subject to modifications, or to deny the
application for the Planning and Zoning Commission’s review at a public hearing for
which due and proper notice has been provided in accordance with Section 1-3-9.
2. Requests for amendments to this Ordinance shall be considered by the Planning and
Zoning Commission for the purpose of making a written recommendation to City
Council. Following a public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall issue
a recommendation to be forwarded to City Council recommending approval of the
amendment as proposed, recommending approval of the amendment subject to
modifications or recommending denial of the amendment. Such recommendation may
or may not be consistent with the Committee’s recommendations.
3. The Development Review Committee’s and Planning and Zoning Commission’s
reviews and recommendations shall be guided by the following considerations:
a. Documentation indicating inconsistencies in terms of the Ordinance or problems
and/or conflicts in implementation of specific sections of the Ordinance that will
be resolved by the amendment;
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-20 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
b. Whether amendment is needed to respond to changes in the law, statutory or case
law;
c. Whether amendment is needed to address zoning and/or development issues or to
improve processes for addressing such issues;
d. Whether amendment will to promote implementation of goals and objections of
the City’s General Plan;
e. Any other factors related to the impact of the amendment on the general health,
safety or welfare of the citizens of the City and the general public.
4. Following the completion of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s review, the
Zoning Administrator shall forward the application submittal and the Planning and
Zoning Commission’s recommendation to the City Council for final review and
decision.
a. The City Council may decide the application for amendment without a second
public hearing unless a public hearing is requested in writing by the applicant, by
any person appearing in opposition to the amendment at the Planning and Zoning
Commission or by any person who filed a written protest to the amendment in
accordance with Arizona Law. If a public hearing is requested as provided herein,
the City shall hold a public hearing before deciding the application for amendment.
b. Following and consideration of the application submittal and public hearing, if held,
the City Council shall render a decision on the application for amendment and
either approve, approve with modifications, or deny the application for
amendment. Such action may or may not be consistent with the Planning &
Zoning Commission’s recommendation.
F. INITIATION OF AN AMENDMENT
1. An application for an amendment to amend the boundaries of a Zoning District or to
amend or enforce of any terms, conditions, stipulations or other type of requirements
set forth in an ordinance amending the boundaries of a Zoning District may be initiated
by any of the following:
a. All of the owners of the subject property by application executed by all of the
owners of the subject property and their respective spouses if any; or, an agent of
all of the property owners authorized to sign on behalf of all of the property owners
and their respective spouses, when the authority is in writing and filed with the
application;
b. The Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council by its own motion at a
public meeting; or,
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-21 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
c. Zoning Administrator for the purpose of rezoning property to bring such land into
conformance with the General Plan; rezoning of City-owned property; or reversion
of the zoning on any property which fails to comply with a condition of approval
or schedule of development.
2. An application for an amendment to the text of this Ordinance may be initiated by
any of the following:
a. The Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council by its own motion at public
meeting; or,
b. The Zoning Administrator to promote implementation of goals and objections of
the City’s General Plan; to respond to changes in the law, statutory or case law; to
address zoning and/or development issues or processes; to address inconsistencies
in terms of the Ordinance or problems and/or conflicts in implementation of
specific sections of the Ordinance; or to implement new standards or practices that
would benefit the community.
Section 1-3-2 Use Permits
A. Use Permits shall be obtained for those uses as specifically identified in this Ordinance
as being allowed in the zoning district in which the subject property is located subject to
a Use Permit. Applications for Use Permits are decided by City Council following receipt
of recommendations from the Planning and Zoning Commission. Use Permits required
hereunder may be approved or approved with conditions only upon a finding by City
Council that the proposed development and/or use reflected in the application submittal for
the Use Permit:
1. will not be materially detrimental to persons residing or working in the vicinity adjacent
to the property, to the neighborhood, or to the public welfare; and,
2. that the proposed use is reasonably compatible with uses permitted in the surrounding
area.
The applicant bears the burden of demonstrating to the City Council’s satisfaction that the
forgoing requirements have been met. In making this finding the City Council shall
evaluate whether the application submittal addresses the concerns and potential problems
associated with the use as identified in this Ordinance or whether the concerns and
potential problems can be mitigated through the imposition of additional conditions, such
as: imposing conditions to address potential impacts on surrounding properties that will
result from noise, lighting, odors and/or placement of trash receptacles; imposing
conditions that will insure adequate parking, ingress and egress so as not to increase traffic
congestion; limiting the hours of operation; imposing requirements for enhanced
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-22 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
landscaping, screening, and buffering measures that will preserve reasonable use and
enjoyment of adjacent properties.
B. Applications for a Use Permit shall be processed and reviewed in accordance with the
procedures generally described below and more particularly described in the
Administrative Process Manual and in this Ordinance.
1. Applications for a Use Permit shall be filed with the Development Services
Department on form(s) provided by the Development Services Department and all
applicable fees shall be paid when the application is submitted.
a. The application shall include all of the information identified in the application
form(s), the information identified in the Administrative Process Manual, the
information set forth herein and specified elsewhere in this Ordinance; and any
other data required by the Zoning Administrator that is needed for the review of
the Use Permit application.
b. A conceptual Site Plan shall be provided and shall provide sufficient detail to
demonstrate that the concerns and potential problems associated with the use as
identified in this Ordinance either do not exist at this site and/or can be adequately
addressed through mitigation efforts.
c. The application shall be signed by the property owner(s) or an authorized agent of
the property owner(s).
2. The Zoning Administrator shall process such application and shall adhere to the
posting and publication requirements specified in Section 1-3-9 and as required by
Arizona law and shall comply with the Citizen Review Process provided in Section 1-
3-8 of this Ordinance prior to the public hearing before the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
a. The Development Review Committee shall review the application submittal.
Following the completion of the Committee’s review, the Zoning Administrator
shall forward the application submittal with a recommendation for approval,
approval with conditions or denial to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
review.
3. Requests for a Use Permit shall be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission
for the purpose of making a written recommendation to the City Council. Following a
public hearing at which interested parties and citizens have been heard, the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall issue a recommendation to be forwarded to the City
Council, recommending approval, approval with conditions or denial of the Use Permit
application and the reasons for such recommendations. Such recommendation may or
may not be consistent with the recommendations of the Development Review
Committee.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-23 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
4. Following the completion of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s review, the
Zoning Administrator shall forward the application submittal and the Planning and
Zoning Commission’s recommendation to the City Council for final review and
decision.
a. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions or deny the application for
Use Permit. Such recommendation may or may not be consistent with the
recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
b. The City Council may decide the application for Use Permit without holding a
second public hearing if City Council intends to adopt the recommendations of the
Planning and Zoning Commission without change and there has been no written
request for a public hearing by the applicant, by any person appearing in opposition
to the Use Permit application at the Planning and Zoning Commission, or by any
person who filed a written protest to the Use Permit application in accordance with
state law. If a public hearing is requested as provided herein, the City shall hold a
public hearing before deciding the Use Permit application. If the City Council
does not intend to adopt the Planning and Zoning Commission’s recommendation
without change, the City Council shall continue the matter until a public hearing
can be scheduled before City Council decides the matter. Notice of the date, time
and place of the hearing shall be given in the time and manner provided for the
giving of notice of the hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
c. A Use Permit may be granted for a designated period of time with a stated date of
expiration or it may be granted for an indefinite period of time.
C. The use authorized by the Use Permit shall be established within two (2) years of the date
of the Use Permit was approved by the City Council, unless an extension is obtained as
provided herein (“Establishment Period”). A Use Permit shall be considered established
on the site upon commencement of the use, or commencement of construction pursuant to
a valid building permit. If the use authorized by the Use Permit is not established within
Establishment Period and extension for the establishment of the use is not obtained prior
to the expiration of the Establishment Period, the Use Permit approval shall become null
and void, in accordance with the following provisions:
1. Upon expiration of the Establishment Period (initial two (2) year period plus and any
subsequently granted extension), the Zoning Administrator shall send a notice by
certified mail to the property owner and holder of the Use Permit advising that the Use
Permit has expired. If after thirty (30) days the property owner or holder of the permit
does not request an extension and provide evidence that the Use Permit is still being
pursued, the Zoning Administrator shall send a second notice by certified mail to the
property owner or holder of the Use Permit declaring the Use Permit null and void.
If an extension has been requested, the Zoning Administrator shall wait to send a final
notice of expiration until the application for an extension has been decided. If the
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-24 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
application for an extension is denied, the Zoning Administrator shall send a second
notice by certified mail to the property owner holder of the Use Permit declaring the
Use Permit null and void.
2. The Zoning Administrator may authorize a one (1) year extension upon a finding that
the establishment of the Use Permit is actively being pursued; that special
circumstances prevented the property owner or holder of the permit from obtaining a
building permit and/or commencing construction; and that no significant changes have
occurred either in City ordinances or the immediate area that might have altered the
previous Use Permit approval.
Section 1-3-3 Variances
A. Applications for a variance from the terms of this Ordinance will be processed and
reviewed in accordance with the procedures generally described herein and more
particularly described in the Administrative Process Manual and in this Ordinance,
which procedures shall comply with the posting requirements, publication requirements as
required by law. Applications for a variance shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator
upon form(s) provided by the Development Services Department. Applications for a
variance shall be signed by the property owner(s) or an authorized agent of the property
owner(s) and all applicable fees shall be paid when the application is submitted.
Applications for a Variance shall include all of the information and supporting
documentation identified in the application, in this Ordinance and in the Administrative
Process Manual. The application shall be accompanied by:
1. Plans and description sufficient to indicate the nature of the proposed development and
specific terms of this Ordinance from relief is sought; and,
2. Sufficient documentation and other evidence that will allow the Board to find all of the
requirements necessary for the granting a Variance, as set forth below, have been met;
and,
3. Evidence satisfactory to the Board of the applicant’s ability and intention to proceed with
actual construction within six (6) months of the issuance of a variance; and,
4. Any other data that may be required by the Zoning Administrator necessary for review
of the application.
B. Requirements. A Variance shall not make any changes in the Use and/or densities
permitted in any zoning district. A variance from terms of this Ordinance shall not be
granted unless the Board finds, upon sufficient evidence, all of the following:
1. existence of special circumstances or conditions applicable to the property, including its
size, shape, topography, location or surroundings; and,
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-25 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
2. that such special circumstances were not created by the property owner or former owner of
the property or any agent thereof; and,
3. the strict application of this Ordinance will deprive such property of privileges enjoyed
by other property of the same classification in the same zoning district; and,
4. the variance will not be materially detrimental to persons residing or working in the
vicinity, to adjacent property, to the neighborhood or to the public welfare in general; and,
5. the variance shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the
limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is located.
C. Approval. The Board shall hold a public hearing for which due and proper notice has been
provided in accordance with Section 1-3-9 and all interested persons shall be given the
opportunity to be heard. The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse any decision of an Administrative Official, or to pass any variations
from this Ordinance. Any variance granted may be subject to such conditions deemed
applicable by the Board. Variances shall be void if the subject property does not conform
to all conditions, requirements, and standards prescribed by the Board as a condition for
approval of the variance.
D. Time Limitations. A variance shall expire twelve (12) months from the date the variance
was granted unless either a building permit for the development for which the variance
was granted has been obtained and construction commenced or an extension has been
obtained prior to the expiration date. The Board may grant an single twelve (12) month
extension if the applicant demonstrates that circumstances beyond the owner’s control
prevented the owner from obtaining a building permit and/or commencing construction
within twelve (12) months of the date the variance was granted and that there have been
no changes in the City codes or ordinances (including changes in this Ordinance and the
Engineering Standards) that would have affected any of the Board’s findings when it
granted the variance as set forth above.
Section 1-3-4 Special Use Permits
A. Special Use Permits shall be obtained for those specific uses identified in Sections 4-1-2
and 4-1-3 of this Ordinance. Applications for a Special Use Permit shall be processed in
the same manner as an application to amend the boundaries of a zoning district as set forth
in Section 1-3-1 of this Ordinance and as supplemented herein. Applications for Special
Use Permits are decided by the City Council following receipt of recommendations from
the Planning and Zoning Commission. Special Use Permits may be approved or approved
with conditions only upon a finding that the proposed development and/or use reflected in
the application submittal for the Special Use Permit:
1. Will be desirable or necessary to the public convenience or welfare; and,
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-26 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
2. Will be harmonious and compatible with other uses adjacent to and in the vicinity of
the selected site or sites;
3. Is in conformance with the adopted General Plan and any adopted Area Plans; and,
4. Will not be detrimental to surrounding properties or persons in the area due to:
a. Impact on the circulation system of the adjacent neighborhood;
b. Excessive noise or light generated from within the site;
c. Excessive scale or height in relationship to surrounding properties;
d. Hours of operation;
e. Inadequate parcel size to provide adequate buffers or mitigation measures to
surrounding properties;
f. Inconsistency with the development character or architecture of the adjacent
properties.
The applicant bears the burden of demonstrating to the City Council’s satisfaction that the
forgoing requirements have been met.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the City Council require, such
conditions and restrictions, if necessary, upon the height and bulk and area of occupancy
of any site approved for a Special Use Permit as may be reasonable under the particular
circumstances to ensure compliance with this Ordinance.
B. Applications for a Special Use Permit shall be processed and reviewed in accordance with
the procedures set forth in Section 1-3-1 of this Ordinance for processing an application
to amend the boundaries of a Zoning District as supplemented herein.
1. Applications for a Special Use Permit shall be filed the Development Services
Department on form(s) provided by the Development Services Department and all
applicable fees shall be paid when the application is submitted.
a. The application shall include all of the information identified in the application
form(s), the information identified in the Administrative Process Manual; the
information set forth herein and specified elsewhere in this Ordinance including
the information identified in Section 4-1-1 of this Ordinance; and any other data
that may be required by the Zoning Administrator that is needed for the review
of the Special Use Permit application.
b. The application shall be signed by property owner(s) or an authorized agent of the
property owner(s).
2. The Zoning Administrator shall process such application and adhere to the posting
and publication requirements specified in Section 1-3-9 and as required by Arizona law
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-27 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
and shall comply with the Citizen Review Process provided in Section 1-3-8 of this
Ordinance prior to the public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission.
a. The Development Review Committee shall review the application submittal.
Following the completion of the Committee’s review, the Zoning Administrator
shall forward the application submittal with a recommendation for approval,
approval with conditions or denial to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
review.
3. Requests for a Special Use Permit shall be considered by the Planning and Zoning
Commission for the purpose of making a written recommendation to City Council.
Following a public hearing at which interested parties and citizens have been heard, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall issue a recommendation to be forwarded to the
City Council, recommending approval, approval with conditions or denial of the
Special Use Permit application and the reasons for such recommendations. Such
recommendation may or may not be consistent with the recommendations of the
Development Review Committee.
4. Following the completion of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s review, the
Zoning Administrator shall forward the application submittal and the Planning and
Zoning Commission’s recommendation to the City Council for final review and
decision.
a. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions or deny the application for
Special Use Permit. Such recommendation may or may not be consistent with the
recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
b. The City Council may decide the application for Special Use Permit without
holding a second public hearing if the City Council intends to adopt the
recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission without change and
there has been no written request for a public hearing by the applicant, by any
person appearing in opposition to the Special Use Permit application at the Planning
and Zoning Commission, or by any person who filed a written protest to the Special
Use Permit application in accordance with state law. If a public hearing is requested
as provided herein, the City shall hold a public hearing before deciding the Special
Use Permit application. If the City Council does not intend to adopt the Planning
and Zoning Commission’s recommendation without change, the City Council shall
continue the matter until a public hearing can be scheduled before City Council
decides the matter. Notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be given
in the time and manner provided for the giving of notice of the hearing by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
c. A Special Use Permit may be granted for a designated period of time with a stated
date of expiration or it may be granted for an indefinite period of time.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-28 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
C. The use authorized by the Special Use Permit shall be established within two (2) years of
the date the Special Use Permit was approved by the City Council, unless an extension is
obtained as provided herein (“Establishment Period”). A Special Use Permit shall be
considered established on the site upon commencement of the use, or commencement of
construction pursuant to a valid building permit. If the use authorized by the Special Use
Permit is not established within Establishment Period and an extension for the
establishment of the use is not obtained prior to the expiration of the Establishment Period,
the Special Use Permit approval shall become null and void, in accordance with the
following provisions:
1. Upon expiration of the Establishment Period (initial two (2) year period plus and any
subsequently granted extension), the Zoning Administrator shall send a notice by
certified mail to the property owner and holder of the Special Use Permit advising that
the Special Use Permit has expired. If after thirty (30) days the property owner or
holder of the permit does not request an extension and provide evidence that the Special
Use Permit is still being pursued, the Zoning Administrator shall send a second notice
by certified mail to the property owner or holder of the Special Use Permit declaring
the Special Use Permit null and void. If an extension has been requested, the Zoning
Administrator shall wait to send a final notice of expiration until the application for
an extension has been decided. If the application for an extension is denied, the Zoning
Administrator shall send a second notice by certified mail to the property owner
holder of the Special Use Permit declaring the Special Use Permit null and void.
2. The City Council may authorize a one (1) year extension upon a finding that the
establishment of the Special Use Permit is actively being pursued; that special
circumstances prevented the property owner or holder of the permit from obtaining a
building permit and/or commencing construction; and that no significant changes have
occurred either in City ordinances or the immediate area that would have altered the
previous Special Use Permit approval.
D. If an application for a Special Use Permit is denied by the City Council, or the application
is withdrawn after the Planning and Zoning Commission hearing, the Commission shall
not consider an application for the same Special Use within one (1) year from the date of
the original hearing.
Section 1-3-5 Site Plan Requirement and Review Process
A. APPLICABILITY. Site Plan approval is required prior to development activities on
property located in zoning districts for which site plan review is required as specified in
this Ordinance. This includes, by way of example, but not limitation: all uses within
commercial and industrial zoning districts; all uses in certain residential districts such as
multi-family residential district; manufactured home subdivision district; mobile
home/recreational vehicle district; and uses in residential districts that require a Use
Permit. Site Plan review for single-family, two-family uses and model home complexes
shall be done concurrently with an application for a building permit for such uses.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-29 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
B. APPROVAL AUTHORITY. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Ordinance
or as otherwise required by City Council as a stipulation in a zoning amendment, the
Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny
any application seeking approval of Site Plan or an amended Site Plan. Violation of any
conditions imposed by the Zoning Administrator shall be considered a violation of this
Ordinance, and shall render any permit null and void.
C. PURPOSE. The Site Plan review process promotes the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the city and the general public by promoting safe, functional, attractive,
harmonious, and compatible development within the city and insuring that structures,
utilities, streets, parking, circulation systems, yards, and open spaces are developed in
accordance with the goals and objectives of the City’s General Plan and the requirements
of this Ordinance, City of Goodyear Code of Ordinances, the Engineering Standards,
and any other applicable federal, state, and/or local laws, ordinances, codes, rules,
regulations, policies, and guidelines.
D. CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL. Where Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City
Council approval of a Site Plan is required, the recommendation of the Committee on the
Site Plan shall be transmitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council
by the Zoning Administrator. The Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council
may approve, conditionally approve or deny the Site Plan.
E. APPLICATION PROCESS. Site Plan applications will be processed and reviewed in
accordance with the procedures generally described herein and more particularly described
in the Administrative Process Manual and Engineering Standards.
1. Applications for a Site Plan shall be filed with the Development Services Department
on form(s) provided by the Development Services Department and shall include all of
the information identified in the: application form(s), in the section of the
Administrative Process Manual related to Site Plans; in the Engineering Standards,
and any other data that may be required by the Zoning Administrator which is needed
to insure compliance with applicable requirements.
2. Site Plan applications shall be signed by the property owner(s) or an authorized agent
of the property owner(s) and all applicable fees shall be paid when the application is
submitted.
F. REQUIREMENTS. A Site Plan and the development reflected therein shall be consistent
with the goals and objectives of the City’s General Plan; shall comply with the specific
requirements for the zoning district in which it is located; shall comply with all Zoning
Conditions attached to the property; and shall comply with the requirements set forth in:
1. this Ordinance;
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-30 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
2. the Subdivision Regulations;
3. the Engineering Standards;
4. the Flood Prevention Regulations;
5. any applicable Development Agreement;
6. any applicable Development Master Plan; and,
7. all other applicable federal, state, and/or local laws, ordinances, codes, rules,
regulations, policies and/or guidelines.
G. REVIEW. The Development Review Committee shall review the Site Plan for
compliance with all applicable requirements. The review procedure is intended to be
applied in a flexible manner to allow for creative designs, varying development concepts,
locations and innovative response to applicable requirements. In the review, the
Committee shall be guided by the following design review criteria and principles of
development:
1. The proposed development complies with all provisions of this Ordinance and all
other ordinances, master plans, general plans, goals, objectives and standards of the
City of Goodyear.
2. The proposed development does not have any detrimental effect upon the general
health, welfare, safety, and convenience of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood, and shall not be detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood.
3. The proposed development promotes a desirable relationship of structures to one
another, to open spaces, and to topography both on the site and in the surrounding
neighborhood.
4. The height, location, materials, color, texture, area, setbacks, and mass of any
structures, buildings, walls, signs, lighting, and landscaping is appropriate to the
development, the neighborhood, and the community.
5. Ingress, egress, internal and external traffic circulation, off-street parking facilities,
loading and service areas and pedestrian ways, are so designed as to promote safety
and convenience and to be aesthetically pleasing.
6. The architectural character of the proposed structures is in harmony with, and
compatible to, structures in the neighboring environment and the architectural
character desired for the City; avoiding excessive variety or monotonous repetition.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-31 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
7. Mechanical equipment, appurtenances and utility lines are concealed from view or are
otherwise integral to the building and site design.
8. Street lights shall be installed along all perimeter streets and streets within the
development in accord with City standards.
H. APPROVED SITE PLAN. Following the approval of the Site Plan, the applicant shall
prepare and submit a Final Site Plan to the Zoning Administrator that conforms to the
Site Plan approved and any conditions and/or terms of approval. Upon the Zoning
Administrator’s determination that the Final Site Plan conforms to the approved Site
Plan and the conditions and/or terms of approval, the Zoning Administrator shall certify
the Final Site Plan and the certified Site Plan shall be included in the application for
building permits for the site. Development activities shall substantially conform with the
approved Site Plan and any conditions or restrictions attached thereto, and any substantial
deviation from the approved Site Plan and any conditions or restrictions attached thereto
is a violation of this Ordinance.
I. PERIOD OF APPROVAL. An approved Site Plan shall expire (1) year from the date of
approval unless either a building permit for the development reflected in the Site Plan has
been obtained and construction commenced or an extension has been obtained prior to the
expiration date. A single one (1) year extension may be granted if the applicant
demonstrates that circumstances beyond the owner’s control prevented the owner from
obtaining a building permit and/or commencing construction within one (1) year of the
date the Site Plan was approved and that no changes in City codes or ordinances (including
changes in this Ordinance and the Engineering Standards) that would have significantly
altered the requirements for the prior Site Plan approval. Requests for extensions
hereunder shall be approved by the authority that approved the Site Plan for which the
extension is being sought. Upon expiration of the Site Plan or any extension thereto, the
property owner will be required to file a new application for Site Plan approval before
undertaking any development activities on the site.
J. APPEAL PROCEDURE.
1. An applicant may appeal the decision of the Zoning Administrator on any Site Plan
application to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The appeal, along with any
required processing fee, shall be filed in writing to the Development Services
Department Director within fifteen (15) working days of the date of the decision is
issued in writing. The appeal shall give reasons for the appeal and the relief requested.
2. The Appeal will be processed pursuant to the procedures set forth in the City of
Goodyear Administrative Process Manual adopted by the City Council.
3. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve, approve with modifications,
conditionally approve, or deny the appeal. The decision of the Planning and Zoning
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-32 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Commission shall be in writing and shall be binding, unless such decision is appealed
to the City Council.
4. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission to the
City Council. The appeal, along with any required processing fee, shall be filed in
writing with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) working days from the date of the
decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The appeal shall provide reasons
for the appeal and the relief requested.
5. The Appeal will be processed pursuant to the procedures set forth in the City of
Goodyear Administrative Process Manual adopted by the City Council.
6. The City Council may approve, approve with modifications, conditionally approve, or
deny the appeal. The decision of the City Council shall be in writing and shall be final.
7. Persons with standing who are aggrieved by a decision of the City Council hereunder
may, within thirty (30) days after the Council rendered its decision, file a complaint for
special action in the superior court of Maricopa County to review the Council’s
decision.
Section 1-3-6 Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy
Neither building permits nor certificates of occupancy may be issued until the use of building(s)
and land conform with this Ordinance and all other applicable codes and ordinances, including
conditions of approval for any Ordinance amending the zoning district of the subject property and
conditions of approval for any permit or authorization approved pursuant to the requirements of
this Ordinance or the Subdivision Regulations. No building or construction permits shall be
issued without having first obtained approval of a site plan review application and design review
application in conformance with this Ordinance.
Section 1-3-7 Zoning Permits
A. Zoning Permits may be granted only when expressly permitted by this Ordinance.
Approval of a Zoning Permit must be based on a finding that the Zoning Permit:
1. will not be materially detrimental to persons residing or working on the subject property
or within the vicinity of the property, to the neighborhood, or to the public welfare;
and,
2. that the proposed use is reasonably compatible with uses permitted in the surrounding
area.
B. Applications for Zoning Permits shall be processed and reviewed in the accordance with
the procedures generally described below and more particularly described in the
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-33 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Administrative Process Manual, in this Ordinance and in the Engineering Standards
if applicable.
C. Applications shall be filed with the Development Services Department on form(s) provided
by the Development Services Department and all applicable fees shall be paid when the
application is submitted.
1. The shall include all of the information identified in the application form(s); the
information identified in the Administrative Process Manual; the information
identified in Engineering Standards if applicable; and any other relevant data required
by the Zoning Administrator that is needed for the review of the Zoning Permit
Application. The application shall be signed by the property owner(s) or an authorized
agent of the property owner(s).
2. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application submittal, and may impose
specific conditions or requirements as a condition of approval related to the property
or operation of the requested Zoning Permit use.
Section 1-3-8 Citizen Review Process
A. Prior to any public hearing, as required under Article 1 of this Zoning Ordinance, on any
application for any zoning ordinance that changes any property from one zoning district
to another, including those for Preliminary PAD district and Final PAD district approval;
for a Use Permit; and for a Special Use Permit application that imposes any regulation not
previously imposed, or that removes or modifies any such regulation previously imposed,
the Zoning Administrator shall require the applicant to conduct a neighborhood meeting
or an acceptable alternative prior to a public hearing to consider the proposal. A written
notice of the application shall be sent by first class mail to the owners of all properties
within five hundred (500) feet of the property that is subject to a rezoning, Use Permit or
Special Use Permit application and to such other persons as the Zoning Administrator
reasonably determines to be potentially affected citizens. In determining the number of
potentially affected citizens, the Zoning Administrator shall review the density and
intensity of residential development in the general vicinity, the existing street system, and
other factors that may be related to the impact of the proposed zoning amendment, Use
Permit, or Special Use Permit on the character of the neighborhood.
B. The written notice shall also include a general explanation of the substance of the proposed
zoning amendment, Use Permit or Special Use Permit application and shall state the date,
time and place scheduled for a neighborhood meeting, at which any adjacent landowner(s)
or those other potentially affected citizens, will be provided a reasonable opportunity to
express any issues or concerns that the landowner or citizen may have with the proposed
zoning amendment, Use Permit or Special Use Permit application before any public
hearing required by this Ordinance is held.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-34 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
C. The written notice shall be given at least fifteen (15) days before the neighborhood meeting
in one or more of the following manners:
1. The notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation published or
circulated in the City of Goodyear; or,
2. The notice shall be posted upon the sign required in Article 1, unless waived by the
Zoning Administrator; or,
3. The notice shall be mailed in accordance with the procedures required elsewhere in
Article 1.
D. The Zoning Administrator, upon consultation with the applicant, shall establish a time,
date and place for the neighborhood meeting that provides a reasonable opportunity for the
applicant, adjacent landowners and those other potentially affected citizens to discuss and
express their respective views concerning the application and any issues or concerns that
they may have with the proposed zoning amendment, Use Permit or Special Use Permit
application. The Zoning Administrator shall attend the meeting, but is not required to
conduct the meeting. The Zoning Administrator shall report the results of the
neighborhood meeting to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Mayor and City
Council when such body considers taking action on the application.
E. At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, an alternative citizen review process may
be used that does not involve a neighborhood meeting. The alternative process shall consist,
at a minimum, of the following:
1. The written notice described in Section 1-3-8, except that the notice shall only indicate
the name, address and phone number of the member of the planning staff whom
adjacent landowners within five hundred (500) feet, or other potentially affected
citizen, may contact to express any issues or concerns that the landowner or citizen may
have with the proposed zoning amendment, Use Permit or Special Use Permit
applications.
2. A staff report summarizing any issues or concerns expressed by adjacent landowners
shall be presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Mayor and Council
when such body considers taking action on the application.
Section 1-3-9 Public Hearings
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS. Applications for amendments, including those for
Preliminary PAD district and Final PAD district approval, Special Use Permits, and Use
Permits shall require a public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission. Prior
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-35 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
to the public hearing before the Commission, the application shall adhere to the citizen
review process set forth in this Ordinance.
B. NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING. Notification of a public hearing shall comply with State
Statutes governing public hearings and this Ordinance:
1. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled public hearing, a notice of the public
hearing shall be posted on the subject property; published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City; and provided by first class mail to all property owners within
five hundred (500) feet of the subject properties.
2. Notice shall include, where applicable, the location and general explanation of the
proposed action, a general description of the affected area, and the date, time and
location of the scheduled public hearing. If the matter to be considered applies to
territory in a high noise or accident potential zone as defined in ARS Section 28-8461,
the notice shall also include a general statement that the matter applies to property
located in the high noise or accident potential zone.
3. When the proposed amendment involves land that abuts other municipalities or
unincorporated areas of Maricopa County or a combination thereof, notice of the public
hearing shall be sent to the planning agency of the adjacent governmental unit.
4. When the proposed amendment involves land that is located within the territory in the
vicinity of a military airport or ancillary military facility as defined in ARS Section 28-
8461, notice of the public hearing shall be sent to the military airport.
5. Failure of any person or entity to receive notice shall not constitute grounds for any
court to invalidate the action for which the notice was given.
6. Amendments to the text of this Ordinance, which are of a general nature and are not
directed at a specific real property, shall require a notice to be published once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
scheduled public hearing.
Section 1-3-10 Applications and Fees
A. APPLICATIONS.
1. All Land Use and Development Applications Required Under the Zoning Ordinance
shall be filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator on forms provided by the
Development Services Department. Applications shall include: the information
identified on the application form(s); the information identified in the Administrative
Process Manual and Engineering Standards, if applicable; the information set forth
herein and specified elsewhere in this Ordinance; and any other data required by the
Zoning Administrator that is needed for the review of the application.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-36 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
2. Applications will be processed and reviewed by the Zoning Administrator in a
manner that is consistent with the procedures generally described in this Ordinance
and as more particularly described in the Administrative Process Manual and
Engineering Standards, if applicable.
3. Except as otherwise expressly provided in the Administrative Process Manual, all
applications referred to herein shall be executed by all of the owners of the subject
property and their respective spouses, if any, or an agent of all of the property owners
authorized to sign on behalf of all of the property owners and their respective spouses
when such authorization is in writing and filed with the application. An application
must be made by the property owner or authorized agent, unless otherwise specified in
this Ordinance.
4. All applications shall be actively pursued to a decision. If a complete and full submittal
of all documents and information requested in the staff written review comments has
not occurred within 180 calendar days from the date on staff’s written review
comments, the application will be deemed inactive and shall expire. The applicant may
file a request for an extension. Any and all requests for an extension shall be made in
writing and received prior to the expiration date. The Zoning Administrator may
authorize, in writing, No more than one extension of one hundred and eighty days for
good cause if there is a reasonable belief that the application will be actively pursued
during the extension period. This provision applies to all land use and development
applications required under the Zoning Ordinance.
B. FEES.
1. Fees for all matters pertinent to the administration of this Ordinance will be set from
time to time by Resolution of the City Council.
2. All application fees shall be paid when the application is submitted. Application fees
shall not be refundable.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-37 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Article 1-4 DESIGN GUIDELINES MANUAL AND DESIGN REVIEW PROCESS
1-4-1 Establishment and Purpose of Design Guidelines Manual
1-4-2 Administration of Manual
1-4-3 (Reserved)
1-4-4 Appeal Process
Section 1-4-1 Establishment and Purpose of Design Guidelines Manual
The Mayor and City Council hereby authorize the establishment of a Design Guidelines Manual
that is intended to provide design criteria for site layout, building elevations, landscape plans, and
parking arrangement in order to enhance the overall quality of design of Goodyear’s built
environment. Basic concepts that will aid in assessing a design proposal are outlined within the
Guidelines. The Guidelines are not intended to restrict creativity, variety, innovation or
imagination, but rather to assist the designer in achieving a quality design which will enhance the
proposed development and the City, and be compatible with adjacent land uses. Development
applications will be reviewed by the Development Review Committee and the Development
Services Department in accordance with the City Council adopted Design Guidelines Manual, and
all other applicable requirements of this Ordinance, as amended from time to time.
Section 1-4-2 Administration of Manual
A. DESIGN GUIDELINES
1. Design review shall consider the design of a project in relation to its urban context, and
shall focus on the application of the City of Goodyear Design Guidelines Manual
referred to in this Ordinance and formally adopted by the City Council, as amended
from time to time.
2. The Development Review Committee shall use the Design Guidelines Manual adopted
by the City Council as its official policy in the design review process.
B. CONSISTENCY
All applications for Design Review approval required under these Guidelines and the
review of such applications shall be consistent with the requirements of this Ordinance
and the Goodyear City Code, as amended from time to time (the “Guidelines”).
C. APPLICABLITY
The requirements of the Guidelines apply to the development identified below, and Design
Review approval is required prior to undertaking such development.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-38 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
1. NEW DEVELOPMENT. Except as otherwise expressly provided by ordinance(s)
adopted by City Council, all new residential and non-residential development shall
comply with the standards and requirements as set forth in the Guidelines and this
Ordinance.
2. ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS AND RESTORATION OF NON-RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS. Building additions, alterations and/or restorations that meet one of the
following criteria listed below shall comply with the standards and requirements set
forth in the Guidelines and this Ordinance.
a. Additions or alterations to existing non-residential buildings and/or to individual
suites/stores that will increase gross floor area of the building and/or individual
suite/store by more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area of the
building and/or individual suite/store.
b. Any alterations to the exterior façade of an existing non-residential building and/or
to an individual suite/store, including changes in the color or materials of the
façade. Changes to a sign cabinet or panel shall not constitute alterations under
these provisions.
c. Any non-residential building that is destroyed to the extent of more than fifty (50)
percent of the assessed value.
3. ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS AND RESTORATIONS OF RESIDENTIAL AND
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES. Building additions, alterations, and/or restorations
that meet one of the following criteria listed below shall comply with the standards and
requirements set forth in the Guidelines and this Ordinance.
a. Additions of detached accessory buildings in excess of one hundred twenty (120)
square feet shall comply with the standards and requirements set forth in the
Guidelines and this Ordinance and shall be designed to be compatible with the
existing residential dwelling in terms of building materials, including roof
materials, and colors.
b. Additions or alterations to existing residential buildings that will increase the gross
floor area of the building by more than one hundred (100) square feet.
c. Any residential building that is destroyed to the extent of more than fifty (50)
percent of the assessed value.
4. NON-CONFORMING USES. All non-conforming uses and buildings shall be
subject to Article 4-3 of this Ordinance. If under those provisions a nonconforming
building or use is altered or restored, said building or use shall be subject to review
and approval by the Zoning Administrator for conformance with all applicable
Design Guidelines.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-39 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
5. OTHER REGULATIONS. Compliance with additional codes and/or regulations as
adopted by the Goodyear City Council shall be adhered to, and where differences occur,
the more restrictive requirement shall prevail. Where any inconsistency exists between
additional codes and/or regulations, the Zoning Administrator shall make a
determination on their applicability.
6. EXISTING AND APPROVED DESIGN GUIDELINES. In cases where separate
Design Guidelines have been approved by the City Council in conjunction with a
Planned Area Development or other zoning application, those guidelines shall govern
except to the extent that the specific P.A.D. or zoning guidelines have not addressed
issues within the Council adopted Design Guidelines Manual.
D. APPLICATION REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS
1. Applications for Design Review approval shall be processed and reviewed in
accordance with the procedures generally described herein and more fully described in
the Administrative Process Manual and in the Guidelines.
a. Prior to submitting an application for Design Review Approval, the applicant shall
attend a pre-application conference with a representative of the Development
Services Department.
b. Applications for Design Review approval shall be filed with the Development
Services Department on form(s) provided by the Development Services
Department and shall include all of the information identified in the application
form(s), in the Administrative Process Manual, in the Guidelines, and any other
data that may be required by the Zoning Administrator that is needed for review
of the application.
c. Applications shall be signed by the property owner(s) or an authorized agent of the
property owner(s) and all applicable fees shall be paid when applications are
submitted.
2. The Development Review Committee shall review the application submittal for
compliance with applicable Guidelines and this Ordinance and, following the
completion of the Committee’s review, the Zoning Administrator shall approve,
approve with conditions or deny the Design Review application. In the event of a
denial, no development activities shall be authorized until a new application for Design
Review approval has been submitted and approved.
3. The approval date of the Design Review approval shall be the date on which the
application was approved by the Zoning Administrator. Design Review approvals
are tied to other development approvals, which will be identified in the notification of
Design Review approval; and the Design Review approval expires if such related
development approval expires.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-40 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
E. COMPLIANCE
1. Development shall conform to the development and design reflected in the Design
Review application submittal as approved by the Zoning Administrator as a condition
for receiving a Certificate of Occupancy. To insure such conformance, City staff may
conduct site inspections during the construction and upon completion of the
construction.
a. If in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator development within a subdivision
or other residential development project does not conform to the development and
design reflected in the Design Review Application submittal as approved by the
Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall be entitled to have a hold
placed on the release of future building permits until the lack of conformance has
been remedied.
b. If in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator the completed construction of
improvements does not conform to the development and design reflected in the
Design Review Application submittal as approved by the Zoning Administrator,
the Zoning Administrator shall be entitled to have a hold placed on the release of
a Certificate of Occupancy until the lack of conformance has been remedied.
2. NON-COMPLIANCE: The failure to comply with the requirements of the Guidelines,
or the terms of a design review approval, shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance.
Section 1-4-3 (RESERVED)
Section 1-4-4 Appeal Process
A. Any recommendation or requirement imposed by the Zoning Administrator on any
design review application may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission by the
applicant. The appeal shall be filed in writing to the Development Services Department
Director within fifteen (15) working days of the date that the decision of the Zoning
Administrator is transmitted to the applicant. The appeal shall give reasons for the appeal
and the relief requested. The Appeal will be processed pursuant to the procedures set forth
in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual. The Planning and Zoning
Commission may approve, approve with modifications, conditionally approve, or deny the
appeal. All decisions of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be in writing and shall
be binding, unless such decision is appealed to the City Council.
B. Any decision made by the Planning and Zoning Commission may be appealed to the City
Council by the applicant. The appeal, along with the required processing fee, shall be filed
in writing with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) working days from the date of the decision
by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The appeal shall provide reasons for the appeal
and the relief requested. The Appeal will be processed pursuant to the procedures set forth
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-41 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
in the City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual. The City Council may approve,
approve with modifications, conditionally approve, or deny the appeal. The decision of the
City Council shall be in writing and shall be final. Appeals from a City Council decision
shall be heard by an Arizona court of competent jurisdiction.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-42 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
ARTICLE 1-5 CITY CENTER GATEWAY STREETSCAPE PLAN MANUAL AND
DESIGN REVIEW PROCESS
1-5-1 Establishment and Purpose of the City Center Gateway Streetscape Plan
1-5-2 Administration of Streetscape Plan Manual
Section 1-5-1 Establishment and Purpose of the City Center Gateway Streetscape Plan
Manual
The Mayor and City Council hereby authorize the establishment of a City Center Gateway
Streetscape Plan Manual that is intended to provide property owners, developers and designers
with a landscape design standard to follow within the right-of-way and in the street side landscape
setback area of sites within the Gateway corridor as defined in Section 1-5-2-B. Development
applications will be reviewed by the Development Review Committee and the Development
Services Department in accordance with the City Council adopted City Center Gateway
Streetscape Plan Manual, and any additional requirements of this Ordinance.
Section 1-5-2 Administration of Streetscape Plan manual
A. STREETSCAPE PLAN GUIDELINES
1. All development within the area defined herein below shall be subject to the standards
in the City Center Gateway Streetscape Plan Manual referred to in this Ordinance and
formally adopted by the City Council and as amended from time to time.
2. The Development Review Committee shall use the City Center Gateway Streetscape
Plan Manual adopted by the City Council as its official policy in the landscape design
review process.
B. APPLICABLITY
1. All development on property located entirely or partially within six hundred sixty (660)
feet east and west of the centerline of Estrella Parkway, with the centerline of
McDowell Road forming the northern boundary and the north line of Maricopa County
Route 85 (MC85) forming the southern boundary, less and except that portion of
Estrella Parkway between the northernmost centerline of Goodyear Boulevard and
southernmost centerline of Goodyear Boulevard, shall comply with the provisions of
this Streetscape Plan.
2. If any regulations in this Streetscape Plan are in conflict with requirements of the
underlying zoning districts, the regulations in this Streetscape Plan shall prevail.
C. APPLICATION REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-43 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
1. All applications for Site Plan and Landscape Plan approval on property that is subject
to the provisions of this Streetscape Plan shall demonstrate compliance with the
standards, policies and guidelines of the Streetscape Plan in the design of the project.
2. All applications for Site Plan and Landscape Plan Review shall be processed and
reviewed in accordance with the procedures for Site Plan and Landscape Plan approval
described elsewhere in this Ordinance.
D. COMPLIANCE
1. For the purpose of determining compliance, the City of Goodyear Development
Services Department will monitor the construction of each project approved through
the Site and Landscape Plan Review processes for conformance with the approved
development application(s). The Development Services Department may withhold the
release of a Certificate of Occupancy if, in the opinion of the Development Services
Department Director, the construction does not conform to the standards set forth in
the approved application.
2. NON-COMPLIANCE: Failure to comply with the Streetscape Plan as shown on an
approved Site or Landscape Plan application shall constitute a violation of this
Ordinance.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 1-44 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
THIS PAGE WAS LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY.
City of Goodyear 2-1 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS
Section 2-1 Meanings of Words and Terms
Section 2-2 Definitions
ARTICLE 2-1 MEANINGS OF WORDS AND TERMS
For this Ordinance, certain terms and words are herein defined.
Present tense shall include future tense; singular number shall include plural, and plural shall
include singular; "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive; "persons" include individuals,
partnerships, corporations, clubs or associations; reference to one gender shall include the other.
The following terms may be used interchangeably; lot, parcel, plot, or premises; used, arranged,
occupied or maintained; building or structure; sold or dispensed; zone or district.
“City” shall mean the City of Goodyear; “Board” shall mean the Board of Adjustment;
“Commission” shall mean the Planning and Zoning Commission; “Council” shall mean the City
Council; Committee shall mean the Site Plan Review Committee.
Defined words appear in bold throughout the text.
ARTICLE 2-2 DEFINITIONS
Abandoned Vehicle. Any vehicle which is without the required current license plates or tabs,
inoperable, stripped, unclaimed, scrapped, junked or discarded. Inoperable shall also
mean a vehicle being repaired, other than at a commercial facility intended for such use,
when such repairs take seventy-two hours or more.
Abutting. Two adjoining properties sharing a common property line; also where two or more
adjoin only at a corner, but not including cases where adjoining lots are separated by a
street or alley.
Access or Access Way. Designated area, means or way by which pedestrians and vehicles have
safe, adequate and usable ingress to a property or use, as required by this Ordinance.
Accessory Building. A structure in a zoning district which:
a. Is clearly incidental to and customarily found in conjunction with a principal
building; and
b. Is subordinate to the purpose of the principal building; and
c. Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants in the
principal building; and
City of Goodyear 2-2 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
d. Is located on the same lot or parcel as the principal building.
Accessory Use. Use customarily incidental, related, appropriate and clearly subordinate to the
main use of a lot or building, which does not alter the principal use of subject lot or
building, or adversely affect other properties in the district.
Adjacent. Condition of being near to (e.g., properties separated by a street or alley) or abutting.
Administrative Process Manual. The City of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual as
adopted and amended from time to time by the City Council.
Adult Businesses.
The following terms relate to definitions, distinctions and types of Adult Business:
Adult Bookstore: A commercial establishment having as a substantial portion of its stock
in trade, books, magazines and other periodicals depicting, describing
or relating to “specified sexual activities” or which are characterized
by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to
“specified anatomical areas”.
Adult Live Entertainment Establishment: A business that offers any of the following
entertainment during any part of any two (2) or more days within any
continuous thirty (30) day period:
a. Topless or bottomless dancers, male or female striptease
dancers, or male or female go-go dancers whose clothing less
than completely and opaquely covers:
(1) Human genitals and pubic region, and
(2) Buttocks, and
(3) Entire female breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the areola.
b. Nude models or models where costuming is as described in
paragraph a., above.
Nothing in the definition of “adult live entertainment establishment”
shall be construed to apply to the presentation, showing, or
performance of any play, drama, or ballet in any theater, concert hall,
fine arts academy, school, institution of higher education, or other
similar establishment as a form of expression of opinion or
communication of ideas, information, or comments differentiated from
City of Goodyear 2-3 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
the promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advancing
the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise.
Adult Novelty Store: A commercial establishment which:
a. As one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or
rental, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the
following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed
matter which depict or describe “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” or
(2) Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are
designed for use in connection with “specified
sexual activities” excluding condoms and other birth
control and disease prevention products.
b. A commercial establishment may have other principal
business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or
rental of the above-listed items and still be characterized as an
adult novelty store. Such other business purposes will not
serve to exempt such commercial establishment from being
characterized as an adult novelty store so long as one of its
principal business purposes is offering for sale or rental for
consideration the above-listed items; or
c. Regularly excludes all minors from the premises or a section
thereof because of the sexually explicit nature of the items
sold, rented or displayed therein.
Adult Theater: An enclosed building or open air drive-in theater regularly used for
presenting any film or plate negative film or plate positive film or tape
designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition, or films, glass slides
or transparencies, either in negative or positive form, designed for
exhibition by projection on a screen depicting, describing or relating to
“specified sexual activities” or characterized by an emphasis on a
matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified anatomical
areas” for observation by patrons therein.
Erotic Dance or Performance Studio: A business which emphasizes and seeks, through
one or more dancers or other performers, to arouse or excite the
patrons’ sexual desires. Nothing in the definition of “erotic dance or
performance studio” shall be construed to apply to the presentation,
showing or performance of any play, drama, or ballet in any theater,
City of Goodyear 2-4 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
concert hall, fine arts academy, school, institution of higher education,
or other similar establishment as a form of expression of opinion or
communication of ideas or information differentiated from the
promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advancing the
economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise.
Airport. Property used or intended primarily for taking off and landing of aircraft, and
appurtenant areas used or intended for airport buildings or facilities (e.g., open spaces,
taxiways and tie-down areas, hangers and accessory buildings).
Alley. Public thoroughfare which affords only secondary vehicular access to abutting property
and is not intended for general traffic circulation.
Amendment. Change in wording, context, or substance of this Ordinance (e.g., addition or
deletion, or change in district boundaries or classifications on district map) which
imposes any regulation not heretofore imposed, or removes or modifies any regulation
heretofore imposed.
Amusement Park. An outdoor facility, which may include structures and buildings, where there
are various devices for entertainment, including rides, booths for the conduct of games or
sale of items, and buildings for show and entertainment.
Analogous Use. Comparable, similar, or resembling listed uses. Analogous uses shall not be any
more deleterious, obnoxious, or harmful than uses permitted.
Animals. The following terms relate to definitions, distinctions, and types of animals.
Domestic Animals. Any animal customarily kept by humans for companionship
including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds, rabbits, hamsters, mice, turtles, and the
like.
Large Animals. Cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, pigs, beasts of burden, llamas,
alpacas, or any other animal not listed weighing more than twenty (20) pounds, except
Domestic Animals, unusual/exotic animals, or donkeys.
Small Animals. Any animal that does not reside in a home, including rabbits for
agriculture purposes, chickens, roosters, fowl or any other animal weighing less than
twenty (20) pounds, except domestic animals or unusual/exotic animals.
Apartment. Suite of rooms, with cooking facilities and private bath and toilet facilities, used for
living purposes. Each apartment shall be considered a dwelling unit.
Assisted Living Facility. A facility, licensed by the State of Arizona to provide supervised care
for more than ten (10) adults who are living together by reason of age, disability, illness,
City of Goodyear 2-5 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
infirmity or companionship and for whom meals, recreation or other diversion, and
general health care is provided.
Assisted Living Home. Assisted Living Home. A single family detached dwelling having
common kitchen facilities that provides resident rooms and is shared as a primary
residence by one (1) to ten (10) persons with a disability or by one (1) to ten (10) elderly
persons living together as a single housekeeping unit, which is licensed by the State of
Arizona and which the operator provides or contracts to provide 24-hour supervisory care
services, personal care services or directed care services on a continuous basis.
Attached Building. Building with parts of exterior wall in common with another building, or
connected to another building by roof.
Automatic Car Wash. A structure containing facilities for washing automobiles using chain
conveyor or other method of moving the cars along, and automatic or semi-automatic
application of cleaner, brushes, rinse water and heat for drying.
Automobile Dealer, New. Franchised agency selling new motor vehicles and providing services
commonly associated with motor vehicle sales. New automobile dealership may include
sale of used motor vehicles.
Automobile Dealer, Used. Agency selling used motor vehicles not in conjunction with or on
same site as new motor vehicle franchise and providing services commonly associated
with motor vehicle sales.
Automobile Storage Facility. Building or lot designed or used for storing of four or more
vehicles.
Automobile Repair. All aspects of repair of motor vehicles including, but not limited to,
lubrication, tune-up and preventive maintenance.
Awning. Structure of canvas or metal projecting above a window or door, or over patio as
protection from sun and rain.
Balcony. Portion of building projecting into required yard, and floor height is four feet or more
above grade.
Bar or Cocktail lounge. Business establishment devoted primarily to alcoholic beverage service
to which food service is only incidental, i.e. where state sales tax receipts from the sale
of alcoholic beverages equals or exceeds fifty-five percent (55%) of the total state sales
tax receipts including food.
Bar/Microbrewery. Facility with provision for the brewing of beer for on-premises consumption
only. Maximum of 25% of the floor area shall be devoted to the brewery.
City of Goodyear 2-6 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Barrel. A barrel container that can hold no more than 31 gallons.
Basement. Portion of a building located partly underground but having not less than half its
floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
Block. Property abutting one side of the street, and lying between two nearest intersecting streets
or railroad rights-of- way, unsubdivided acreage, or waterway (but not an alley or utility
easement), of sufficient width as to interrupt continuity of development on both sides of
block.
Boardinghouse or Lodging house. Building where, for definite periods, lodging (with or without
meals) is provided for three to twenty persons.
Body Piercing Studio. A business that as one of its principal uses implants, perforates, or pierces
the skin or other body part to make a hole, mark or scar for a non-medical purpose. A
Body Piercing Studio shall not include a Jewelry Store, Boutique, Beauty Parlor or
similar establishment that uses a mechanized, pre-sterilized ear piercing system that
penetrates the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear or both as an accessory use to a principal
use.
Brewery. A facility for the brewing of beer and wholesale distribution of beer produced onsite.
Brewpub. A restaurant with facilities for the brewing of beer for onsite consumption and retail
sale at the restaurant. A brewpub must derive at least 40% of its gross revenue from the
sale of food.
Building. Any structure, including patio and similar type coverings for shelter, housing or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind, (with the exception of
dog houses, play houses, and similar structures). Each portion of a building separated
by a dividing wall without openings may be deemed a separate building when issuing
building permits.
Building Coverage. That portion of a lot occupied by any building or structure, including those
buildings or structures not intended for human occupancy, calculated by dividing the
total building ground floor area by the net site area. Portals to be excluded from the
calculation.
Building Envelope. That area of a lot lying between the front, rear, and side yard setback lines
and between ground level and the maximum allowable building height amounting to the
three dimensional area available for potential building construction.
Building, Height of. Vertical distance measured from point of reference elevation (fourteen
inches above average elevation at top of crown of roadway, if no curb) to the highest
point of coping of a flat roof, or to the highest point of a mansard roof, or to the highest
gable of a pitch or hip roof. When drainage considerations supersede this Ordinance, the
City of Goodyear 2-7 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
point of reference elevation shall be subject to the approval of the Chief Building Official,
or his designee.
Building Site. Area of building, plus associated parking areas and open space required by this
Ordinance. Building site may encompass more than one lot.
Bungalow. A one-storied house with a low-pitched roof.
Carport. Accessory building, or portion of a main building, with two or more open sides,
designated or used for parking of motor vehicles. Enclosed storage facilities may be a
part of a carport.
Casita. A living area in an accessory building used as a bedroom, home office or other use that
would be allowed and typically provided within the main building. The casita may also
include a bathroom, but no kitchen facilities.
Cellar. That portion of the building between floor and ceiling wholly or partly below grade
(vertical distance from grade to floor is equal to or greater than from grade to ceiling).
Church, Synagogue or Temple. Permanently located building commonly used for religious
worship.
City Code or Goodyear City Code. The Goodyear Code of Ordinances as adopted and amended
from time to time by the City Council.
Clinic. A place for group medical services not involving overnight housing of patients.
Club. An association of persons, whether or not incorporated, religious or otherwise, for social
purpose, but not including groups which are organized primarily to render a service
carried on as a business for profit.
Coin Operated Laundry and Cleaning Service. Establishments primarily engaged in the
operation of a coin-operated self-service laundry and dry cleaning equipment for use on
the premises.
College. Private or public places of general instruction (not including day nursery schools,
dancing schools, riding academies, or trade or specialized vocational schools) authorized
to award baccalaureate or higher degrees.
Commercial Use. Use operated for profit or compensation that provides retail of goods or
rendering of service.
Committee. The Development Review Committee as described in Section 1-2-6 of this
Ordinance.
City of Goodyear 2-8 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Common Open Space. Useable open space, other than private open space or required setbacks,
may include recreation oriented areas.
Community Development Department. The Development Services Department.
Community Development Director. The Development Services Department Director, or
designee.
Condominium. Ownership in real property consisting of undivided interest in common in a
portion of a parcel or real property, together with a separate, undivided interest in air
space in residential, industrial or commercial buildings on such real property (e.g.,
apartment, office or store).
Convalescent Home or Nursing Home. Place or institution with provisions for bed care, or for
chronic or convalescent care for one or more persons (exclusive of relatives). Persons
with communicable diseases (including contagious tuberculosis) shall not be admitted or
cared for in homes licensed under the State of Arizona as convalescent or nursing
homes.
Convenience Use. Convenience uses include those commercial uses in which:
a. Retail gasoline is sold.
b. The primary business is the sale of food or drink for consumption, either on or
off premise, over a counter, or from an outdoor service window or automobile
service window. Of the food or drink sold, at least twenty (20) percent is in
disposable, carry out containers, or edible containers.
c. Restaurants where forty (40) percent or more of the total floor area is for food
preparation.
d. Stores less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet where
groceries, reading materials, personal or household goods, general merchandise,
together with food and drink primarily for consumption off premises are sold.
e. Car washes (self-service and/or automated), drive-through laundry/dry
cleaners, and drive-through video stores.
f. The Community Development Director makes a determination that an
establishment is a "convenience use" by virtue of being an analogous use to
retail businesses described above.
Cul-de-Sac. Local street having one end open to vehicular traffic, and other terminated by a
vehicular turnaround.
City of Goodyear 2-9 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Curb Elevation. Average elevation of the curb adjacent to a development from which height of
building is determined.
Day Care Facility. A facility not occupied as a residence that is used to provide day time care
and supervision for more than ten (10) children or more than ten (10) adults not related
to the proprietor.
Density. Ratio of the number of dwelling units to net land area in acres as provided in the
Goodyear General Plan as amended from time to time.
Development Policy Committee. The Development Review Committee as described in Section
1-2-6 of this Ordinance.
District. An area classification as shown on zoning map, having uniform regulations governing
use of buildings and premises, or height and area of buildings.
District Map. Official zoning map (part of Zoning Ordinance) of the City of Goodyear.
Donation Drop-Off Box. Any container, storage unit or structure, other than an accessory building
or shed, that can or is used for the holding of charitable or for-profit donated items by the
general public, including but not limited to clothing, toys, books, and newspapers, with
the collection of those donated items made at a later date or time and which is located for
such purposes outside an enclosed building.
Dust Free. Treatment of native soil with covering of asphalt, concrete, or masonry.
Dwelling Group. Two (2) or more buildings on the same lot, each containing one (1) or more
dwelling units.
Dwelling Unit. A room or group of rooms within a building containing cooking accommodations
and occupied exclusively by one (1) family. An apartment shall be considered a
dwelling unit.
Dwelling, Multiple. A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
Dwelling, Single-Family. A building containing only one (1) family unit.
Dwelling, Two Family. A building containing only two (2) units; a duplex.
Efficiency Apartment. Dwelling unit with only one combined living and sleeping room (may
also have a separate room containing only kitchen facilities, and separate room containing
only sanitary facilities).
Energy Generation Facility: A facility designed and operated for the generation and distribution
of electricity for the primary purpose of selling electricity generated to the electric power
City of Goodyear 2-10 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
grid, including facilities which use fossil fuels, solar energy, hydroelectric energy,
geothermal energy, biomass energy or wind energy as a resource. This definition does
not apply to on-site electric generation equipment as defined herein when such use is
an accessory use to a principal permitted use.
Engineering Standards. The City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies
Manual as adopted and amended from time to time by the City Council.
Family.
a. Individual; or
b. Two or more persons, including children, related by blood, marriage, or adoption
and usual servants, living together as single housekeeping unit in dwelling unit;
or
c. No more than six persons not related, living together as a single housekeeping
unit within a dwelling unit; or
d. Persons with development disabilities and operators of a residential facility as
defined in this section.
Farm. Area of five or more contiguous acres used for raising of farm animals and/or production
of crops (e.g., vegetables, fruit trees, fiber or grain) and their storage.
Flood Prevention Regulations. Chapter 16 of the Goodyear City Code as adopted and amended
from time to time by the City Council.
Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.). Ratio of gross building floor area to gross lot area of a building
site.
Frontage. All property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or
terminating) measured along the line of a street (if street is dead end, then all property
abutting one side between an intersecting street and the street’s termination), including
property fronting on a cul-de-sac.
Garage, Repair. Building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or
used for servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring, selling or storing vehicles.
Garage, Storage. Building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for housing of four
or more vehicles.
Golf Course. Facility, other than a miniature golf course, for playing of golf which includes a
clubhouse with rest rooms and locker rooms as well as additional services customarily
City of Goodyear 2-11 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
furnished (swimming, outdoor recreation and related retail sales, including restaurant
and cocktail lounge if approved as part of required Use Permit).
Grade. (Adjacent ground elevation) - Lowest point of elevation of finished surface of ground
between the exterior wall of a building and a point five feet from the wall, or the lowest
point of elevation of a finished surface of the ground between an exterior wall of a
building and a property line, if less than five feet from a wall, or if walls are parallel to
and within five feet of a public sidewalk, alley or public way, then the grade shall mean
the top of the crown of a street (if no curb exists) established at the midpoint of a front
of lot. For establishing heights of walls, fences or other screening devices, see Section
5-2. Walls, Fences.
Gross Floor Area. Sum of gross areas of several floors of a building or buildings, measured
from the exterior wall, or from a center line of a wall separating two buildings. Gross
floor area shall not include: underground parking space; uncovered steps; portals; or
exterior balconies.
Gross Lot Area. Area of a lot including one-half of all dedicated streets and alleys abutting the
property.
Guest House. Attached or detached accessory building used to house guests of occupants of the
principal building, which is never rented or offered for rent. Any guest house providing
cooking facilities shall be considered a dwelling unit.
Guest Ranch. Building or group of buildings located on ten (10) or more contiguous acres,
containing guest rooms or dwelling units, some or all of which share separate entrances
leading directly from outside of a building, with garage or parking space located on the
lot and designed primarily for accommodation of guests, but having not more than two
(2) rental units per acre, and having outdoor recreational facilities (horseback riding,
swimming, tennis courts, shuffle board courts, barbecue and picnic facilities). (See also:
Resort).
Guest Room. Room designed to be occupied by one or more guests for sleeping purposes, having
no kitchen facilities (not including dormitories for sleeping).
Hazardous Materials/Explosives. Any substance characterized as flammable solids, corrosive
liquids, radioactive materials, oxidizing materials highly toxic materials, poisonous
gases, reactive materials, unstable materials, hypergolic materials and pyrophoric
materials and any substance or mixture of substances which is an irritant, a strong
sensitizer or which generates pressure through exposure to heat, decomposition or other
means.
Heliport. Area used or intended for landing and takeoff of helicopters; may include areas of
buildings appropriate to accomplish these functions.
City of Goodyear 2-12 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
High Rise Building. Building which exceeds thirty-six (36) feet in height.
Home Business. An occupation or profession carried on entirely within the confines of a
Dwelling, Single Family, detached, including an attached garage, a manufactured home,
or in a mobile home by a member of a family residing on the premises, which is clearly
incidental to the use of the structure for dwelling purposes and meets all of the following
requirements:
 does not change the exterior character of the premises in any way;
 does not involve the direct sale or bartering of goods;
 does not involve the use of materials or mechanical equipment not recognized as
part of normal household or hobby use
 does not involve manufacturing
 does not involve cabinet or furniture making;
 does not involve auto or appliance repair;
 does not involve the provision of services to animals at the dwelling, such as
veterinary offices, and kennels;
 does not involve the sale or distribution of food products at the dwelling;
 does not include any sort of “waiting” area and that serves only one customer at a
time.
Home Day Care. A residential dwelling used by persons residing on the premises to provide day
time care and supervision for up to ten (10) children or up to ten (10) adults not related
the residents. It is a form of Home Business.
Hospital. Facility for general and emergency treatment of human ailments, with bed care (e.g.,
sanitarium), but not a convalescent or nursing home.
Hotel. Building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation; open to
transient guests.
Household Employee's Quarters. Accessory building located on the same premises with a
dwelling unit, used solely as a dwelling for persons employed on the same premises as a
dwelling unit, and having no cooking facilities.
Inert Material Landfill. An area in which construction debris that is neither chemically reactive
nor biodegradable and will not decompose, such as concrete, brick, rocks and uncontaminated
sands, soils and earth may be deposited to facilitate land reclamation for a public project borrow
pit.
Institution. Building or buildings occupied by a nonprofit corporation or nonprofit establishment
for public use.
Irrigation System. Underground watering system or access to water resource district lateral canal
used for the purpose of sustaining and promoting plant life.
City of Goodyear 2-13 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Junkyard. The use of more than two hundred (200) square feet of the area of any lot, whether
inside or outside a building, for the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other
motor vehicles or machinery, or for the storage or keeping of abandoned and/or
inoperable vehicles, parts, and/or equipment resulting from such dismantling or wrecking,
or for the storage or keeping of junk including scrap metal or other scrap materials.
Kennel. Premises where five (5) or more dogs or cats are bred, boarded and/or trained.
Landscaped Area. Area improved through harmonious combination of trees, shrubs, ground
cover, and natural topping material (boulders, rock, stone, granite or other approved
materials). The area shall be void of any asphalt or concrete pavement, except where
walks are allowed or as approved by the Zoning Administrator as part of the landscape
plan.
Landscape Plan. A plan drawn on twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inch format, prepared to
scale, showing elements such as trees, shrubs, ground cover, sculpture, walls, lighting,
water features, walkways and other organic and inorganic materials. The plan shall
include a plant list, indicating the size quantity, and name, both botanical and common,
of all plant materials to be used.
Large Retail User. A singular retail user, who occupies no less than one-hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet of floor area, typically requires high parking to building ratios,
and/or has a regional sales market. The floor area shall include any associated tenant
spaces having common access within the confines of the primary use. It shall also include
any outside area, which provides associated services to the public such as, but not limited
to, outdoor merchandise display or snack bar. Excluded from floor area shall be
underground parking spaces, parking structures, uncovered steps, exterior balconies, and
mezzanines so long as these areas are not used for the sale or display of merchandise.
This definition does not extend to industrial land uses.
Loading Space. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a
group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials, and for which appropriate means of access is
provided.
Lot. Legally created parcel of land occupied, or intended for occupancy by one (1) main
building, with its accessory building(s), and uses customarily incidental to it, including
open spaces required by this Ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a street.
Lot Area. Net area included within lot lines after all rights-of-way dedications have been made.
Lot, Corner. Lot adjoining two (2) or more streets at their intersections.
Lot Depth. Horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines.
City of Goodyear 2-14 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Lot, Through lot, Double Frontage. Lot having frontage on two non-intersecting parallel (or
approximately parallel) streets.
Lot, Interior. Lot other than a corner lot or key lot.
Lot, Key. Lot adjacent to a corner lot, having its side lot line in common with rear lot line of a
corner lot, and facing on a street which forms a side boundary of a corner lot.
Lot Lines. Property lines bounding a lot.
Figure 5.
Lot Line (Front). Front lot line shall be determined as follows:
a. Corner Lot: Shorter of two (2) lot lines adjacent to streets as originally platted
or laid out. Where lot lines are equal, the front lot line shall be that lot line
obviously front by prevailing custom of other buildings in block. If such front
is not evident, then either may be considered the front of lot, but not both.
b. Interior Lot: Lot line bounding a street frontage.
Lot Line (Rear). Rear lot line shall be determined as the lot line opposite to the front lot line.
Where side lot lines meet in a point, the rear lot line shall be the line not less than ten
(10) feet long, lying within the lot and parallel to the front lot line. If the front lot line is
curved, then the rear lot line shall be a line not less than ten (10) feet long, lying within
the lot and parallel to a line tangent to the front lot line at its midpoint.
Lot Line (Side). Side lot lines are those lines connecting the front and rear lot lines.
Lot Length. Length (depth) of a lot shall be:
R e a r
Y a r d
Setback
Lot Depth
or Length
Side Yard
Setback
Building Envelope
(includes height limit)
F r o n t
Y a r d
Setback
Rear
Front
Through Lot
Key Lot
Corner Lot
Lot Line Lot Line
Interior
Lot
Through
Lot
Interior
Lot
Street Street
Street
LOT TERMINOLOGY
Lot Coverage
Lot Depth
or Length
Lot Line
Street
Side
Side
Lot Width at
Front Setback
Setbacks, Depth, Width, Building Envelope
(Irregular Lot)
Through, Key, Corner, Interior Coverage, Setbacks, Building Envelope, Depth
Rear
Building Envelope
(includes height limit)
Front
City of Goodyear 2-15 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
a. The shortest distance between such lines where front and rear lines are parallel.
b. If front and rear lines are not parallel, the shortest distance between the midpoint
of a front line and midpoint of a rear lot line.
c. If the lot is triangular, the shortest distance between the front lot line and a line
parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten (10) feet long lying wholly with
the lot.
Lot, Zoning. Single tract located within a block, designated by the owner or developer as a tract
to be used, developed, or built on as a unit, under single ownership or control.
Maneuvering Area. Any portion of a lot that is used for the circulation of vehicles into or from
off-street parking spaces or loading spaces, including but not limited to, off-street
parking spaces or loading spaces, driveways, drive aisles, and fire lanes.
Manufactured Housing. Dwelling that has been certified as a manufactured home by the
applicable State of Arizona or United States government agency, which may be
fabricated, in whole or in part, off the site and delivered to the site for final assembly and
construction in compliance with applicable building and fire codes.
Manufactured Home Lot. Parcel of land within an approved manufactured home subdivision,
shown in the records of the Maricopa County Recorder's Office and designed and
intended for accommodation of one manufactured home or pre-existing mobile home.
Manufactured Home Park. Approved residential development shown on the City records, with
accessory buildings and uses for enjoyment and benefit of residents, in which individual
spaces are provided for placement of manufactured homes or pre-existing mobile
homes or recreational vehicles for dwelling units or sleeping purposes, whether or not
a charge is made for accommodation.
Manufactured Home Space. Parcel within an approved manufactured home park, shown on
the City records, and designed and intended for accommodation of one manufactured
home.
Manufactured Home Subdivision. Residential subdivision shown on the records of the Maricopa
County Recorder's Office, with accessory buildings and uses for enjoyment and benefit
of residents, in which the individual ownership of a lot is permitted, for placement of a
manufactured home or pre-existing mobile home for a dwelling unit or sleeping
purposes.
Manufacturing. Fabricating or assembling of materials into finished or partially finished products
by hand or machinery.
City of Goodyear 2-16 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Massage Establishment. Any building, room, place, or establishment where non-medical or nonsurgical
manipulative exercises or devices are practiced upon the human body manually
or otherwise by a state licensed massage therapist with or without the use of therapeutic,
electrical, mechanical or bathing devices. Massage establishments, as established
herein, shall not include the activities of a licensed physician, surgeon, dentist,
occupational or physical therapist, chiropractor, osteopath or a regularly licensed and
established hospital or dispensary, and shall not include uses, including but not limited
to, beauty parlors, salons, spas and health and exercise facilities where massage services
may be available as an accessory use to a permitted principal use.
Mature Trees. Healthy, full-bodied trees with a shape characteristic of the species, and of the
following minimum sizes:
Ten (10) to twelve (12) feet in height with two (2) inches single trunk caliper, or one (1)
inch average trunk caliper for multiple trunk tree, or eight (8) foot height for palms. For
each building story over one (1):
a. Required mature trees shall be increased in size by one half (1/2) inch caliper
for multiple trunk trees, and one (1) inch caliper increase for single trunk trees,
except that palms shall be increased by four (4) feet in height; or
b. In lieu of increasing sizes of required mature trees, provide additional trees at
a rate of one and one-half (1.5) times the number otherwise required.
Medical Marijuana: All parts of any plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or not, and
the seeds of such plant used to treat or alleviate a registered qualifying patient’s
debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with the patient’s debilitating
medical condition, as defined in A.R.S. §36-2801.
Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation: The cultivation of marijuana by a
registered designated caregiver for a registered qualifying patient, as defined in A.R.S.
§36-2801 which is conducted as an accessory use to the primary residence of the
registered designated caregiver and in conformance with the standards in Article 4-2-
13.
Medical Marijuana Dispensary Cultivation Location: An enclosed, locked facility used for
the cultivation of medical marijuana for a registered medical marijuana dispensary
and medical marijuana infusion using the product of such cultivation.
Medical Marijuana Dispensary: A building used by a not-for-profit entity that acquires,
possesses, cultivates, manufactures (including medical marijuana infusion), delivers,
transfers, transports, supplies, sells or dispenses marijuana or related supplies and
educational materials to a registered qualifying patient, registered designated caregiver,
or a registered nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary agent.
City of Goodyear 2-17 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Medical Marijuana Infusion: The process by which medical marijuana is incorporated into
consumable or edible goods by means of blending, cooking, processing or other means
of incorporation.
Medical Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation: The cultivation of marijuana by a
registered qualifying patient, as defined in A.R.S. §36-2801 which is conducted as an
accessory use to the primary residence of the registered qualifying patient and in
conformance with the standards in Article 4-2-13.
Microbrewery. A facility for the brewing of beer for onsite consumption as well as wholesale and
retail sale. Food and/or other alcoholic beverages may also be served.
Mobile Home. Factory assembled portable structure exceeding eight (8) feet wide and/or forty
(40) feet long, containing bathroom and kitchen facilities and service connections, and
readily movable as a unit on its own chassis and running gear, and designed as a dwelling
unit without a permanent foundation.
Mobile Home Room Addition. Building addition or alteration to a mobile home, other than
factory designed and assembled.
Motel. Building or group of buildings containing guest rooms or dwelling units, some with
separate entrances leading directly from the outside, with garage or parking space
located on-lot, designed or used for accommodation of automobile travelers (motor court,
motor lodge and tourist court, but not mobile home park).
Motor Home. Vehicular unit built on or permanently attached to a self-propelled vehicle chassis,
van or chassis cab, as an integral part of the complete vehicle, to provide temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping or travel use.
Net Floor Area. For determining parking requirements, total floor area of a building measured
from interior faces of load bearing walls (excluding air shafts, stair wells, elevator shafts,
rest rooms, and mechanical equipment rooms).
Non-Chartered Financial Institutions. Business, other than a state or federally chartered bank,
credit union, mortgage lender, or savings and loan association that receives more than
25% of its net income from providing any of the following services or any combination
of the following services: (1) check cashing services provided for a percentage fee or for
a flat fee that varies on the amount of the check; (2) loans provided for periods of less
than six months that are secured by an assignment of wages, the assignment of an auto
title, or the holding of an auto title and for which the borrower pays a flat percentage fee,
a flat fee that varies on the amount being advanced, or any other fee or interest that is not
based on a disclosed annualized percentage rate for the transaction and; (3) pawn
brokerage services; and/or (4) deferred present services under which a party accepts a
check and agrees for a percentage fee or flat fee that varies on the amount of the check to
hold the check for at least five days before presentment for payment or deposit.
City of Goodyear 2-18 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Non-Climbable. Not easily climbed by a young child, not having a ladder or horizontal rung
effect by which a young child can gain uninvited access to the top, nor having vertical
openings through which a four (4) inch sphere can pass.
Nonconforming Building. Building or portion thereof which was lawful when established, but
which does not conform to subsequently established district or regulations.
Nonconforming Lot. Parcel which was lawful when established, but having less area, frontage
or dimensions than now required in the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Use. Use of a building or land which does not conform after passage of this
Ordinance (or amendment thereto) with the use regulations of the district in which it is
located.
Nursery School. Institution for care of children of preschool age. Even though some instruction
may be offered, it shall not be considered a "school".
Off-Street Parking Area. Reserved for transient storage of motor vehicles, including parking
spaces, maneuvering areas, aisles and driveways completely located on the property it
serves. (For further information on standards and requirements please see Article 6, Off-
Street Parking.)
Office Building. A place where a particular kind of business is transacted or a service is supplied,
excluding retailing, according to the following:
a. A place in which functions such as consulting. record keeping, or clerical work
are performed, or
b. A place in which a professional occupation is performed.
On-Site Electric Generation Equipment. Equipment located on-site which is an accessory use
to the principal permitted use on the premises and supplies electricity predominantly for
use on the same site from backup generators for emergency use only or alternative energy
sources, such as solar or wind, provided such equipment otherwise complies with adopted
design guidelines and development standards.
Open Space. Land area devoted to passive or active outdoor enjoyment for purposes of recreation,
leisure, scenic and visual enjoyment. (Golf courses, desert land, portions of natural
washes and preserved agricultural land may contribute to a portion of required common
open space. See: District Development Standards, e.g., Section 3-2-12-B-2.)
Ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Goodyear, Arizona as adopted and amended
from time to time by the City Council.
City of Goodyear 2-19 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Parking Lot. A parcel or portion of a parcel of land in which members of the general public may
park their motor vehicles for the purpose of utilizing an adjacent use or facility. (For
further information on standards and requirements please see Article 6, Off-Street
Parking.)
Parking Lot, Commercial. Lot upon which public operating vehicles and parking thereon may
be charged for usage of the lot.
Parking Space. Permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, having a minimum width of
nine (9) feet and an area of 180 square feet, which will accommodate a car. Parking is
off-street, with access from streets or secondary means.
Permitted Use. Use specifically permitted, or use analogous to those specifically permitted.
Portable Storage Container. A readily mobile prefabricated structure transported to a site for
the purpose of temporary and/or periodic storage of merchandise, goods, or materials
related to the primary permitted use. The term shall include any such structure whether
placed directly on the ground or having an attached axle and wheels.
Portal. An architecturally defined covered pedestrian entry into a yard within a defined lot.
Preschool. Public or private establishment providing supervision and educational training for four
or more children two years of age or older, not related to proprietor.
Private Open Space. Usable area intended for exclusive use of the occupant(s) of a dwelling unit
to which it is adjacent.
Private Use. Restricted to occupants of a lot or building with their guests, where compensation
for use is not received, and where no business or commercial activity is associated with
the use or building.
Professional Use. The rendering of a service of a professional nature by:
a. Architects, engineers and surveyors, who are licensed by the Arizona State
Board of Technical Registration.
b. Doctors, osteopaths and dentists, who are licensed by the State of Arizona.
c. Lawyers who are admitted to practice before the courts of the State.
d. Accountants who are members of the Arizona Society of Certified Public
Accountants or the Arizona Association of Accountants, Incorporated.
e. Consultants and practitioners who are recognized by the appropriate above
licensed professions.
City of Goodyear 2-20 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
f. Chiropractors, chiropodists, optometrists and naturopaths.
Prohibited Use. Use not specifically permitted, or a use analogous to those not specifically
permitted.
Public project borrow pit. An area where material has been removed from the ground for use in
a public construction project.
Public Utility Facilities. Buildings, structures, or equipment used by a public utility for delivery
of utility service including, but not limited to, electric substations, gas pressure regulating
stations, water production, water treatment and water storage facilities and equipment,
office buildings, and maintenance and storage yards, but not including water reclamation
facilities, wastewater treatment plants or energy generation facilities.
Ranch. Area of ten (10) or more contiguous acres used for the raising of livestock on a commercial
basis (does not include commercial pen feeding/feed lots). Ranch includes horse
breeding and training, but not riding stables.
Recreational Vehicle. The following definitions delineate different types of Recreational
Vehicles:
a. Vehicular or portable unit mounted on chassis and wheels, not more than eight
(8) feet wide and forty (40) feet long, primarily designed to provide temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, and either has its own
motive power, or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle (e.g., trailer coach,
travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and motor homes). Total width
of a recreational vehicle once sited for occupancy, including all tip-outs and/or
slide-outs, shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet. For purposes of measuring length,
the trailer hitch and/or tongue shall not be excluded.
b. All all-terrain cycles, motorcycles, motorbikes, jet skis, boats, trailers (for
transporting said vehicles) which are used for leisure activity and not for work.
Recreational Vehicle Awning. Light-weight overhead structure used in conjunction with a
recreational vehicle, for shading or weather protection of carports, patios, porches, and
windows. Awnings shall not be permitted to have attached siding.
Recreational Vehicle Park. Approved residential development shown in City records, with
accessory buildings and uses for enjoyment and benefit of the patrons, in which
individual spaces are provided for parking of recreational vehicles for temporary
portable housing and sleeping purposes, whether or not a charge is made for
accommodation.
Recreational Vehicle Space. Parcel within an approved recreational vehicle park shown in the
City records, designed for accommodation of one recreational vehicle.
City of Goodyear 2-21 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Residential Facility. Home in which persons with development disabilities live; licensed,
operated, supported, or supervised by the State of Arizona. Developmental disability
shall mean autism, cerebral palsy, epilepsy or mental retardation.
Residential facility serving six (6) or fewer persons shall be considered a residential use
property if the facility provides care on a twenty-four (24) hour per day basis. Residents
and operators of the facility shall be considered a family. Limitation of six (6) or fewer
persons does not include the operator of the residential facility, members of the
operator's family, or persons employed as staff (except that the total number of all persons
living at the residential facility shall not exceed eight (8)).
Residential Uses. Single, two and multiple family dwelling units, hotels, motels, dormitories,
mobile homes, and residential facilities.
Resort. Group of buildings containing more than five (5) dwelling units and/or guest rooms,
and providing outdoor recreational activities (e.g., golf, horseback riding, swimming,
shuffleboard, tennis). May furnish services customary to hotels (e.g., restaurant,
cocktail lounge, and convention facilities).
Rest Home. Premises used for the housing of and caring for the ambulatory, aged or infirm. There
shall be only incidental convalescent care not involving either trained nurse or physician
residing on the premises. There shall be no surgery or other activities as are customarily
provided in hospitals.
Restaurant. Establishment whose primary business is serving food to the public.
Restaurant, Drive-in. Building where food and drink are served for consumption on the
premises, by order from and service to vehicular passengers.
Restaurant, Drive-thru. Building where food and drink are served for consumption within a
building or off premises, by order from vehicular passengers outside a structure,
including but not limited to, service from an outdoor service window.
Retail. Sale of tangible personal property for any purpose other than for resale.
Rooming House. See "Boarding house".
School. Private or public places of general instruction (not day nursery schools, dancing schools,
riding academies, or trade or specialized vocational schools).
Screening Wall. A solid masonry wall designed and constructed so as to conceal areas used for
refuse, mechanical equipment, parking, storage, and service and loading bays from street
and public view, and to separate potential incompatible land uses.
City of Goodyear 2-22 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Service Station,Automotive. Retail business engaged primarily in the sale of motor fuels, but
also in supplying goods and services generally required in the operation and maintenance
of automotive vehicles (sale of petroleum products; sale and servicing of tires, batteries,
automotive maintenance and repair; and supplying of incidental customer services and
products). Major automotive repairs, painting and body and fender work, rental and sales
of motor bikes, automobiles, boats, trailers, trucks, and any other type of sales or services
not specifically approved as part of the original Use Permits must be approved prior to
an area being used for these purposes.
Shopping Center. Group of facilities for retail commercial use, planned and designed for a site
on which built, functioning as a unit, with off-street parking, landscaped areas and
pedestrian malls or plazas provided on the property as an integral part of a unit.
Signs. Any identification, description, illustration, symbol or device which is affixed directly or
indirectly upon a building, vehicle, structure or land and which identifies or directs
attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business.
Additional definitions related to signs may be found in Article 7-5.
Site Area, Gross. The total area of a development site including, where applicable, dedicated
portions of abutting streets.
Site Area Net. Developable portions of a site not including abutting streets.
Site Plan. A plan of development showing proposed and existing structures; circulation, access
and maneuvering areas; open space, landscaping, parking lots and other amenities and
or required features. The plan is submitted for evaluation by the Site Plan Review
Committee as described in Section 1-2-7.
Site Plan Review Committee. The Development Review Committee as described in Section 1-
2-6 of this Ordinance.
Sleeping Room. Room, other than a guest room, in which no cooking facilities are provided.
Specified Anatomical Areas (See: Adult Business). Areas that depict, describe or relate to:
a. Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) human genitals, pubic region;
(2) buttock; and
(3) that portion of the female breast constituting the nipple and areola (the
more darkly pigmented portion of the breast encircling the nipple).
City of Goodyear 2-23 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
b. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
Specified Sexual Activities (See: Adult Business). Activities that depict, describe, or relate to:
a. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
b. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
c. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or
female breast.
Stable, Private. Detached accessory building for the keeping of horses, mules or ponies owned
by the occupants of the premises (not kept for remuneration, hire or sale).
Stable, Commercial. Area of ten (10) or more contiguous acres containing stables for horses,
mules or ponies which are bred, hired, shown or boarded on a commercial basis.
Story. Portion of a building between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the
floor next above; the top most story shall be a portion of the building included between
the upper surface of the top-most floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor
level directly above a basement, cellar or unused underfloor space is more than six (6)
feet above grade or more than fifty (50) percent of the total perimeter, or is more than
twelve (12) feet above grade at any point, the basement, cellar or unused underfloor
space shall be considered a story.
Street. Dedicated public or private passageway which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property.
Street,Centerline. Centerline of a street right-of-way determined by the City Engineer.
Street,Line. Dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel and a contiguous street (right-of-way).
Structural Alterations. Change in supporting members of a building (bearing walls, or
partitions, columns, beams, or girders) or the complete rebuilding of a roof.
Structure. Piece of work constructed or erected, use of which requires location on the ground or
attached to something having location on the ground (not a tent, vehicle, trailer coach or
mobile home).
Structure, Temporary. Piece of work readily movable and used or intended for a period not to
exceed ninety (90) consecutive days. Structure shall be subject to applicable property
development standards for the district in which it is located.
City of Goodyear 2-24 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Subdivision Regulations. Chapter 15 of the Goodyear City Code as adopted and amended from
time to time by the City Council.
Swimming Pool, Private. A contained body of water used for bathing or swimming purposes
either above or below ground level with the container being eighteen (18) inches or
greater in depth at any point.
Swimming Pool, Public. Same as private pool, but operated as a commercial business. Public
swimming pools shall conform with Maricopa County health requirements.
Tattoo Studio. A business that marks the skin with any indelible design, letter, scroll, figure,
symbol or any other mark that is placed by the aid of needles or other instruments upon
or under the skin with any substance that will leave color under the skin and that cannot
be removed, repaired or reconstructed without a surgical procedure. A Tattoo Studio
may or may not be operated in conjunction with a Body Piercing Studio.
Teen Entertainment Center. Facility at which no alcoholic beverages are served and is open to
persons from fifteen (15) through twenty (20) years of age unaccompanied by adults at
which entertainment activities are furnished including, but not limited to social dancing,
billiards, arcade games, etc.
Temporary Use. A use, business, sale, display, or event which is conducted for a specified,
limited amount of time that are generally related to a particular seasonal, cultural,
traditional or community activity.
Townhouse. Single-family dwelling with party walls and no side yards between abutting
dwellings.
Tip-out or Slide-out. Recreational vehicle component which rides within the main structure of
a recreational vehicle while traveling, and either tips or slides out at the site for the use
as a living area. Tip-out or slide-outs shall meet the requirements of the Arizona State
Division of Building Codes when installed as an after market modification, and shall not
be permanently anchored to the ground.
Trailer, Accessory. Vehicle used or designed for temporary living or sleeping purposes, having
axles and wheels (one or more). Dwelling unit for density and parking requirement
purposes, but not considered a single or multiple family dwelling, apartment, efficiency
apartment, rooming unit or guest room.
Trailer, Travel. Vehicle or portable unit mounted on a chassis and wheels, not exceeding eight
(8) feet wide and/or forty (40) feet long, and is drawn by a motor vehicle to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use.
Trailer, Work. Portable vehicular attachment with axle and wheels used exclusively for business
or occupational purposes.
City of Goodyear 2-25 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Truck, Camper. Portable unit, consisting of a roof, floor, and sides designed to be loaded onto
and unloaded from the bed of a pickup truck, to provide temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, or travel use.
Use. Purpose for which land or a building is occupied or maintained, arranged, designed or
intended.
Use, Accessory. Subordinate use customarily incidental to, and conducted on the same lot with,
a principal use of a building, including household employee's quarters.
Used Car Dealer. Operation of a used car sales business not connected with a franchised new car
dealership.
Use Permit. Permit granted to a property owner by the Council to conduct a permitted use in a
zoning district subject to a Use Permit. Use permit may be granted at the discretion of
Council after receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission.
Use Permit Use. A Use Permitted in a particular zoning district only upon showing that such
use will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location and/or operations
of such use as specified in this Ordinance and authorized by the City Council.
Variance. Modification of the literal provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, granted by the Board
of Adjustment upon finding that the strict enforcement would cause undue hardship,
owing to circumstances unique to an individual property for which the variance is
granted, and not caused by the applicant.
Ventilation Court. An area provided within a building site, open to the sky, for the purpose of
providing light and air to rooms intended for human habitation which do not other wise
have window exposure to a street, alley or other open space. The width of a court shall
be its least horizontal dimension.
Veterinary Hospital. Facility maintained by a licensed doctor of veterinary medicine where all
types of animals are given medical and surgical treatment and are cared for during the
time of treatment.
Veterinary Office. An office maintained by a licensed doctor of veterinary medicine for the
treatment and care of small animals, namely the usual household pets and other animals
of a similar size and nature but not livestock.
Volume. Volume of a building occupying a particular site (determined by multiplying gross floor
area of individual floors, by height of each story).
Volume Ratio. Ratio of building volume to net lot area of a building site.
City of Goodyear 2-26 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Wall. Structure or device required by this Ordinance for screening purposes, forming a physical
barrier, so constructed that fifty (50) percent or more of the vertical surface is closed and
prevents passage of light, air and vision (concrete, concrete block, wood or other materials
that are solids, and are assembled to form a screen). Where a solid wall is specified, one
hundred (100) percent of the vertical surface shall be closed, except for approved gates
and other access ways. Where a masonry wall is specified, the wall shall be concrete
block, brick, stone or other similar material, and one hundred (100) percent of the vertical
surface shall be closed, except for approved gates or other access ways.
Warehouse. Building used for the storage of goods of any type, and where no retail operation is
conducted.
Wholesale. Sale of tangible personal property for resale by a licensed retailer, for consumption
by an ultimate purchaser.
Wireless Communications Facilities. Any facility used for wireless communications, usually
consisting of a support structure for antenna(e), an equipment shelter or cabinet, and/or
other transmission and reception devices used for business or commercial purposes.
Xeriscape. A creative landscaping program designed to save water. The word Xeriscape comes
from "xeros," the Greek word for "dry," but the look of a Xeriscape yard is interesting
and colorful.
Yard. Open space at grade level between a building and adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward. Width of side yard,
depth of front yard, or depth of rear yard measured as a minimum horizontal distance
between lot lines and a main building.
Yard, Front. Open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building, extending the full
width of the lot, and situated between a street line and the front line of the building
projected to the side lines of the lot. Front yard on a residential corner lot is the yard
adjacent to the shorter street frontage; front yard of a commercial corner lot is the
yard adjacent to the major street, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
Yard, Rear. Open space on the same lot with a main building, between the rear line of the
principal building and the rear line of the lot, extending the full width of the lot.
Yard, Side. Open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building situated between the
building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line. Interior side yard
is defined as a side yard adjacent to a common lot line.
Zoning Administrator. The Development Services Department Director, or designee.
Zoning Conditions. Conditions and/or stipulations imposed by the City Council as a condition
of approval of a zoning amendment.
City of Goodyear 2-27 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Goodyear, Arizona as adopted and
amended from time to time by the City Council.
Zoning Permit. Permit granted to a property owner through the Community Development
Department upon a finding that the allowed activity is in conformance with the intent of
this Code. Such permit may be limited by specific conditions, restrictions, terms, or time
period.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-1 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
ARTICLE 3 ZONING DISTRICTS
3-1 Application of District Classifications
3-2 Residential Districts
3-3 Commercial Districts
3-4 Industrial Districts
3-5 Planned Area Development
ARTICLE 3-1 APPLICATION OF DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS
Each District classification establishes the Permitted Uses, Permitted Accessory Uses, Uses that
are Permitted Subject to Conditions, and uses that may be approved by Use Permit, and
Development Regulations, pertaining to the Districts. Cross-references to other applicable
requirements of this Code, such as Parking or Landscaping, may be indicated. See Article 4 for
Special Uses and Uses requiring additional evaluation.
ARTICLE 3-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
3-2-1 Purpose
3-2-2 Permitted Uses
3-2-3 Development Standards for Single Family Residential
3-2-4 Single Family—Additional Use Definitions and Regulations
3-2-5 Development Standards for Multi-Family Residential District
3-2-6 Multi-Family—Additional Use Definitions and Regulations
3-2-7 Supplemental Standards Applicable to All Residential Districts
SECTION 3-2-1 PURPOSE
A. General Purpose of Residential Districts. The purposes of the residential districts are to:
1. Provide high quality, complete neighborhoods to meet the varying lifestyles of the City’s
residents.
2. Provide for the orderly, well-planned, and balanced growth of residential neighborhoods.
3. Establish design standards to help create distinct and attractive residential
neighborhoods.
B. Specific Purposes of Residential Districts. Residential Districts are comprised of
Agricultural Districts, Single Family Residential Districts, and Multi-Family Residential Districts.
The purposes of the agricultural, single family residential and multi-family residential districts are:
1. Agricultural District. Allows agricultural, ranching, and related uses within the City,
and it acts as a “holding district” for annexed lands that have been used for agricultural
purposes until a suitable rezoning occurs.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-2 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
2. Agricultural Urban. To provide a low-density, estate-type residential use that allows
for non-commercial agricultural uses and Large Animal and Small Animal privileges.
The Agricultural Districts include:
• Agricultural (AG) • Agricultural-Urban (AU)
3. Single Family Residential. To provide areas for detached and attached single family
dwellings with each dwelling being located on a separate lot. It also includes Two-
Family Residential, which allows for one single family dwelling or two single family
dwellings (a duplex) to be located on a single lot. These districts also allow for other
uses under certain circumstances and allow for other uses when compatible with a
residential environment subject to a Use Permit.
The Single Family Residential Districts include:
• R1-10 (Single Family Detached) • R1-7 (Single Family Detached)
• R1-6 (Single Family Detached) • R1-4 (Single Family Detached)
• R1-A (Single Family Attached)
• R2 (Two Family Residential)
• R1-C (Court Home)
4. Multi-Family Residential. To provide areas for a variety of multiple residence housing
types, manufactured home parks and subdivisions, and recreational vehicle parks.
These districts also allow for other uses under certain circumstances and allows for
other uses when compatible with a multifamily residential environment subject to a Use
Permit.
The Multi-Family Residential Districts include:
• MF-18
• MF-24
• MHS -- Manufactured Home
Subdivision
• MH/RVP -- Manufactured Home
or Recreational Vehicle Park
(MH/RVP)
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-3 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
SECTION 3-2-2 PERMITTED USES
Table 3-2-2 below identifies uses that are permitted, uses that are permitted if certain conditions
are met, and uses that may be permitted by a Use Permit within each Agricultural, Single Family
Residential and Multi-Family Residential District. The various types of permitted uses are
designated below:
P – Principal Permitted Use
U – Use Permit Use
C – Use that is permitted if certain conditions are met
AC – Accessory Use that is permitted if certain conditions are met
Blank cells indicate a use is not permitted
Unless otherwise expressly permitted elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance, uses not specifically
permitted are prohibited. Although not comprehensive, the “Additional Use Definitions and
Regulations” column includes references to limitations applicable to specific use classification
referenced in Section 3-2-4 and 3-2-6 or refers to regulations located elsewhere in this Zoning
Ordinance.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-4 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
Table 3-2-2: Residential Districts Use Classifications
Multi-Family
AG
AU
R1-10, R1-7, R1-6
R1-4, R1-C
R1-A
R2
MF-18/24
MHS
MH/RVP
Additional Use
Definitions and
Regulations*
Household Living
P P P P P
P
P
P
AC AC AC AC AC AC 8-2
U U
U
P P 3-2-6-A
P 3-2-6-A
Group Living
Assisted Living Facility U U
Assisted Living Home
1-6 residents P P P P P P P P P
7-10 residents, more than ¼ mile from
another Assisted Living Home with 7-10
residents. C C C C C C U 3-2-4-B
7-10 residents, less than ¼ mile from another
Assisted Living Home with 7-10 residents U U U U U U U 3-2-4-B
Civic & Institutional
Day care
Home day care: 1-3 adults or children AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC 3-2-4-A
Home day care: 4-10 adults or children U U U U U U U U U
Day care facility U U U U U U U U U
AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC 3-2-4-A
U
P P P P P P P P P
U U U U U U U U U
P P P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P P
AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC AC
Continued on next page
Single Family
Detached accessory building
Dwelling, one single family detached
Parks, playgrounds and other recreational
facilities including accessory eating and drinking
establishments which many not be located closer
than 100 feet to any adjacent residential use or
district.
Uses of land or structures customarily incidental
and subordinate to one of the principal uses
Temporary office, construction sheds, storage,
and similar uses incidental to a construction
project, which shall be removed upon completion
or abandonment of the construction work.
Model Home Complex
Guest ranch & resort
An additional single family dwelling for every 20
acres of lot area above the first ten acres
Manufactured home
Recreational vehicle
Home business, other than home daycare
Hospital and related uses
Dwelling, one single family attached
Dwelling, two family (duplex)
Dwelling, multiple
Public utility facility to serve immediate area,
excluding office faciliites and maintenance yards
P - Principal Permitted Use;
U - Use Permit Use;
C - Uses that are permitted if certain
conditions are met;
AC - Accessory Use that are permitted if
certain conditions are met
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-5 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
Continued - Table 3-2-2: Residential Districts Use Classifications
AG
AU
R1-10, R1-7, R1-6
R1-4, R1-C
R1-A
R2
MF-18/24
MHS
MH/RVP
Additional Use
Definitions and
Regulations*
Agriculture
P
P P
Animal Keeping C C 3-2-4-C
U 3-2-4-D
Growing and harvesting of fields or trees P
P P
AC AC
C C
U
Single Family Multi-Family
*This list is not exclusive but is intended to provide references to conditions specific to given uses
Nurseries and greenhouses for commercial
growing of plants, trees, buses, flowers, and
vegetables and other food crops, provided that
such enclosures not be located closer than 50
feet from any dwelling, and no direct sales are
permitted on the premise.
Agricultural, flower, and vegetable gardening,
nurseries and greenhouses for the purpose of
propagating and cultivating only, provided no
direct sales business shall be carried out on the
premises, and provided that no obnoxious
fertilizers shall be stored and no obnoxious soil
renovations shall be carried out on the premise
Sales building or stand for the direct sale of
agricultrual products produced on the premises.
Agricultural uses and buildings for commercial
Agricultural uses and buildings for noncommercial
gain
Dairies, egg and poultry farms for commercial
gain.
Aviaries and apiaries. Shall not be located
closer than 200 feet from any dwelling or
public roadway, street, no direct sales is
permitted.
P - Principal Permitted Use;
U - Use Permit Use;
C - Uses that are permitted if certain
conditions are met;
AC - Accessory Use that are permitted if
certain conditions are met
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-6 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
SECTION 3-2-3 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR THE AGRICULTURAL
DISTRICT AND SINGLE FAMILY- DISTRICT
The following development standards apply to all single family residential districts.
A. Table 3-2-3-A prescribes development standards for each agricultural district and single
family residential district. Additional development and design standards and regulations
for agricultural districts and single family residential districts can be found elsewhere in
the Zoning Ordinance.
(1) Front setback shall be measured to patios, livable space, and side entry garages
(2) Setback from a public or private street that is not providing direct vehicular access to homes shall be 10 feet
(3) Attached side setbacks shall be 0 feet, whereas building separation shall be a minimum of 5 feet
(4) Where a minimum 10 foot wide landscape tract is provided, the typical side setbacks, rather than Street Side
setback applies
(5) Total of both sides setback may be reduced to 10 feet subject to the requirements as provided in Section 3-2-3-D
B. Additional standards set forth in Section 3-2-7 (Supplemental Standards Applicable to
All Residential Districts)
C. The following requirements apply in all Single Family districts:
a. Open Space Requirements. Minimum open space shall be provided as listed in Table
3-2-3-A.
Table 3-2-3-A: Development Standards - Single Family Districts
Standard
AG AU R1-10 R1-7 R1-6 R1-4 R1-A R1-C R2
Lot Standards
Minimum Lot Area (sq ft) 435,600 43,560 10,000 7,000 5,500 4,500 2,800 3,200 7,200
Minimum Lot Width (ft) 300 150 80 70 55 45 35 40 72
Minimum Lot Depth (ft) N/A N/A 125 100 100 100 80 80 100
Building Form and Location
Maximum Height (ft) 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30
Maximum Building Coverage 20% 20% 40% 45% 60% 60% 75% 60% 40%
Minimum Setbacks (ft)
Front (1) 20 20 10 10 10 10 10 5 (2) 20
Front facing garage 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20
Side 20 15 10 5 5 5 0 (3) 0 5
Total both sides 40 30 20 15 15 (5) 15 (5) 0 (3) 10 15
Street Side (4) 100 30 20 15 10 10 10 10 20
Rear 100 50 30 25 20 20 15 15 20
Development Standards
Open Space % (of net area) 0 0 10 12 15 15 15 15 12
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-7 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
b. Parks. A portion of the required open space shall be provided as park space or useable
open space for recreation purposes. Facilities such as, but not limited to, pools and
clubhouses can be counted toward useable open space. The following useable open
space shall be provided:
i. For complete developments less than 40 acres in size, 75% of required open
space shall be useable open space. Phasing a larger project into 40 acre or less
in order to avoid providing the neighborhood parks required for developments
larger than 40 acres is not permitted.
ii. For developments that are 40 acres in size or larger, the following shall apply.
There shall be a 5-acre neighborhood park within a ¼ mile walking distance of
all dwelling units. Two parks totaling at least 5 acres may be provided in lieu
of a single 5-acre park if additional amenities are provided above and beyond
those listed in section c and the parks are connected via a system of on or offstreet
connections. When two parks are provided it is highly encouraged to
connect them via off-street trails.
c. Useable Open Space Design Standards. The required useable open space (i.e.,
neighborhood parks) must meet the following standards:
i. Parking shall be provided to the park either on-street or on-site.
ii. Residents shall not be separated by an arterial or freeway from the
neighborhood park.
iii. At least one tot lot shall be provided per park, or in age-restricted
communities a recreation amenity of similar scope.
iv. Shaded seating areas and walking paths shall be provided.
v. 50% of all neighborhood parks within a square mile shall include active
recreation facilities that are fields. If there is only one neighborhood park
within the development, it shall include an active recreation facility.
d. Entry Feature: Each project shall have a unique entry feature at its primary
entrance to provide individual identity to the development. Entry features are
encouraged to be creative and may include elements such as: entrance paving,
distinctive landscaping treatment, planters, special wall treatment, gates and other
entry features.
e. Perimeter Walls and Lot Fences.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-8 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
i. Perimeter Walls shall be required along the rear of reverse frontage of
single family lots along collector or arterial streets and may be installed
elsewhere around the perimeter of a subdivision. Such walls shall be not
less than of six (6) feet nor more than eight (8) feet in height and shall be
constructed of slump block, brick, or masonry with stucco or mortar wash
finish and decoratively designed with details such as inlaid tile or brick
work, cap tiles, wall inserts, offsets, or pilaster treatments. Long, straight,
unbroken walls are not permitted. Wall openings shall be provided to
allow pedestrian access to adjacent commercial, open space, trail, school,
and similar amenities.
ii. Perimeter Lot Fences if provided, shall be not less than five (5) feet nor
more than six (6) feet in height and shall be constructed of slump block,
masonry, or wrought iron except for sections of Perimeter Lot Fences that
are part of Perimeter Wall along the reverse frontage of single family lots
along collector or arterial streets, in which case, the requirements for a
Perimeter Wall set forth above shall apply.
D. Design Requirements for Residential Districts (R1-6, R1-4, R1-A, R1-C).
a. In addition to the requirements listed in Section 3-2-3-C, each subdivision shall be
designed with at least the number of Design Elements set forth Table 3-2-3-E.
b. The minimum lot width may be reduced, administratively, up to 5 feet in R1-6
and R1-4 if additional Design Elements are provided as set forth in Table 3-2-3-E.
c. The Total Both Sides setback may be reduced to 10 feet in the R1-6 and R1-4
districts if additional Design Elements are provided as set forth in Table 3-2-3-E.
Both the lot width and setback may be reduced by providing the Design Elements
set forth in the table.
d. The descriptions of the Design Elements for each category are listed below in
paragraphs (i), (ii), (iii), (iv).
For example, if an owner of property zoned R1-6 wants do develop 50 foot wide
lots, the owner would need to comply with the requirements of Section 3-2-3-D
and provide at least; 2 Amenity Elements listed in paragraph (i) below, 3
Connectivity Elements listed in paragraph (ii) below, 1 Streetscape Element listed
in paragraph (iii), and 1 Additional Streetscape Element listed in paragraph (iv)
below.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-9 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
i. Amenity Elements. The purpose of providing amenity elements is to
create diverse places within a community that are accessible to the
surrounding residents. Smaller lots require additional amenities because of
the smaller private yards that are provided.
1. Adjacent to Community Amenity. The project is adjacent to an open
space amenity (e.g., Bullard Wash, Gila River, hillside preserve) or
community facility (e.g., community park, recreation center) and
reasonable access has been provided to the amenity. A clubhouse,
pool, or other significant community amenity within a master
planned community can count toward this requirement without
being directly adjacent if the neighborhood is served by the
amenity.
2. Additional Park Space. The development includes privately
maintained park space at least 30 percent greater in area than the
minimum required useable open space.
3. Additional Internal Park Amenities. Meaningful and impactful
additional amenities are provided within parks. For example, a
horseshoe pit would not meet this threshold but pickle ball courts
would; Simple outdoor grills would not meet this threshold but an
outdoor fireplace with integrated grills would. Additional
amenities are provided within the required park space:
a. A pool, splash pad, or similar active recreational
infrastructure.
b. A clubhouse, community room, or similar passive
recreational gather places.
c. Restroom facilities.
Zoning Designation Minimum Lot
Width (ft)
Total Both
Sides Setback
Amenity
Elements
Connectivity
Elements
Streetscape
Elements
R1-6 55 15 0 0 0
REDUCED R1-6 50 10 1 2 2
R1-4 45 15 1 2 3
REDUCED R1-4 40 10 2 4 4
R1-A 35 N/A 1 2 1
R1-C 40 N/A 1 2 1
Table 3-2-3-E: Lot Size and Minimum Number of Required Design Elements for Reduced Lot
Width and Side Yard Setback Reduction Requests
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-10 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
d. Active recreation fields above and beyond the minimum
requirements including basketball courts, soccer fields,
baseball fields, and similar facilities.
e. Additional amenities that are not minimally required by the
Parks, Recreation, Open Space, and Trails Master Plan as
determined by the Zoning Administrator and that provide
meaningful and impactful recreational opportunities for the
community that as a general rule cannot be accommodated
in a traditional 10,000 square foot lot.
4. Integrated Commercial. A parcel zoned commercial is located
within the development or directly adjacent that is integrated into
the neighborhood and has the impact of serving as a gathering
place and amenity to the community, subject to the following:
a. No subdivision perimeter wall separates the neighborhood
from the commercial parcel or direct pedestrian
connections are provided.
b. The residential neighborhood is not separated from the
commercial amenity by an arterial roadway (i.e., a
residential area receiving credit for this amenity must not
have to cross an arterial roadway to get to the commercial
amenity)
c. The residential neighborhood is entirely contained within a
1,320 foot radius of a commercial property. (i.e., the
residential area receiving credit for this amenity must be
within 1,320 feet of the commercial area, residential lots
outside of the radius would provide another amenity or not
be eligible for lot reductions).
5. Additional Amenities. Other amenity elements not minimally
required by any other regulation, ordinance, policy, standard or
master plan adopted by the City that meet the stated purpose and
provide the same impact to the community as the listed elements
may be approved.
ii. Connectivity Elements. The purpose of connectivity elements is to create
an inclusive community that promotes a sense of community and provides
a walkable and bikeable community with easy and quick access to nearby
amenities such as schools, commercial areas, trails, and parks.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-11 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
1. Infill Development. The site is located in areas that will provide
easy and quick access to nearby amenities such as schools, trails,
and parks and that also have been identified as growth areas as
defined by the General Plan.
2. Trail System Connections. Publicly accessible trail connections are
provided within the community and connect to larger trail systems
or have the ability to connect to future trail systems (i.e., trails are
not limited to use by only those who live within the H.O.A.).
3. Smaller Blocks. Smaller blocks create a more walkable
community. They should be designed in a way to reduce street
lengths and foster neighborhood interactions. Maximum block
lengths shall be no more than 660 feet. The maximum number of
continuous blocks with side yards facing the street is limited to
three. The blocks should be broken up with some homes facing the
side street and/or should be staggered. .
4. No subdivision perimeter wall. The subdivision is designed and
homes are oriented so that subdivision perimeter walls are not
necessary in order to increase connectivity from the neighborhood
to surrounding amenities.
5. Lot Diversity. At least 30% of the lots within the subdivision
exceed the minimum lot width by 5 feet. (e.g., in a 100 lot
subdivision in the R1-4 district 70 homes are 45-foot wide and 30
homes are 50-foot wide).
6. Additional Connectivity Elements. Other connectivity elements not
minimally required by any other regulation, ordinance, policy,
standard or master plan adopted by the City that meet the stated
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-12 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
purpose of creating an inclusive community that provides easy
access to amenities and services and provide the same impact to
the community as the listed elements may be approved.
iii. Streetscape Elements. The purpose of streetscape elements is to create a
sense of place and ensure that smaller lot developments are of high
quality.
1. Additional front setback. Homes (and all elements of the homes
and garages) have a minimum setback of 30-feet.
2. Detached sidewalk. A detached sidewalk is utilized with a planter
strip that is a minimum of 5.5 feet wide. Planter strips shall be
planted, irrigated, and maintained with live plant materials.
3. Shared or Clustered Driveways. Driveways are paired so that there
is a single curb-cut providing access to 2 houses, and the total
width for the paired driveway is not more than 20 feet.
Alternatively, driveways may be clustered (but need not share the
same curb cut) so that there is at least 36 feet of uninterrupted curb
between the clustered driveways.
4. Alley-Loaded. Homes utilize alley loaded garages.
5. Open Space Facing Homes. Homes do not have a traditional front
yard but face onto a shared open space or courtyard.
6. Paving Material. Decorative paving (i.e., pavers) are utilized for
all horizontal paved surfaces between the house and sidewalk.
7. Deep recessed garages. Garages are setback at least 20-feet from
the front part of the home which could include living space or a
front porch but does not include a courtyard.
8. Porches and Courtyards. 100% of homes have a front porch or
courtyard with at least 50% of the homes having a covered front
porch that is at least 48 square feet. Covered porch can include a
slatted roof or other roof design alternative, if it is an integrated,
significant architectural feature with columns that are
complimentary to the style of the home.
9. Additional Streetscape Elements. Other streetscape elements not
minimally required by any other regulation, ordinance, policy,
standard or master plan adopted by the City that meet the stated
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-13 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
purpose and provide the same impact to the community as the
listed elements may be approved.
e. Creation of a new lot that is less than the required minimum lot area requires
approval of a Planned Area Development (PAD)
SECTION 3-2-4 SINGLE FAMILY—ADDITIONAL USE DEFINITIONS AND
REGULATIONS
a. HOME BUSINESS. A home-based business shall be conducted entirely and unobtrusively
within the principal residence including an attached garage, and shall not generate
pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that normal to the district in which it is located and
shall comply with the following.
a. There shall be no buildings or structures other than those permitted in the
district.
b. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, or glare, shall be produced
or caused by the business or the nature of the business.
c. Parking for the business shall be in driveway or garage only
d. Activity shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
e. The home business shall obtain and maintain an annual business registration
permit as required by City Code
f. Shall not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the living area
b. ASSISTED LIVING HOMES. An application for an assisted living home must be
submitted, reviewed and approved by the Development Services Director (formerly known
as the Community Development Director) or his designee prior to a Zoning Clearance
being signed from the City;
a. A minimum separation distance of 1,320 feet, one-quarter (1/4) mile for all
assisted living homes with greater than six (6) residents, from another assisted
living home with greater than six (6) residents, unless a Use Permit is approved
by the City Council.
b. Vehicles belonging to employees and residents are required to park onsite, in the
garage or on an approved driveway.
c. Deliveries or routine stops (exclusive of visitors) specific to a group home shall
be restricted to day light hours only.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-14 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
d. The assisted living home shall obtain and maintain an annual business registration
permit as required by City Code.
e. The Development Services Director, or his designee, shall have the right to
review, provide corrective action and if necessary, revoke any approval of an
assisted living home if it is found to be endangering the public health, welfare, or
safety of the surrounding community.
f. The assisted living home shall meet all requirements of the prevailing City of
Goodyear Building and Fire Codes to be determined by the Chief Building
Official and the Fire Chief, or their designees.
g. The assisted living home shall obtain and keep current all necessary licenses and
certifications from the Arizona Department of Health Services and/or any other
state agency responsible for licensing assisted living homes.
c. ANIMAL KEEPING
a. In the AG district, there is no maximum number of animals. Dairies, egg and
poultry farms are not permitted except through a use permit.
b. In AU district, the number of animals allowed on a property shall be limited to a
maximum of three (3) large animals and (5) small animals for each one (1) acre
of lot area, or any combination thereof. Animals may only be kept for purposes of
non-commercial gain.
(1) Animals under six (6) months old shall not be counted.
(2) Regulations do not pertain to domestic animals.
(3) Roosters are not permitted in the AU district.
(4) The maximum number of animals allowed on the property may be
exceeded for an additional animal (or animals) that is being kept and
raised in connection with participation in a Supervised Agriculture
Experience (SAE) Project, or similar program, by obtaining a temporary
use permit from the Zoning Administrator, and paying the required fee.
Issuance of a temporary use permit for this purpose by the Zoning
Administrator, may be withheld if the Zoning Administrator finds that
allowing additional animals is contrary to the public health or safety.
(5) A stable or shade structure shall be provided for horses equal to a
minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of cover per horse.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-15 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
(6) Any egg laying fowl maintained in the AU district shall be located 200
feet from any lot line.
c. Requirements for corrals, stables, and other similar structures used or required for
the keeping of animals in both AG and AU Districts:
(1) Corrals, structures, pens, stables, shade structures and like enclosures for
the keeping of animals shall be located in the rear yard and such facilities
shall not be located any closer than one hundred (100) feet from any
dwelling, nor fifty (50) feet from any lot line.
(2) Corrals, structures, pens, stables, shade structures and like enclosures shall
be cleaned and waste material removed from the site no less than twice per
week.
(3) Any open pasture area provided for the animals must be enclosed by a
stock-tight fence which shall be located outside of the front setback.
D. DAIRIES, EGG AND POULTRY FARMS
a. May not be located closer than 500-feet from any dwelling.
b. May not be located 200 feet from any lot line.
c. All activities shall be conducted and maintained in a manner that prevents noxious
odors, noise, dust, insects, and other negative impacts from intruding upon
residential enjoyment or reasonable use or properties in the vicinity.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-16 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
SECTION 3-2-5 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR THE MULTI-FAMILY
DISTRICT
Table 3-2-5 prescribes the development standards for all Multi-Family Residential Districts.
Additional development standards for multi-family residential districts follow this table.
TABLE 3-2-5 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

Zone standards
Districts MF-18 MF-24 MHS MH / RVP
Minimum Net Site Area
10,000 10,000 10 acre 10 acre site
Maximum Density in Du/Ac 18 24 5 10 22
Minimum lot Width 200 ft. 100 ft. 60 ft. 50 ft. 28 ft.
Minimum lot depth N/A N/A 100 ft. 60 ft. 40 ft.
Maximum Height (ft.) 30 40 20 20
Accessory building (ft.) 12 12 12 12
Maximum Building coverage 50% 50% N/A N/A
Minimum Setbacks
Front (ft.) 30 30 20 10
Total Both Sides 60 ft. 40 ft. 15 ft. 10 ft.
Minimum Side yard (ft.) 30 20 5 10 5
(Other uses) (35) (40)
Rear yard % of lot depth 20% 20% 25 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft.
Street Side (ft.) 20 30 15 10
Recreational O/S (sq. ft./d.u.) 400 400 400 400 150
*10,000 sq. ft. minimum, with 100 ft. minimum width for two-family dwellings
The following development standards apply to all Multi-Family Residential Districts:
A. All uses, are subject to Site Plan review.
B. Open Space requirements:
a. Recreational open space is that portion of a project site not divided into individual
lots and made available to residents for the purpose of outdoor living space for
residents and may include lawn areas, walkways, sitting areas, courtyards, pools,
and outdoor recreation facilities. Buildings, structures, or other impervious
surfaces devoted to recreation or common open space uses shall be considered as
open space. This space shall be the central focus of the project and must be easily
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-17 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
accessible by the occupants. Driveways, parking areas, and required yard areas
shall not be considered as outdoor living area.
b. Private outdoor space is that portion of the unit or lot devoted to outdoor
recreational use by the individual resident(s) of the unit or lot. This area is
provided in addition to the recreational open space. Private outdoor space shall be
provided in the form of private yards, patios, or balconies. Patios or balconies
shall be a minimum size of sixty (60) square feet per unit and a minimum
dimension of six (6) feet.
c. Required yards and landscaping setback areas fronting onto public streets shall
be entirely landscaped except for necessary driveways and walkways. Parking is
not permitted within the required setback area, including driveway area.
d. No more than fifty (50) percent of the required front yard landscaped area or
any other street frontage area may be used for storm water retention purposes.
Side slopes of basins shall not exceed a 6:1 slope. The maximum side slope ratio
shall be 4:1 ratio.
C. Building Separation:
a. The following shall apply for multi-family projects that include two (2) or more
related buildings in which the buildings have a common entrance, such as
apartment complexes. The minimum distance between the principle entrance of
one building and any other buildings shall be according to the following
schedule:
Building Height Minimum Yard Dimension
1 story 20 feet
2 story 30 feet
b. Except as provided above, the minimum separation between buildings on a multifamily
site shall be fifteen (15) feet; and between dwellings in manufactured
home subdivisions or recreational vehicle parks, ten (10) feet.
D. Relationship of Project to Surrounding Land Uses:
The relationship between a multi-family, manufactured/mobile home or
recreational vehicle park project and adjacent land uses shall take into account the
type of adjacent uses, building scale, density, and building heights. Particular
sensitivity shall be displayed to the relationship between a multi-family project and
adjacent residential uses of lesser density to minimize the impact on those less dense
areas.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-18 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
a. Multi-family buildings two (2) stories in height or greater shall not be placed
within seventy-five (75) feet of single family residential area or zoning district.
b. Individual design situations may dictate additional conditions or considerations to
minimize the impact of a multi-family, manufactured/ mobile home or
recreational vehicle park development on adjacent residential uses through the
imposition of one or more of the following design considerations:
(1) use of one-story buildings;
(2) additional landscaping to serve as buffer area;
(3) wider setbacks from property line;
(4) modify orientation of buildings;
(5) modify the orientation of windows and balconies;
(6) provide screen walls
c. Common recreation facilities in a project shall be located to minimize the
intrusion of noise on adjacent residential areas.
d. Pedestrian and visual linkages shall be made between a project and off-site
amenities.
e. The project shall be designed to minimize negative traffic impacts on the
surrounding uses.
E. Building Design:
The following elements of design shall be considered and encouraged in the
architecture of multi-family buildings and/or arrangement of manufactured homes
or recreational vehicles (definition a.):
a. The residential scale and character of a project should be emphasized. The mass
of the building can be reduced by varying setbacks and building heights or by
angular orientation of buildings.
b. In multi-family developments:
(1) The architectural detailing and treatment of windows and doorways should
be strongly considered through the use of clerestory windows, arched
shapes, bay windows, recessed windows, raised borders, awnings,
shutters, and trellises.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-19 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
(2) The individuality and privacy of units should be emphasized through the
use of private and semi-private entry ways. Long, narrow passageways or
corridors lined with entrances are strongly discouraged.
(3) Entryways and stairwells should be an integral part of the building design.
Consideration should be given to screening stairwells or using unique
architectural treatments so that they blend in with the overall building
elevation.
c. In all such projects:
(1) Patio walls and fences should be an integral part of building design and
should match the main building design.
(2) All units or buildings housing common facilities on lots abutting or
within fifty (50) feet from arterial streets should be a single story high.
SECTION 3-2-6 ADDITIONAL USE DEFINITIONS AND REGULATIONS FOR
MH/RVP AND MHS
A. MHS & MH/RVP REGULATIONS
a. One manufactured home shall be permitted on each approved manufactured
home lot or space. No recreational vehicles or conventional construction units
shall be permitted on a manufactured home lot for dwelling purposes.
b. MH/RVP Only: One recreational vehicle permitted on each approved
recreational vehicle lot. No mobile home or conventional construction units
shall be permitted on recreational vehicle lots for dwelling purposes.
Recreational vehicles shall not remain in a Recreational Vehicle Park for more
than six (6) months in any one (1) year.
c. MHS Only: PROPERTY OWNER’S ASSOCIATION – Each subdivision shall
establish a Property Owner’s Association and a Board of Directors, to administer
and enforce required covenants, conditions and restrictions, and to oversee the
operation of common facilities.
d. MH/RVP Only: MANAGEMENT – Each park shall maintain full-time
management to handle daily enforcement and property management for park
residents and with the express responsibility to ensure that the park is in current
compliance with all City codes.
e. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-20 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
i. Community or recreational facilities to an extent not less than specified in
the development requirements.
ii. Common facility service buildings (laundry facilities, accessory supplies,
park maintenance, management, community buildings, and other uses of a
similar nature). All such buildings shall be centrally located, and use shall
be restricted to occupants.
iii. Dwelling for one manager, caretaker, and/or watchman employed on the
premises, the total units not to exceed three (3).
iv. Any other uses of land or structures customarily incidental and
subordinate to one of the principal permitted uses, unless otherwise
excluded.
f. DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
i. Exterior property lines abutting public streets shall have a six (6) foot
masonry wall located on a fifteen (15) foot setback, landscaped and
maintained by a Property Owner’s Association. Masonry walls and/or
landscaped strips may be required along other exterior property lines to
ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses.
ii. Access to all lots shall be from interior, private streets (2” asphalt over 4”
A.B.C.) and not less than thirty-two (32) feet in width.
iii. Sidewalks shall be at least five (5) feet wide on both sides of all streets.
iv. All dumpster type refuse collection facilities shall be screened on three (3)
sides with a masonry wall, with the fourth side being a gated entrance.
v. All utility lines shall be placed underground.
vi. Boat, travel trailer or RV storage shall not occur on the same lot with a
mobile home. Each development shall provide masonry walled, screened
storage areas for such vehicles within the subdivision for use by the
occupants of an area not less than three hundred (300) square feet for each
mobile home lot.
vii. Each mobile home must be affixed with permanent tiedowns/anchors and
skirting of a permanent, fire retardant material, and installed to enclose the
open space between the bottom of the floor and grade level of the stand.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-21 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
viii. All room additions, awnings, or covers shall be regulated by current
building codes.
ix. All room additions shall be structurally independent of the MH/RV, but
may be attached with weather stripping.
x. A detached storage building is permitted in the rear half of each lot in a
Manufactured Home Subdivision and in a Manufactured Home Park. For
every foot in height (to the peak of a building) above the fence, one foot
of setback shall be required on all sides of the building. If there is no the
fence the storage building shall be set back one foot from the lot line for
every foot in height (to the peak of the building) above six feet.
xi. Detached storage buildings are not permitted in Recreational Vehicle
Parks.
SECTION 3-2-7 SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL
AGRICULTURAL, SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL, AND MULTI-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
The following standards apply to all agricultural, single family residential and multi-family
residential districts:
A. The undergrounding of all utilities less than 69kV within and abutting the proposed
development shall be completed prior to issuance of construction permits for the applicable
phase of development.
B. Dedication of any necessary easements and rights-of-way, in form and substance acceptable
to the City, prior to approval of any Site Plans or issuance of any construction permits on the
rezoned land.
C. Separation of any production crops on ground owned by the property owner for whom the
rezoning is sought or such owners and successors on the property herein zoned by not less
than fifty (50) feet from occupied dwelling units, if applicable.
D. Use Permit uses shall comply with the regulations, standards and requirements in Article 4
of the Zoning Ordinance, and all Use Permit uses are subject to Site Plan review.
E. Parking Regulations, Standards and Requirements in Article 6 of the Zoning Ordinance.
F. Landscaping, Walls, Screening, Pools and Property Improvement Regulations, Standards,
and Requirements in Article 5 of the Zoning Ordinance.
G. Sign Regulations, Standards and Requirements in Article 7 of the Zoning Ordinance.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-22 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
H. Regulations, Standards, and Requirements and in Article 8 of the Zoning Ordinance.
I. Temporary office and/or construction sheds and storage incidental to a construction projects
are permitted and shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of construction work.
J. Landscaping is required to be installed in accordance with City standards within collector or
arterial rights-of-way.
K. Each subdivision shall establish a Property Owner’s Association and a Board of Directors to
administer and enforce required covenants, conditions, and restrictions and to oversee the
operation of common facilities.
Compliance with all applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules, regulations, standards,
guidelines, conditions of approval, which includes by way of example but not limitation: the
Building Codes and Regulations (currently Chapter 9 of the Goodyear City Code), the
Subdivision Regulations adopted by the City of Goodyear (currently Chapter 15 of the
Goodyear City Code), the City’s Zoning Ordinance, the City of Goodyear’s Design
Guidelines Standards, the City of Goodyear Engineering Design Standards and Policies as
they all may be adopted and amended from time to time (“Development Regulations”). If
there are any inconsistencies between the Development Regulations, the more restrictive
requirements apply. For instance, if a standard in the City of Goodyear’s Design Standards is
more restrictive than a provision in the Zoning Ordinance the on the same subject, the Design
Standard would apply.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-23 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
ARTICLE 3-3 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
The Commercial Districts provide activity centers with shopping and services, employment for
local residents and to strengthen the City’s economic base. Their standards are intended to assure
convenience, safety, positive community image, variety in retail, commerce and office
development responding to the community’s quality of life. Zoning classifications include offices,
neighborhood and community-wide businesses, the Central Business District and related public
facilities designations. Use intensities and site development criteria are intended to mitigate
impact on, as well as maintain compatibility with, adjacent residential areas.
3-3-1 C-O Commercial Office District
3-3-2 C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
3-3-3 C-2 General Commercial District
3-3-4 CBD Central Business District
3-3-5 PFD Public Facilities District
3-3-6 Commercial Districts Standards
Section 3-3-1 CO Commercial Office District
Professional and administrative services are established at a residential scale in the CO District,
providing for transition between retail commercial areas and residential uses.
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES. Only listed use of structures or land shall be permitted.
1. Offices for professional, administrative, clerical and sales services.
2. Financial institutions, including drive-through window, but excluding nonchartered
financial institutions.
3. Medical offices or clinics.
4. Medical laboratories, excluding animal research.
5. Churches.
B. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
1. Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to one of the
permitted principal uses, unless otherwise excluded.
2. Ancillary uses, intended primarily to serve tenants, employees and business invitees
of the principal building and use, such as restaurants, snack bars, cafeterias, gift
shops or similar retail uses, provided that public advertising of such accessory uses
does not occur on the exterior of the building.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-24 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
3. Portable Storage Containers, subject to Article 8-2 of this Ordinance.
C. USE PERMIT USES. The following uses may be approved by Use Permit:
1. Veterinary offices, provided such facilities are constructed to prevent objectionable
noises and odors outside the walls of the office. Boarding of animals shall be
permitted only for short time periods for the purpose of observation incidental to
care.
2. Day care (elderly or youth).
3. Studios for the practice and sale of the fine arts.
4. Public utility facilities to serve the immediate area, but not including outside
storage or maintenance yards for public utility use.
D. DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
1. All uses are subject to Site Plan review.
2. All uses shall be conducted within entirely enclosed buildings, except drivethrough
windows for financial institutions.
3. Outdoor displays and outdoor storage of materials, supplies or inventory are
prohibited.
4. Area, Setback and Height and related requirements shall conform with the
standards for the District, as set forth in Commercial Districts standards,
Subsection 3-3-6.
5. Off-Street Parking: Paved, screened parking, which may be covered, subject to
setback standards, shall be provided in accord with the requirements of Article 6,
Parking and Loading.
6. Landscaping, Walls, Screening: Refer to Article 5, Property Improvement
Standards.
7. Supplemental Regulations: Refer to Article 8, General Provisions.
Section 3-3-2 C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
C-1 District uses are intended to provide limited retailing, generally on small parcels, serving
nearby residential neighborhoods. The District may be applied as a transition buffer between uses
of varying intensity or to add separation distance between arterial streets and residential districts.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-25 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES. Only listed use of structures or land shall be permitted.
1. Auto sales, leasing.
2. Banks and financial institutions, including drive-thru facilities, but excluding nonchartered
financial institutions.
3. Business and professional offices.
4. Crematory.
5. Equipment rental.
6. Day care (elderly or youth).
7. Manufactured home sales.
8. Personal and household services, such as barber and hair styling shops, beauty
salons, clothing alterations, dry cleaning shops, furniture and appliance repair,
copying shops, self-service laundry, shoe repair shops, but excluding
drive-through window facilities.
9. Retail stores with sales only, not to exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet of
gross floor area, individually; and not to exceed fifty thousand (50,000) square
feet in a commercial complex. Drive-through facilities and convenience uses
require Use Permit approval.
10. Studios for the practice and sale of the fine arts.
11. Restaurants, excluding drive-in and drive-through facilities. The area being
devoted primarily to the consumption of alcoholic beverages shall not exceed
twenty-five percent (25%) of the total public floor area.
B. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
1. Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to one of the
permitted principal uses, unless otherwise excluded.
2. Signs, on-site, as permitted in Article 7 of this Ordinance.
3. Portable Storage Containers, subject to Article 8-2 of this Ordinance.
C. USE PERMIT USES. The following uses may be approved by Use Permit.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-26 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
1. Automobile service stations subject to Article 4.
2. Convenience store use subject to Article 4.
1. Hospitals and health care facilities which may include assisted living facilities.
2. Veterinary Offices, provided such facilities are constructed to prevent
objectionable noises and odors outside the walls of the office. Boarding of animals
shall be permitted only for short time periods for the purpose of observation
incidental to care.
5. Public utility facilities to serve the immediate area, but not including outside
storage or maintenance yards for public utility use.
D. DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
1. All uses are subject to Site Plan review.
2. All uses shall be conducted within entirely enclosed buildings, except drivethrough
windows for financial institutions.
3. Outdoor displays and outdoor storage of materials, supplies or inventory are
prohibited.
4. Area, Setback and Height and related requirements shall conform with the
standards for the District, as set forth in Commercial Districts standards,
Subsection 3-3-6.
5. Off-Street Parking: Paved, screened parking, which may be covered, subject to
setback standards, shall be provided in accord with the requirements of Article 6,
Parking and Loading.
6. Landscaping, Walls, Screening: Refer to Article 5, Property Improvement
Standards.
7. Supplemental Regulations: Refer to Article 8, General Provisions.
Section 3-3-3 C-2 General Commercial District
General retail, service and office use is provided for in the C-2 District, as well as encouragement
of major, masterplanned retail shopping centers to respond to community and regional area
demand for goods and services. Combined, multiple-use developments with shared access,
parking, design themes and amenities are particularly intended.
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES. Only listed use of structures or land shall be permitted.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-27 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
1. Adult bookstore, adult novelty store and adult theater, subject to the conditions of
subsection 4-2-1.
2. Automotive repair and upholstering.
3. Banks and financial institutions, excluding non-chartered financial institutions.
4. Bus terminals.
5. Business and professional offices.
6. Carpet and rug cleaning services.
7. Cleaning and dying plants.
8. Bar/cocktail lounge subject to the following conditions or limitations:
a) Live music or entertainment shall only be allowed as an accessory use if the
facility is located a minimum of three hundred feet (300’) from the property
line of any residentially zoned or designated property. The area within the
facility designated for music or entertainment activities shall not exceed 5,000
square feet. All noise generated by live music or entertainment activities shall
be fully contained within the indoor space occupied by the bar/cocktail lounge.
b) The area devoted to patron dancing shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%)
of the total floor area.
9. Costume rentals.
10. Day care (elderly and youth).
11. Drive-through windows and outdoor teller facilities.
12. Employment agency.
13. Entertainment establishments, general, including: athletic facilities, bowling alleys,
electronic game centers and arcades, ice and roller rinks, miniature golf, performing
arts centers, pool halls and theaters.
14. Express office, including railway.
15. Fine arts studios.
16. Frozen food lockers.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-28 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
17. Funeral home.
18. Fur cleaning and storage.
19. Health club.
20. Hospital supplies.
21. Hotels and motels.
22. Key and lock service.
23. Large Retail User, subject to the provisions of Article 4-2-7.
24. Parking lots.
25. Pawn shop.
26. Personal and household services, such as barber and hair styling shops, beauty
salons, clothing alterations, dry cleaning shops, furniture and appliance repair,
copying services, self-service laundry, shoe repair shops (but excluding
drive-through facilities).
27. Plumbing shop.
28. Private business, professional, and trade schools.
29. Public utility facilities and offices including facilities to serve the immediate area,
but not including outside storage or maintenance yards for public utility use.
30. Restaurant, excluding drive-in and drive-through facilities, subject to the
following conditions or limitations:
a) Live music or entertainment shall only be allowed as an accessory use if the
facility is located a minimum of three hundred feet (300’) from the property
line of any residentially zoned or designated property. The area within the
facility designated for music or entertainment activities shall not exceed 5,000
square feet. All noise generated by live music or entertainment activities shall
be fully contained within the indoor space occupied by the restaurant.
b) The area devoted to patron dancing shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%)
of the total floor area.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-29 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
31. Retail stores with sales only, excluding drive-through facilities and convenience
uses as defined in Article 4.
32. Second hand stores.
33. Seed and feed, retail and sales office.
34. Sign painting shop.
35. Taxidermist.
36. Travel bureaus.
37. Typewriter and business machine sales and repair.
38. Window glass installation shops.
39. Veterinary Offices, provided such facilities are constructed to prevent
objectionable noises and odors outside the walls of the office. Boarding of animals
shall be permitted only for short time periods for the purpose of observation
incidental to care.
40. Non-Chartered Financial Institution, subject to the provisions of Article 4-2-8.
41. Massage Establishment, Tattoo Studio and Body Piercing Studio, subject to the
provisions of Article 4-2-10.
42. Brewpub, subject to the provisions of Article 4-2-15.
43. Microbrewery, producing 15,000 barrels of beer or less per year.
B. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
1. Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to one of the
permitted principal uses, unless otherwise excluded.
2. Signs, on-site, as provided in Article 7 of this Ordinance.
3. Portable Storage Containers, subject to Article 8-2 of this Ordinance.
C. USE PERMIT USES. The following uses may be approved by Use Permit:
1. Automobile service stations, subject to the provisions of Article 4.
2. Car wash (hand or automatic), subject to the provisions of Article 4.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-30 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
3. Convenience use subject to the provisions of Article 4.
4. Hospitals and related uses.
5. Limited outdoor display of nursery stock, lawn furniture, garden supplies and
outdoor accessory items, in conjunction with a primary retail use, when not in
conflict with pedestrian and/or traffic movement or established parking areas.
6. Storage buildings consisting of individually rented storage rooms which are
independently accessed and locked and are used for dead storage purposes.
7. Mobile home sales.
8. Veterinary Hospitals, provided such facilities are constructed to prevent
objectionable noises and odors outside the walls of the office.
a. Keeping or boarding of animals shall not occupy more than twenty-five
percent of the gross area of the office.
(1) There shall be no outdoor kennels or runs.
(2) There shall be no direct outside exit from any room containing
kennels.
D. DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
1. All uses are subject to Site Plan review.
2. Area, Setback and Height and related requirements shall conform with the
standards for the District, as set forth in Commercial Districts standards,
Subsection 3-3-6.
3. Off-Street Parking: Paved, screened parking, which may be covered, subject to
setback standards, shall be provided in accord with the requirements of Article 6,
Parking and Loading.
4. Landscaping, Walls, Screening: Refer to Article 5, Property Improvements
Standards.
5. Supplemental Regulations: Refer to Article 8, General Provisions.
Section 3-3-4 Central Business (CBD) District
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-31 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
The Central Business District provides a variety of uses including retail, governmental offices,
service uses, professional, cultural and entertainment establishments, hotels and motels, and
transportation facilities within a high density central business/civic center development area.
Commercial uses not specifically listed are prohibited. All wholesale and industrial uses are
prohibited as well as all second-hand merchandise sales.
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES. Only listed use of structures or land shall be permitted.
1. Banks and financial institutions, excluding drive-thru’s and non-chartered
financial institutions.
2. Business and professional offices.
3. Cultural facilities for the arts, such as dance, theater, art, music.
4. Entertainment establishments and uses, excluding adult bookstore, adult theater and
adult live entertainment establishments.
5. Exhibition hall and convention facilities.
6. Governmental offices, libraries, auditoriums, museums, and amphitheaters.
7. Hotel and motel.
8. Parking lots and structures.
9. Personal and professional services including: barber and hair styling shops, beauty
salons, ticket offices, bonding companies, brokerage firms, credit bureaus, credit
unions, employment agency, messenger service, public relations consultants, real
estate office, title insurance companies, copying services and travel bureaus.
10. Public utility offices.
11. Retail stores with sales only, excluding drive-through facilities, Large Retail
Users, and convenience uses as defined in Article 4.
12. Restaurant, excluding drive-in and drive-through facilities.
B. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
1. Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to one of the
permitted principal uses, unless otherwise excluded.
2. Signs, on site as provided in Article 7 of this Ordinance.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-32 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
3. Portable Storage Containers, subject to Article 8-2 of this Ordinance.
C. USE PERMIT USES. The following uses may be approved by Use Permit:
1. Day care (elderly or youth).
2. Institutions of a religious, educational or philanthropic nature; private clubs,
lodges, or fraternal organizations.
3. Outdoor seating for food and drinking establishments.
D. DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
1. All uses are subject to Site Plan review.
2. Area, Setback and Height and related requirements shall conform with the
standards for the District, as set forth in Commercial Districts standards,
Subsection 3-3-6.
3. Permitted commercial uses are restricted to closed buildings, with exceptions
included in Article 4, including outdoor storage of materials and supplies, displays.
4. Off-Street Parking: Paved, screened parking, which may be covered, subject to
setback standards, shall be provided in accord with the requirements of Article 6,
Parking and Loading.
5. Landscaping, Walls, Screening, Pools: Refer to Article 5, Property Improvements
Standards.
6. Supplemental Regulations: Refer to Article 8, General Provisions.
Section 3-3-5 Public Facilities (PFD) District
This District accommodates those uses which are provided by governmental entities for general
public usage or convenience, and to insure compatibility with adjacent residential areas.
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES. Only listed use of structures or land shall be permitted.
Facilities owned, leased or operated by City, County, State, United States government, or
school districts, including but not limited to offices, courts, schools, libraries, public
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-33 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
assembly buildings, athletic and play fields, and parking lots and structures, and public
utility facilities including wastewater treatment plants or water reclamation facilities.
B. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
1. Signs, on-site, as permitted in Article 7 of this Ordinance.
2. Wireless communications facilities, subject to the provisions of Subsection 4-2-4.
3. Portable Storage Containers, subject to Article 8-2 of this Ordinance.
C. USE PERMIT USES. The following uses may be approved by Use Permit.
1. Adult and juvenile detention facilities.
2. Food banks.
3. Maintenance facilities, excluding those required for building maintenance within
the complex.
4. Vehicle maintenance buildings and facilities.
D. DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
1. All uses are subject to Site Plan review.
2. Area, Setback and Height and related requirements shall conform with the
standards for the District, as set forth in Commercial Districts standards,
Subsection 3-3-6.
3. Off-Street Parking and loading, in accord with the provisions of Article 6, Parking
and Loading.
4. Landscaping, Walls, Screening, Pools: Refer to Article 5, Property Improvements
Standards.
5. Supplemental Regulations: Refer to Article 8, General Provisions.
Section 3-3-6 Commercial Districts Standards
A. DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS
Lot area, height, setback and related standards for the Commercial Districts (including
Central Business and Public Facilities Districts) are as follows:
Figure 8.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-34 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
(1) Buildings adjacent to any residential use or district are subject to additional minimum building setbacks as
defined in Subsection B.6 (c).
(2) Buildings with heights in excess of 30 ft. shall provide 1 foot of additional setback for each foot of building
height over 30 ft.
B. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
1. Substantial additions to or remodeling fifty percent (50%) or more of existing
buildings shall be subject to Site Plan review.
2. Required yards fronting on a public street shall be entirely landscaped except for
driveways and walkways. Parking and maneuvering areas shall not be permitted in
required yard fronting on a public street.
3. A mobile home, recreational vehicle, or similar vehicle shall be prohibited as a
facility for any commercial use permitted in this Ordinance except construction
trailers and offices which are allowed while construction is being conducted on the
site, or manufactured buildings that have staff-approved architectural treatments
(i.e., stucco).
4. Design Standards shall be submitted by the developer to the City for commercial
subdivisions.
5. Commercial uses are restricted to closed buildings, except as permitted with a Use
Permit, including storage of materials and supplies, displays, and listings, except
automobile service stations, which are allowed as a use.
6. Commercial uses located adjacent to or separated by an alley from any residential
use or District shall provide:
a. A ten (10) foot wide landscape strip, planted with one (1) tree every (20) linear
feet, shall be required along the common property line. Trees must be low water
use, as approved by the Arizona Department of Water Resources.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Districts C-O C-1 C-2 CBD PFD
Minimum Net Site Area 6,000 10,000 10,000 None None
Minimum Lot Width 60 ft. 150 ft. 150 ft. None None
Maximum Height 30 ft. 30 ft. 56 ft. 75 ft. 40 ft
Maximum Building Coverage 50% 50% 50% None None
Minimum Setbacks
Front 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft.(2) None None
Side 20 ft. (1) 20 ft. (1) N/A (1) None None
Rear 20 ft. (1) 20 ft. (1) N/A (1) None None
Street side 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. (2) 30 ft. 30 ft.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-35 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
b. A six (6) foot solid masonry wall shall be required along the common property
line and along interior property lines. An eight (8) foot wall may be required
for commercial projects warranting higher screening. Within the front yard
setback, a minimum wall height shall be three (3) foot.
c. The following minimum building setbacks as determined by the planned
building height:
Commercial
Building Height
(1)
Minimum Building Setback
Adjacent to Any Single-Family
or Two-Family Residential
Use or District
Minimum Building
Setback Adjacent to Any
Multi-Family Residential
Use or District
20 ft. or less 30 ft. 30 ft.
21 ft. to 30 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
Greater than
30 ft.
50 ft. plus 5 feet of additional
building setback for each foot
of building height over 30 ft. at
the point where such additional
building height occurs
50 ft.
(1) For the purposes of this section, building height shall be measured exclusive of the height of
any architectural elements or parapet walls permitted by Article 8-3, Sections B and C.
d. Walls which front onto a public street shall be constructed of masonry with
stucco, slump block, or brick designed to match the main building on the site.
7. Screening standards shall be observed as follows:
a. All outdoor storage areas for materials, trash, equipment, vehicles or similar
items shall be screened from view along all street frontages by a six (6) foot
wall constructed of slump block, brick, or masonry with a stucco or mortar wash
finish designed to match the main building on the site.
b. All loading, delivery and carwash service bays shall not front onto a public
street and shall be screened from public view with at least a six (6) foot wall,
constructed of brick, slump block, or masonry with a stucco or mortar wash
finish, or a similar finish, designed to match the main building on the site.
c. The storage of materials, trash, equipment, vehicles, or other items within an
enclosed storage area should not be substantially visible from adjoining streets
or properties.
d. Dismantling, servicing or repairing of vehicles and/or equipment shall be within
completely enclosed building or within an area enclosed by brick, block or
masonry walls.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-36 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
e. All outdoor refuse enclosures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
single-family, detached residential zoning district, or a minimum of 30 feet if a
30-foot wide landscape buffer is established and maintained between the
enclosure and the single-family, detached residential zoning district along the
entire length of the commercially designated property, as measured from the
exterior wall of the refuse enclosure to the nearest residential property line.
8. Buildings with metal or steel exteriors shall be architecturally altered through the
construction of veneers, facades, or other architectural treatments and installation
of landscaping to minimize the extent of metal surfaces visible from the street.
9. Drive-thru windows shall not face onto a public street. Stacking lanes shall be
screened from the street with three (3) foot masonry walls or berms.
10. All buildings located within a unified, planned development, such as a community
or neighborhood commercial center shall be architecturally styled to achieve
harmony and continuity of design. Building elevations shall be coordinated with
regard to color, texture, materials, finishes, and form.
11. All lighting shall be screened in a downward direction and directed away from
adjacent properties and streets.
12. Electrical utility, cable TV and all other utility lines for buildings shall be placed
underground. Overhead lines are permitted only for 69kV or greater electrical
transmission facilities.
13. Mechanical equipment, whether ground-level or roof mounted, and other fixtures
such as, but not limited to, telephones, vending machines and ice machines shall be
screened from public view and be so located to be perceived as an integral part of
the building.
14. All four sides of a building shall receive consistent architectural treatment.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-37 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
ARTICLE 3-4 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
The Industrial Districts provide for the industrial businesses of the community including research
and development, warehousing, wholesaling, manufacturing, assembling and limited retail and
service uses. The districts promote the economic diversity and employment of the City and
provide for varying levels of intensity of industrial uses. Performance and design standards assure
the City of high quality industrial development.
3-4-1 I-1 Light Industrial Park
3-4-2 I-2 General Industrial Park
3-4-3 Industrial District Standards
Section 3-4-1 I-1 Light Industrial Park
This District is intended to promote and protect light manufacturing, warehouses and research
and development industries; to cluster such industries into attractive planned Industrial Parks; to
minimize incompatibility of industrial uses with adjacent land uses; and provide sufficient space
in appropriate locations to businesses and manufacturing firms free from offensive land uses in
modern, landscaped buildings and surroundings.
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES. Only listed use of structures or land shall be permitted.
1. Manufacturing, assembling, and processing.
2. Medical Marijuana Dispensary subject to the provisions of Article 4-2-11.
3. Medical Marijuana Cultivation Location subject to the provisions of Article 4-
2-12.
4. Microbrewery, producing 15,000 barrels of beer or less per year.
5. Office buildings.
6. Parking lot or garage.
7. Private business, professional, and trade schools.
8. Public utility facilities
9. Scientific or research laboratories.
10. Similar uses as determined by the Zoning Administrator, or his designee.
11. Veterinary Offices;
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-38 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
12. Veterinary Hospitals and animal boarding facilities, provided:
a. Activities at such facilities are conducted entirely indoors, except for
supervised and controlled outdoor exercise areas;
b. The facilities are constructed to prevent objectionable noises and odors
outside the walls of the office;
c. There shall be no outdoor kennels or runs; and
d. There shall be no direct outside exit from any room containing kennels.
13. Warehouse, wholesale, or distribution facility.
B. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
1. Car wash, fueling station, and minor automotive repair for vehicles related to the
primary use and not operated as a general commercial operation.
2. Facilities and storage areas incidental to a construction project.
3. Outdoor storage, provided it is conducted within an area enclosed and screened
from view by a solid masonry wall on all sides and there is no storage taller than
the wall.
4. Portable Storage Containers, subject to Article 8-2 of this Ordinance.
5. Signs, on-site, as provided by Article 7 of this Ordinance.
6. Temporary construction offices.
7. Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to one of the
permitted principal uses, unless otherwise excluded.
8. Retail sales limited to 25% of total gross floor area.
C. USE PERMIT USES. The following uses may be approved by Use Permit.
1. Day care (elderly or youth).
2. Dwelling for a watchman or caretaker employed on the premises.
D. DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
1. All uses are subject to Site Plan review.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-39 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
2. Operations, including storage of anything except merchandise displayed for sale,
shall be conducted in a fully enclosed building or entirely behind walls, fences or
planting screens which fully conceal them from visibility off the lot. No
merchandise shall be displayed outside a building for sale or rent.
3. Area, Setback and Height and related requirements shall conform with the
standards for the District, as set forth in the Industrial Districts Standards,
Subsection 3-4-3.
4. Off-Street Parking and Loading: Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall
be provided in accordance with Article 6, Parking and Loading.
5. Landscaping, Walls, Screening: Refer to Article 5, Property Improvement
Standards.
6. Supplemental Regulations: Refer to Article 8, General Provisions.
Section 3-4-2 I-2 General Industrial Park
The I-2 General Industrial Park District is to promote and protect large and intensive industrial
manufacturing plants and their appurtenant uses, and to provide attractive and well maintained,
planned Industrial Parks for the location of such activities.
A. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES. Only listed use of structures or land shall be permitted.
1. Adult bookstore, adult novelty store and adult theater, subject to the conditions of
subsection 4-2-1.
2. Food Bank.
3. Animal boarding, breeding, shelter, or pound.
4. Automotive repair including body and fender works.
5. Brewery, producing 40,000 barrels of beer or less per year.
6. Cement and paving material mixing plant.
7. Egg handling facility.
9. Parking lot or garage.
10. Private business, professional, and trade schools.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-40 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
10. Public utility facilities, wastewater treatment plants, and water reclamation
facilities.
11. Emissions testing and vehicle licensing.
12. Foundry or casting of metal which does not cause noxious odors or fumes.
13. Highway maintenance facilities.
14. Machine shop.
15. Manufacturing, assembling, and processing. .
16. Meat products, packing, smoking and curing, providing no objectionable fumes are
emitted.
17. Medical Marijuana Cultivation Location subject to the provisions of Article 4-
2-12.
18. Medical Marijuana Dispensary subject to the provisions of Article 4-2-12.
19. Monument Works
20. Office buildings.
21. Private Commercial Outdoor Entertainment Venue
22. Public works facilities.
23. Radio and television transmitting tower and facilities.
24. Sand blasting.
25. Scientific or research laboratories.
26. Sewage disposal and treatment plant.
27. Tire retreading and vulcanizing.
28. The following uses, provided they are conducted within a building or an area
enclosed and screened from view by a solid masonry wall on all sides:
a. Contractors equipment storage yard or plant, or rental of equipment commonly
used by contractors.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-41 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
b. Lumber yard, planning mills.
c. Motion picture studio.
d. Transfer company, trucking terminal.
29. Similar uses as determined by the Zoning Administrator, or his designee.
30. Veterinary Offices.
31. Veterinary Hospitals.
32. Warehouse, wholesale or distribution facility.
B. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
1. Car wash, fueling station, and minor automotive repair for vehicles related to the
primary use and not operated as a general commercial operation.
2. Facilities and storage areas incidental to a construction project.
3. Outdoor storage, provided it is conducted within an area enclosed and screened
from view by a solid masonry wall on all sides and there is no storage taller than
the wall.
4. Portable Storage Containers, subject to Article 8-2 of this Ordinance.
.
5. Signs, on-site as provided in Article 7 of this Ordinance.
6. Temporary construction offices.
7. Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to one of the
permitted principal uses, unless otherwise excluded.
C. USE PERMIT USES. The following uses may be approved by Use Permit.
1. Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture.
2. Distillation of bones, coal, refuse, grain or wood.
3. Fertilizer manufacture.
4. Gas manufacture and cylinder recharging.
5. Glue or gelatin manufacture.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-42 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
6. Hazardous processes or explosives storage, including those materials or products
such as manganese or fuel oil and similar materials which represent fire hazards,
only upon Fire Chief approval.
7. Rubber goods manufacture.
8. Mineral extraction, including sand or gravel pits.
9. Smelting of tin, copper, zinc, or iron ores.
10. Transmitting stations.
11. Tannery.
D. DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
1. All uses are subject to Site Plan review.
2. Area, Setback and Height and related requirements shall conform with the
standards for the District, as set forth in the Industrial Districts Standards,
Subsection 3-4-3.
3. No use is permitted which will create or is likely to create conditions detrimental
to the health, safety and general welfare of the community, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator or his designee.
4. No use is permitted which will emit any offensive odor, dust, noxious gas, noise
vibration, smoke, heat or glare beyond the boundaries of the lot on which such use
is conducted.
5. Off-Street Parking and Loading: Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall
be provided in accordance with Article 6, Parking and Loading.
6. Landscaping, Walls, Screening: Refer to Article 5, Property Improvement
Standards.
7. Supplemental Regulations: Refer to Article 8, General Provisions.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-43 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
Section 3-4-3 Industrial Districts Standards
A. DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS
Lot area, height, setback and related standards for the Industrial Districts are as follows:
Figure 9.
* Thirty (30) feet per side; provided further that a ten (10) foot area
adjacent to the property line be landscaped and maintained.
** The height of a building located in an I-1 district that will penetrate a slope
of 100:1 from the runway centerline or runway end of an operating airport
shall only exceed 40 feet upon a determination by the Federal Aviation
Administration (“FAA”) that the proposed building height presents no
hazard to air navigation as evidenced by the receipt of a Determination of No
Hazard to Air Navigation issued by the FAA.
B. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
1. All new buildings and uses of land or substantial additions to or remodeling twenty
percent (20%) or more of the total building area of existing buildings shall be
subject to Site Plan review.
2. Required yards fronting on an arterial street shall be entirely landscaped except
for driveways and walkways. Along all other public streets, a minimum
landscaped area of thirty (30) feet per side shall be provided. Parking and
maneuvering area shall not be permitted within the landscaped area.
3. Performance Standards: No use shall be established, maintained or conducted
within any Industrial District which may cause any of the following:
a. Dissemination of smoke, gas, dust, noxious odor or any other atmosphere
pollutant outside the building in which the use is conducted; or with respect to
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Districts I-1 I-2
Minimum
Site Area
1 acre 5 acres
Lot Width 150 ft. 300 ft.
Lot Depth 200 ft. 400 ft.
Maximum
Building Coverage
50% 50%
Maximum Height 50 ft.** 50 ft.
Minimum Setbacks Front 30 ft. 50 ft.
Side* 30 ft. 30 ft.
Rear 20 ft. 50 ft.
Street
side
30 ft. 30 ft.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-44 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
a use that is not conducted within a completely enclosed building, any
dissemination whatsoever.
b. Noise perceptible beyond the property boundaries of the immediate site.
c. Discharge of any waste material into any water course or ditch.
d. Dissemination of glare or vibration beyond the immediate site.
e. Potential hazards (fire, explosion, radioactive or any similar cause) to property
in the same or any adjacent district.
f. Conditions detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the
community, as determined by the Zoning Administrator or his designee.
4. All principal buildings and all accessory buildings or structures, including
loading and unloading facilities shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet
away from any existing or planned residential use, except where adjoining a
railroad right-of-way.
5. A mobile home, recreational vehicle, or similar vehicle shall be prohibited as a
facility for any industrial Use Permitted in this Ordinance except construction
trailers and offices may be allowed while construction of the primary structure is
being completed.
6. Manufactured buildings would be permitted if their architecture complies with
Staff-approved exterior materials.
7. Industrial uses located adjacent to or separated by an alley from any existing or
planned residential use shall provide:
a. A ten (10) foot wide landscape strip, planted with one (1) tree every (20) linear
feet, shall be required along the common property line. Trees must be low water
use, as approved by the Arizona Department of Water Resources.
b. A six (6) foot solid masonry wall shall be required along the common property
line and along interior property lines. An eight (8) foot wall may be required for
industrial projects warranting higher screening. Within the front yard setback, a
minimum wall height shall be three (3) foot.
c. Walls which front onto a public street shall be constructed of masonry with
stucco, slump block, or brick designed to match the main building on the site.
8. Screening standards shall be observed as follows:
a. All outdoor storage areas for materials, trash, equipment, vehicles or similar
items shall be screened from view along all street frontages by a six (6) foot
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-45 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
wall constructed of slump block, brick, or masonry with a stucco or mortar wash
finish designed to match the main building on the site.
b. Loading, delivery, roll-up/dock doors, and service and wash bays may front onto
a public street or a limited access highway, provided all of the following
circumstances are met:
(1) There is no existing or planned residential use within 500 feet of the rightof-
way line on the opposite side of the public street or limited access
highway;
(2) The loading, delivery, roll-up/dock doors, and service and wash bays
occupy a maximum of 50% of the building width facing the public street
(50% may be increased to 75% if the site is a corner lot);
(3) The loading, delivery, roll-up/dock doors, and service and wash bays shall
be screened from public view with a combination of a two (2) foot berm
and a six (6) foot wall, or an eight (8) foot wall. Either wall is to be
constructed of brick, slump block, or masonry with a stucco or mortar wash
finish, or a similar finish, designed to match the main building on the site;
(4) Other than along a road designated as a scenic arterial, a minimum of two
(2) continuous offset rows of 24 inch box trees are planted twenty feet on
center along the frontage of the public street or limited access highway,
within the required 30-foot wide landscape area; and
(5) When loading, delivery, roll-up dock doors, and service and wash bays front
on a scenic arterial, as designated on the Land Use and Transportation Map
of the General Plan, a 40-foot wide landscaped area shall be required, and a
minimum of two (2) continuous offset rows of trees shall be planted twenty
feet on center along the frontage of the scenic arterial with the external of
the two (2) rows being 24 inch box trees and the interior of the two (2) rows
being 36 inch box trees. Clustering of trees to provide better screening may
be approved at site plan review and approval.
c. The storage of materials, trash, equipment, vehicles, or other items within an
enclosed storage area should not be substantially visible from adjoining streets
or properties.
d. Dismantling, servicing or repairing of vehicles and/or equipment shall be within
completely enclosed building or within an area enclosed by brick, block or
masonry walls.
e. All outdoor refuse enclosures shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
existing or planned residential use, or a minimum of 30 feet if a 30-foot wide
landscape is established and maintained between the enclosure and the existing
or planned residential use along the entire length of the industrially designated
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-46 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
property, as measured from the exterior wall of the refuse enclosure to the
nearest residential property line.
9. Buildings with metal or steel exteriors shall be architecturally altered through the
construction of veneers, facades, or other architectural treatments and installation
of landscaping to minimize the extent of metal surfaces visible from the street.
10. All buildings located within a unified, planned industrial park development shall
be architecturally styled to achieve harmony and continuity of design. Building
elevations shall be coordinated with regard to color, texture, materials, finishes, and
form.
11. All lighting shall be screened in a downward direction and directed away from
adjacent properties and streets.
12. Electrical utility, cable TV and all other utility lines for buildings shall be placed
underground. Overhead lines are permitted only for 69kV or greater electrical
transmission facilities.
13. Mechanical equipment, whether ground-level or roof mounted, and other fixtures
such as, but not limited to, telephones, vending machines and ice machines shall be
screened from street view and be so located to be perceived as an integral part of
the building.
14. All four sides of a building shall receive consistent architectural treatment.
15. Above ground silos, tanks, and other similar structures that are accessory uses to
the primary building and are not occupied may be either freestanding or integrated
into a building, up to a maximum height of 65 feet, exclusive of mechanical
equipment, screening, and architectural embellishments, which shall be limited to
five (5) feet above the height of the silo, tank, or structure. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the maximum height of any above ground silo, tank or similar structure
provided for herein that will penetrate a slope of 100:1 from the runway centerline
or runway end of an operating airport shall only exceed 40 feet upon a
determination by the Federal Aviation Administration (“FAA”) that the proposed
height presents no hazard to air navigation as evidenced by the receipt of a
Determination of No Hazard to Air Navigation issued by the FAA.
16. Any part of the silos, tanks, and other similar structures visible from the public way
shall be painted to match the primary building and shall be located at the side or
rear of the primary building so as to be partially screened by the primary building.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-47 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
ARTICLE 3-5 PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
This District is intended to accommodate, encourage and promote developments with innovative
design involving residential and nonresidential land uses, which together form an attractive,
harmonious unit in the community. Such a planned development may be designed as a large-scale
separate entity, able to function as an individual community or neighborhood; as a small-scale
project which requires flexibility because of unique circumstances or design characteristics; or as
a transitional area between dissimilar land uses. The planned development, if so specified at the
time of zoning approval, may include standards or criteria that differ from those regulations
pertaining to other districts (including deviations from the development standards prescribed in
Section 3-2-7.A) when warranted by circumstances such as but not limited to: alternative
residential lot design, innovative architectural or subdivision design features, retirement housing,
in-fill development involving a small or irregularly shaped parcel, or other circumstances found
by the City through the PAD approval to merit departure from the regulations pertaining to other
districts.
The PAD may be used either as an overlay district to provide flexibility in an otherwise established
land use district, or it can be used as an independent district. This district, which may only be
developed in accordance with an approved development plan, is further established to provide both
the developer and the City with reasonable assurances that specific, proposed uses, intensities and
phasing are consistent with the adopted General Plan.
3-5-1 Planned Area Development Applicability
3-5-2 Permitted Uses
3-5-3 Planned Area Development Procedures
3-5-4 Development Standards
3-5-5 Amenity Expectations
Section 3-5-1 Planned Area Development Applicability
The provisions of this Article shall apply to all Planned Area Development documents, and any
additional or supplemental information that is deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator,
or his designee, to meet the following objectives: to accommodate variations in building design,
lot arrangements and land uses for a maximum choice in the types of environments for residential,
commercial, industrial uses and facilities; to provide for a coordinated and compatibly arranged
variety of land uses -- with efficient and safe traffic circulation, including the separation of
pedestrian from vehicular traffic -- through innovative site planning; to maintain quality of living
excellence with the provision of usable open space standard to minimize adverse environmental
impact on surrounding areas; and to assist in fulfilling the goals, objectives and policies of the City
of Goodyear General Plan and amendments thereto.
Section 3-5-2 Permitted Uses
All uses permitted within the PAD District are determined by the underlying zoning district, or
by an approved development plan for the site. Residential neighborhoods shall include a range of
types and styles. In the development of a balanced community, a variety of housing within one
project shall be deemed most in keeping with the objectives of this Article. All other uses shall be
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-48 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
determined by the compatibility of such uses with each other as well as with surrounding land uses
and shall conform to policies established in the City of Goodyear General Plan.
Densities and intensity permitted in the PAD district shall conform with the City of Goodyear
General Plan except as to portions of the PAD specifically covered by a plan of development,
development agreement, standards or stipulations adopted prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance as set forth in Section 1-1-5-B.
Section 3-5-3 Planned Area Development Procedures
An application for a Planned Area Development district may be filed as a Preliminary PAD district
or a Final PAD district, as provided herein. A Final PAD district can be used either as an overlay
district to provide flexibility in an otherwise established land use district, or it can be used as an
independent district. Prior to submitting an application for a Preliminary PAD district or Final
PAD district, a pre-application meeting shall be held between the owner or owners representative(s)
and the City to determine which process would be applicable to the proposed development.
For large, multiphase projects, an application may be filed for a Preliminary PAD district
accompanied by conceptual preliminary development plan with sufficient description and
documentation to identify the nature, mix and general arrangement, density, open space, and quality
of the project. For small-scale or single phase projects, a Final PAD district may be requested,
provided all of the information required for both a Preliminary and Final PAD application is
submitted with the application.
Applications for a change of zoning district to Preliminary PAD and/or Final PAD, and any
amendment of any term conditions, stipulations or other requirements set forth in an ordinance
approving such changes, are zoning amendments pursuant to Section 1-3-1 of this Ordinance.
Applications for a Preliminary PAD, Final PAD or an amendment of any term, condition,
stipulation or other requirement set forth in an ordinance amending the boundaries of a Final PAD
Zoning District shall be decided by the City Council following receipt of recommendations from
the Planning and Zoning Commission. Such applications shall be processed pursuant to the
procedures set forth in Section 1-3-1 of this Ordinance for processing an application to amend the
boundaries of a Zoning District as supplemented herein. The Development Review Committee’s
and Planning and Zoning Commission’s reviews and recommendations shall be guided by the
same considerations set for in Section 1-3-1 of this Ordinance that are to be considered in their
review of an application to amend the boundaries of a Zoning District.
Approval of an application for Preliminary PAD zoning does not does not confer any right to
develop the property. No preliminary or final plat, building permit, zoning permit or any other
approvals of any development or use shall be issued for property under a Preliminary PAD zoning
designation. The owner(s) of property located within a Preliminary PAD zoning district shall
seek and obtain an ordinance amending the zoning district applicable to the property as Final PAD
within two (2) years of the date the City Council approved the application for Preliminary PAD
zoning unless an extension has been granted by the City Council. The failure to comply with this
requirement; any stipulation and/or condition of approval included in the ordinance zoning the
property Preliminary PAD; or any other applicable development agreement or development plan
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-49 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
or the like shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance and shall be grounds for Council to rescind
the Preliminary PAD rezoning and for the City to pursue all other remedies available to it for
violations of City Ordinances.
A. PRELIMINARY PAD APPLICATIONS
An application for a Preliminary PAD district shall be filed on form(s) provided by the
Development Services Department and shall include: the information identified on the
application form(s); the information identified in the Administrative Process Manual; the
information set forth herein and specified elsewhere in this Ordinance; and any other data
required by the Zoning Administrator that is needed for the review of the application.
The application shall include a preliminary development plan (showing general land use
concepts, but not requiring lotting plans at this stage) that demonstrates consistency and
compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, codes, rules,
regulations, policies, and guidelines, including, but not limited to, this Ordinance, the
Subdivision Regulations, the Engineering Standards, the Flood Prevention Standards and
the City’s General Plan, and that includes all of the following:
1. Location information including an area map showing adjacent property ownership and
existing uses within five hundred (500) feet of the parcel, and a legal description of the
metes and bounds of the parcel.
2. Physical constraints to the site’s development: existing topographical features,
including any portions of the site that are subject to flooding (indicating the extent and
frequency, retention areas, calculations and maintenance responsibility); proposed
roadway or major utility line extensions which may impact development; areas within
aircraft approach and holding patterns and such other impediments to the property’s
use and improvement as may be present or planned for the future.
3. Proposed site development that depicts the following:
a. The location and nature of the various uses and their areas in acres (summarizing
land use areas, total number of dwelling units and approximate percentage
allocation by dwelling type, calculation of the residential density in dwelling units
per gross acre as defined in the General Plan;
b. The proposed circulation system, including any improvements (public or private)
needed to accommodate additional traffic;
c. The open space system (including a general statement regarding ownership and
maintenance) with indication of responsiveness to General Plan recreation/open
space and perimeter treatments;
d. Relationship of the project to surrounding land uses; and,
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-50 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
e. Evidence of proposed land use compatibility with existing and projected
community requirements, with the goals of the General Plan.
B. PRELIMINARY PAD REVIEW AND APPROVAL
1. Applications for a Preliminary PAD shall be decided by the City Council following
receipt of recommendations from the Planning and Zoning Commission. Such
applications shall be processed pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 1-3-1 of
this Ordinance for processing an application to amend the boundaries of a Zoning
District as supplemented herein. The Development Review Committee’s and
Planning and Zoning Commission’s reviews and recommendations shall be guided by
the same considerations set for in section 1-3-1 of this Ordinance that are to be
considered in their review of an application to amend the boundaries of a Zoning
District.
2. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions, or reject and application for
a Preliminary PAD district.
a. City Council may approve a Preliminary PAD district only upon finding that the
proposal meets the intent, objectives and general requirements of the PAD district
and is in conformance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances,
codes, rules, regulations, policies, and guidelines, including, but not limited to, this
Ordinance, the Subdivision Regulations, the Engineering Standards, the Flood
Prevention Standards and the City’s General Plan.
b. The Council may, as necessary, attach conditions to the Preliminary PAD district
approval, which may include but are not limited to the following considerations:
intensities and densities; use limitations; landscaping; screen planting; setback and
height of building; paving, location of drives and parking areas; storm drainage
and storm water retention; public and/or private open space; shape and size of lots;
grouping and uses of buildings; maintenance of grounds; regulation of signs;
fences and walls; adequacy of vehicle and pedestrian circulation and access; timing
and phasing; elevations and architectural theme; or any other reasonable
considerations the Council finds germane to maintain community character and
neighborhood quality.
3. Upon City Council approval of an application for the Preliminary PAD district zoning,
the zoning of the property shall be, by Ordinance, reflected on the City zoning map as
a Preliminary PAD district. No preliminary or final plat, building permit, zoning
permit or any other approvals of any development or use shall be issued for property
under a Preliminary PAD zoning designation.
C. FINAL PAD APPLICATIONS
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-51 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
An application for a Final Planned Area Development district shall be filed on form(s)
provided by the Development Services Department and shall include: the information
identified in the application form(s); the information identified in the Administrative
Process Manual; the information set forth herein and specified elsewhere in this
Ordinance; any other data that required by the Zoning Administrator that is needed for
the review of the application. Applications for an amendment shall be signed by the
property owner(s) or an authorized agent of the property owner(s) and all applicable fees
shall be paid when the application is submitted. The application shall include:
1. A final development plan, which includes, at a minimum, all information required on
the preliminary development plan as revised in response to preliminary plan approval,
with plans showing location and type of all improvements including schematic grading
plans with proposed treatment of sloped retention areas; and the following explanatory,
supporting details:
a. introduced by a statement of intended design philosophy and environmental quality
(text, graphics, or photographic examples); and,
b. traffic analysis, including interior roadways, typical development envelopes for
residential uses and building arrangements for recreational, employment,
commercial or institutional uses; and,
c. standards including demand and capacity analyses for municipal systems such as
transportation, water supply, sewage disposal, and other community facilities, such
as schools, public safety, cultural and social services (such as libraries or multigenerational
activity centers); and,
d. if the development is to be phased, a general indication, with chronology of the
intended total project’s staging; and,
e. if applicable, a list of development standards from which departure is requested
stating justifications for each; and,
f. plans and elevations of building types, materials, and colors, to be developed with
the Final PAD district; and,
g. the number of dwelling units by type with estimated school enrollment to be
generated within the entire Final PAD district.
2. Conceptual water, sewer and drainage master plans that conform to the requirements
of all applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations,
policies, and guidelines, including, but not limited to, this Ordinance, the Subdivision
Regulations, the Engineering Standards, the Flood Prevention Standards and the City’s
General Plan.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-52 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
D. FINAL PAD REVIEW AND APPROVAL
1. Applications for a Final PAD zoning district shall be decided by the City Council
following receipt of recommendations from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Such applications shall be processed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 1-
3-1 of this Ordinance for processing an application to amend the boundaries of a
Zoning District as supplemented herein. The Development Review Committee’s and
Planning and Zoning Commission’s reviews and recommendations shall be guided by
the same considerations set for in Section 1-3-1 of this Ordinance that are to be
considered in their review of an application to amend the boundaries of a Zoning
District.
2. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions, or reject an application for a
Preliminary PAD district.
a. City Council may approve a Final PAD district only upon finding that the proposal
meets the intent, objectives and general requirements of the PAD district and is in
conformance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, codes,
rules, regulations, policies, and guidelines, including, but not limited to, this
Ordinance, the Subdivision Regulations, the Engineering Standards, the Flood
Prevention Standards and the City’s General Plan.
b. The Council may, as necessary, attach conditions to the Final PAD district
approval, which may include but are not limited to the following considerations:
intensities and densities; use limitations; landscaping; screen planting; setback and
height of building; paving, location of drives and parking areas; storm drainage
and storm water retention; public and/or private open space; shape and size of lots;
grouping and uses of buildings; maintenance of grounds; regulation of signs;
fences and walls; adequacy of vehicle and pedestrian circulation and access; timing
and phasing; elevations and architectural theme; or any other reasonable
considerations the Council finds germane to maintain community character and
neighborhood quality.
3. Development of property within a Final PAD shall meet all applicable standards of
design and construction required by applicable federal, state, and local laws,
ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, policies, and guidelines, including, but not limited
to, this Ordinance, the Subdivision Regulations, the Engineering Standards, the
Flood Prevention Standards and the City’s General Plan, unless modifications are
accepted by the City Council when approving the Final PAD district. The applicant
shall submit and the Development Services Department shall make a part of the case
file record statements regarding any and all approved deviations from the provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance.
4. Upon City Council approval of an application for Final PAD district, the zoning of the
property shall be, by Ordinance, reflected on the City zoning map as being in the Final
PAD District.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-53 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
Section 3-5-4 Development Standards
The development plan shall respond to the following requirements:
A. FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT
Quality land improvement, consistent with the Goodyear General Plan, is required of
developers in exchange for the applicant’s alternative proposals for meeting or exceeding
standards of the underlying zoning district (or comparable district); and, such alternative
development methods may be expressly stipulated in the final development plan.
1. Density/Intensity. Specific dwelling unit yields or Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.)
may be proposed for individual parcels and development units, notwithstanding
otherwise applicable standards, so long as they are consistent with the principles of
the General Plan.
2. Minimum Lot Area. Single-family residential developments may propose lotting
arrangements with a portion of the site in parcels with less than the otherwise
applicable minimum lot area of 5,500 square feet, in consideration of the following
criteria as well as other justifications which the applicant may provide:
a. Mixed housing types including multi-family units with attention to shelter
affordability;
b. Additional useable open space being provided;
c. Compact residential lots are proximate to employment or freeway interchange
or create a desirable housing market, such as attracting active retirees;
d. Lots with areas less than 5,500 square feet are internal to the development or are
adjacent to non-residential uses; and/or
e. Illustrations of proposed street scene where garages are not dominating, porches
are provided, or the like.
3. Property Improvement Specifications. Unless otherwise requested, approved and
specified on the final development plan, improvements to individual lots or sites
shall conform with the standards set forth in the Zoning District tables for the
district most nearly approximating proposed uses and intensities of use. (See, for
example, Residential District Table in Section 3-2-7.)
a. Parking. Joint use parking facilities, including appropriately-buffered and
screened recreational vehicle, automotive maintenance and washing areas, may
be proposed in accord with Article 6, Parking and Loading.
(1) Parking spaces shall be designated for parks and recreation areas.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-54 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
(2) Separate, designated spaces shall be provided for temporary model home
sales or rental offices.
b. Signage. Comprehensive signage packages shall be proposed to identify and
provide entry monumentation, street signs and common area information;
including monument signs for free-standing non-residential uses and directory
signage for retail, office or industrial park centers.
c. Other improvements. Off-site installation of municipal system extensions, including
streets, sidewalks, pathways, drainage facilities, water, sewer and private-provider
utility trenching and sub-station facilities necessary to serve the development may
be masterplanned in compliance with City engineering specifications or with
attenuation methods and materials approved by the Public Works Director, or his
designee.
B. OPEN SPACE
Allotments of required percentages of the gross site area in improved or preserved open space
to be maintained shall be specified in the final development plan. Desert or agricultural lands,
portions of natural washes, stormwater retention areas, golf courses, and lineal pathway/trail
corridors may be accepted as appropriate to the development. Minimum open space shall be
provided, based on the following average lot sizes:
Average Lot Size Minimum Open Space
5,500-7,000 sq.ft. 15%
7,001-10,000 sq.ft. 12%
10,001-15,000 sq.ft. 10%
15,001+ sq.ft. no minimum
1. Common open space useable for recreation or leisure purposes shall constitute not less
than seventy-five (75) percent of residential development’s open space requirements in
development units where the number of multi-family units and lots of R1-7 area
standard or less represents the majority of dwelling units. Percentages for larger lot
development units or non-residential parcels shall be specified in the final development
plan.
2. Peripheral landscape tracts are required along arterial roadways and the outer edges of
planned development units. Tract widths, wall treatments and improvements such as
pathways or street furniture shall be specified on the final development plan. Tracts
thirty-five (35) feet or greater in width may be abutted by lots with two-story dwellings.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-55 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
Section 3-5-5 Amenity Expectations
Development plans shall specifically address and provide positive response in terms of land
improvement enrichments for the benefit of residents, or business users, their visitors and the entire
Goodyear community, including, but not limited to, the following:
A. RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS.
Safety, spaciousness, attractive appearance, streetscape, recreation, outdoor enjoyment, residential
privacy and compatibility among land uses and housing types are among considerations to which
development plans shall respond.
Figure 11.
1. Design. Planned neighborhoods’ visual
appearance shall be enhanced by creative,
masterplanned response to Section 8-1-A,
Design Standards.
2. Facilities. Housing areas are expected to
provide and maintain amenities to enhance
neighborhood livability and sustainability for
residents of all ages.
a. Recreational facilities. Each dwelling should be located within one thousand
(1000) feet of the nearest common open space or within five hundred (500)
feet of a pathway linkage (sidewalk/bikepath) to such facilities.
b. Drainage structures. Open, flow-conducting swales, retention or detention
basins, which may be coordinated with areas credited toward open space
requirements, should be engineered to prevent safety hazard or creation of
attractive nuisance.
3. Community Integration. Neighborhood design contributes to City-wide
enhancements as well as features which provide residential diversity and linkages
among neighborhoods.
a. Pathways. Bicycle and pedestrian connections to schools, parks, shopping and
other neighborhood activity centers should be conveniently accessible from all
dwellings.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-56 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
b. Neighborhood identity. Entry monumentation, Figure 12.
banners, public art, variations in lighting
fixtures or street furniture help to distinguish
neighborhood units.
c. Residential safety. Pedestrian and security
lighting, non-access landscaping varieties,
traffic visibility, elimination of lurking areas
and public safety/emergency accessibility
should be addressed.
B. COMMERCIAL, EMPLOYMENT OR INSTITUTIONAL USES.
Safety, reduction of traffic congestion, architectural excellence, compatible signage,
landscaping/street furniture treatments in peripheral tracts and parking lots, integration of
impacts on other properties in the vicinity are among considerations to which development
plans shall respond.
1. Design. Planned neighborhoods’ visual appearance shall be enhanced by creative,
masterplanned response to the guiding considerations of Section 8-1-A-2.
2. Facilities. Community-benefiting spaces, fixtures and conveniences should be
installed and maintained in accessible, secure locations.
a. Activity centers. Gathering places (including performance sites, outdoor dining,
recreation or relaxation areas) may be provided for customers, business invitees,
employees and residential neighbors’ use at appropriate times.
b. Joint use facilities. Parking, playing fields, restrooms, drinking fountains,
plazas, walkways and other facilities may be installed and maintained for
community use.
c. Transportation amenities. Bicycle and pedestrian convenience should be
stressed, with consideration of bus stop improvements, park-and-ride lots,
employee shuttle services and the like.
3. Community integration. Non-residential development should seek to relate, both
visually and functionally, with its surrounding neighborhood.
a. Open space connection. Recreation space and multi-purpose pathways are
employed as means to allow employees or customers from the adjacent
neighborhood to access shopping or jobs and interact with business people.
___________________________________________________________________________________________
City of Goodyear 3-57 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: January 22, 2018
b. Transitional buffering. Separation distance, landscaping, walls or joint-use
areas are provided to protect residential privacy and soften the impacts and edges
between non-residential and housing areas.
c. Impact mitigation. Noise, glare, dust, and industrial emissions should be abated
to acceptable residential levels at residential property lines. Exposure to
hazardous materials of any type is prohibited outside of enclosed, controlledenvironment
structures.
City of Goodyear 4-1 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
ARTICLE 4 SPECIAL USES, USES REQUIRING ADDITIONAL
EVALUATION, NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS
This Article provides for land use activities which may be included in the City of Goodyear, but
because of their unique nature, potential for creating impacts on other uses, or pre-existing legal
status require particular consideration as to their proper location and/or maintenance in relation
to adjacent established or intended uses, or to the planned development of the City. The
conditions controlling the location and operation of such uses are established by the following
provisions.
In addition to those uses specifically classified and permitted in each district, there are certain
additional uses which it may be necessary to allow because of their unusual characteristics or the
service they provide the public; and there may be uses or structures that were established prior
to ordinances with which they do not conform and are, therefore, legally nonconforming.
4-1 Special Uses
4-2 Uses Requiring Additional Evaluation
4-3 Nonconforming Uses and Buildings
4-4 Temporary Uses
ARTICLE 4-1 SPECIAL USES
The City Council shall have authority to permit the following uses of land or structures, or both,
subject to procedures and conditions of approval, set forth in Subsection 4-1-1, upon finding that
the proposed location and establishment of any such use will be desirable or necessary to the
public convenience or welfare and will be harmonious and compatible with other uses adjacent
to and in the vicinity of the selected site or sites.
4-1-1 Procedure and Conditions of Approval
4-1-2 Special Uses Considered in Any District
4-1-3 Special Uses in Specified Districts
Section 4-1-1 Procedure and Conditions of Approval
Applications for Special Use Permits for those specific uses identified in Sections 4-1-2 and 4-1-
3 shall be processed in the same manner as an application to amend the boundaries of a zoning
district as set forth in Section 1-3-1 (Amendments) as supplemented by Section 1-3-4 (Special
Use Permits). Amendments to the Special Use shall be processed in the same manner as the
initial application.
Section 4-1-2 Special Uses Considered in Any District
Particular uses not otherwise listed in any District; or those which are listed in certain Districts
but which, under appropriate circumstances, may be considered for approval in any location,
notwithstanding its zoning map district classification are as follows:
City of Goodyear 4-2 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
A. CONSIDERED USES.
Uses which may be considered in any District are:
1. Churches, parish houses, convents, temples and similar places of worship, except
temporary revival tents and temporary buildings.
2. Wireless communications facilities, subject to the requirements of subsection 4-2-4.
3. Day care (elderly or youth), preschool and child care nurseries.
4. Residential office uses permitted in Section 3-3-1-A-1, -3 and -4 and residential
service uses permitted in Section 3-3-2-A-8 and -10.
5. Public, Parochial and Charter Schools.
6. Energy generation facility.
7. Inert Material Landfill which purpose is to facilitate land reclamation of a Public
Project Borrow Pit.
B. ACCESSORY USES.
Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to one of the permitted
principal uses, unless otherwise excluded.
C. DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
Unless otherwise modified by Council approval, the standards and regulations of the
District in which the Special Use is located shall apply.
Section 4-1-3 Special Uses Considered in Specified Districts
Particular uses not otherwise listed in any District; or those which are listed in certain Districts
but which, under appropriate circumstances, may be considered for approval in specified
Districts are follows:
A. CONSIDERED USES.
Uses which may be considered in certain Districts are:
1. Commercial Districts
a. Adult live entertainment, erotic dance or performance studio (C-2 only),
subject to the requirements of subsection 4-2-1.
City of Goodyear 4-3 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
b. Amusement park, auditorium, stadium, arena, gymnasium, or other similar
places for public events. (C-2 only)
c. Bus terminal, railroad passenger station.
d. Large Retail Users (C-2 only), subject to the requirements of subsection 4-2-
7.
e. Mini-storage and recreational vehicle storage facilities.
f. Plant nurseries, which are defined as a business where trees, shrubs, flowers
and other plants are grown on or brought to the premises and maintained there
for the purpose of sale from the premises. Such other additional products
shall be permitted to be sold as are customarily incidental to the plant nursery
operation.
g. Private clubs and fraternal organizations.
h. Restaurants, bars/cocktail lounges, brewpubs or microbreweries with any
of the following factors (C-2 only):
1) live music or entertainment when the facility is located less than three
hundred feet (300’) from the property line of any residentially zoned
or designated property;
2) the area within the facility designated for music or entertainment
activities exceeds 5,000 square feet;
3) the area devoted to patron dancing exceeds twenty-five percent (25%)
of the total floor area; or,
4) open after hours as defined by State law (generally, closing time of the
dance floor is later than that of the bar).
i. Teen Entertainment Center, if the facility is located a minimum of 500 feet
from a bar/cocktail lounge (C-2 only).
j. Microbrewery (C-2 only), producing more than 15,000 barrels of beer per
year.
2. Industrial Districts
a. Any Special Use which may be considered in Commercial Districts.
City of Goodyear 4-4 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
b. Airport, heliport, helistop, and other landing areas, subject to local, state and
federal requirements and restrictions.
c. Cemeteries, crematories, mausoleums, including those for pets.
d. Circus and carnival grounds having permanent facilities.
e. Development or extraction of earth products, clay, gas, gravel, minerals, sand,
stone, topsoil.
f. Drive-in theaters.
g. Race tracks, speedways.
h. Sanitary landfills, transfer stations, recycling facilities.
i. Swap meets, auctions.
j. Zoos.
k. Brewery (I-2 only), producing more than 40,000 barrels of beer per year.
l. Brewery (I-2 only), if the brewery will have live music or entertainment
activities.
m. Microbrewery (I-1 only), producing more than 15,000 barrels of beer per
year.
n. Microbrewery (I-1 only), with any of the following factors:
1) live music or entertainment when the facility is located less than three
hundred feet (300’) from the property line of any residentially zoned or
designated property;
2) the area within the facility is designated for music or entertainment
activities exceeds 5,000 square feet;
3) the area devoted to patron dancing exceeds twenty-five percent (25%) of
the total floor area; or,
4) open after hours as defined by State law (generally, closing time of the
dance floor is later than that of the bar).
B. ACCESSORY USES.
City of Goodyear 4-5 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to one of the permitted
principal uses, unless otherwise excluded.
C. DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
Unless otherwise modified by Council approval, the standards and regulations of the
District in which the Special Use is located shall apply.
City of Goodyear 4-6 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
ARTICLE 4-2 USES REQUIRING ADDITIONAL EVALUATION
Certain uses are declared, hereunder, to require additional assessment regarding appropriate
location and conditions of use or operation.
4-2-1 Adult Businesses
4-2-2 Convenience Uses
4-2-3 Service Stations, Automotive
4-2-4 Wireless Communications Facilities (Commercial)
4-2-5 Restaurants, Bars/cocktail lounges, Breweries, Brewpubs and
Microbreweries subject to Special Use Permit for Live Music or Entertainment
Activities
4-2-6 Teen Entertainment Centers
4-2-7 Large Retail Users
4-2-8 Non-Chartered Financial Institutions
4-2-9 Freeway Pylon Signs
4-2-10 Massage Establishments, Tattoo Studios, and Body Piercing Studios
4-2-11 Medical Marijuana Dispensary
4-2-12 Medical Marijuana Cultivation Location
4-2-13 Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation and Medical
Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation
4-2-14 Brewery
4-2-15 Brewpub
4-2-16 Microbrewery
Section 4-2-1 Adult Businesses
Adult business uses, such as adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult theater, adult live
entertainment establishment, erotic dance or performance studio, are subject to the
following regulations.
A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
1. These provisions shall not be construed as permitting any use or act which is
otherwise prohibited or made punishable by law.
2. Notwithstanding another provision of this Ordinance, an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, adult theater, adult live entertainment establishment, or erotic
dance or performance studio which is a nonconforming use or which does not
conform to the separation standards set forth in this section shall not be:
a. converted to another of the above-listed adult uses; or
b. be expanded beyond the floor area devoted to such adult use on the
effective date of this Ordinance.
City of Goodyear 4-7 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
3. Neither the Zoning Administrator nor the Planning Commission shall have
jurisdiction to grant variances from these provisions.
B. LOCATIONAL REGULATIONS.
Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult theater, adult live entertainment
establishment, erotic dance or performance studio, are subject to the following
conditions or limitations:
1. None of the above-listed uses may be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of
the same type use or any of the other uses listed above. The distance shall be
measured from the exterior walls of the buildings or portions thereof in which the
businesses are conducted or proposed to be conducted to the property line of the
property upon which the other above-listed use sits; and
2. None of the above-listed uses may be located within five hundred (500) feet of a
preschool, kindergarten, elementary or secondary school, church or similar place
of worship, park, playground or any of the following use district classifications:
R1-10, R1-7, R1-6, R-2, MF-18, MHS, MH/RVP, C-1, or PAD. This distance
shall be measured from the exterior walls of the building or portion thereof in
which the adult business is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the
property line of the above-listed use or use restriction.
Section 4-2-2 Convenience Uses
Convenience uses, as herein defined, shall be evaluated regarding their potential impact on
traffic congestion, the neighborhood in general and their appropriateness for the site.
A. REQUIRED INFORMATION.
Except where "convenience uses" are structurally attached as part of a larger center (at
least fifty thousand [50,000] square feet) located on an arterial corner, a Use Permit and
separate Site Plan approval are required.
1. A use conforming to the definition of "convenience use", herein, may be
permitted upon obtaining Use Permit approval. Where free-standing convenience
uses are part of a larger center (at least fifty thousand [50,000] square feet), such
use should not be located on an arterial corner building pad site unless, in the
judgment of the City Council the findings support the proposal and stipulations
designed to mitigate potential problems are attached to the property.
2. When an application is made for a Use Permit for a convenience use,
accompanying the application must be a Site Plan, drawn at an appropriate scale
by a registered civil engineer which includes the following:
City of Goodyear 4-8 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
a. Size and location of the parcel.
b. Location, size, area, and orientation of all structures including any gas pumps
and canopies.
c. Property lines.
d. Existing and future right-of-way lines.
e. Existing and proposed curb cuts.
f. Location of any drive-through windows and queuing lanes.
g. On-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation plan.
h. All parking spaces.
i. Within three hundred (300) feet of the site show the following:
(1) Access from streets to business and vise versa.
(2) Existing land use.
(3) Driveways.
(4) Existing street system with roadways, curbs, gutters, medians, turn
lanes and sidewalks.
(5) Circulation pattern.
(6) Description and location of traffic lights and signs.
B. CONVENIENCE USE EVALUATION CRITERIA.
Prior to being considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Site Plan Review
Committee will review and evaluate the proposed convenience use Site Plan and report
to the Community Development Department. The Community Development
Department's report to the Commission will include, but not be limited to, findings on the
following:
1. Adequacy of the parcel size and configuration to provide for proper access and
internal circulation.
City of Goodyear 4-9 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
2. Compatibility of proposed hours of operation with adjacent residential areas
(hours of operation to be indicated in narrative).
3. Required traffic and access mitigation measures, if any, which may include:
a. Additional right-of-way.
b. Off-site traffic mitigation measures.
c. Restriction of some traffic movements through signs or other measures.
d. Segregation of queuing lanes, vehicle access and pedestrian circulation areas.
e. Cross-access easements.
f. Driveway locations.
4. Other concerns which may place the advisability of the proposed convenience
use in question.
Section 4-2-3 Service Stations, Automotive
Service station uses require specified, additional conditions and design criteria.
A. REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
Use Permit and Site Plan approval are required.
1. The repair of motor vehicles shall not include painting, upholstery, body and
fender repair work or major engine overhauling.
2. The outside display of tires, oil or other sale items shall be located adjacent to
main building.
B. DESIGN CRITERIA.
1. The design of the service station building and site shall be compatible with the
type of development surrounding the station.
2. Service stations which are situated within a larger commercial development shall
be separated from adjacent property by a three (3) foot high wall, landscaping, or
curbing, except for necessary driveways, in order to control vehicular movements
and circulation.
City of Goodyear 4-10 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
3. The width or depth of any service station site shall be a minimum of one
hundred-fifty (150) feet.
4. Pump islands shall be located at least thirty-five (35) feet from the street right -
of-way line.
5. Service areas and bay doors shall not front onto or be substantially visible from
any public street and shall be subject to the screening standards.
6. Service stations shall be subject to all landscaping and design standards including
screening of parking and maneuvering areas with walls and landscaping.
Section 4-2-4 Wireless Communications Facilities (Commercial)
Wireless communications facilities, as herein defined, require specified, additional conditions
and design criteria other than those used only for non-commercial, non-business fixed wireless
communications, such as television and satellite reception antennae or amateur radio antennae
which are exempt.
A. REQUIRED PROVISIONS
1. Wireless communications facilities comprised of panel antennae mounted on or
against an existing structure that do not extend more than ten (10) feet above that
portion of the existing structure, or antennae attached to a 69kV or higher power
line tower or pole which does not raise the height of such tower or pole more than
fifteen (15) feet above its original height, or new antennae attached to an existing,
conforming wireless communications tower which does not raise the height of
such tower more than fifteen (15) feet above its original height, may be approved
administratively by the Community Development Director after review and
approval by the Site Plan Review Committee.
2. All wireless communications facilities that do not meet the above criteria for
review and approval by the Community Development Director and the Site Plan
Review Committee shall require approval as a Special Use in accordance with
the provision of Article 4-1.
B. REQUIRED INFORMATION.
Site Plan approval is required for all wireless communications facilities. For a wireless
communication facility that requires approval as a Special Use as specified herein, the
required Site Plan shall be the preliminary development plan for the Special Use as
required by Section 4-1-1(A), and the review and approval of the Special Use and
preliminary development plan shall constitute Site Plan approval. All applications for
Site Plan or Special Use approval shall contain the following additional materials:
City of Goodyear 4-11 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
1. A current map, or update to an existing map on file, showing locations of
applicant’s antenna(e) and facilities and all other known existing and proposed
wireless communications facilities within a one (1) mile radius of the proposed
facility.
2. A report from a structural engineer registered in the State of Arizona showing the
facility antenna capacity by type and number, and a certification that the proposed
facility is designed to withstand winds in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA 222
(latest revision) standards.
3. Complete names and addresses of the owners of all antennae and equipment to be
located at the site as of the date of application.
4. Written authorization for the use from the site owner.
5. A one-year plan identifying other needed or planned wireless communication
facilities in the City. This allows the City to coordinate tower locations with other
applicants.
6. A minimum of two photographic simulations of the proposed wireless
communication facility.
7. Proof that:
a. reasonable measures have been taken to assure that the proposed wireless
communication facility will be placed in a location which will minimize the
visual impact on the surrounding area.
b. the proposed antenna and equipment could not be placed on a pre-existing
facility under control of the applicant and function under applicable regulatory
and design requirements without unreasonable modification.
c. if the application is for siting in a residential area, the area cannot be
adequately served by a facility placed in a non-residential area.
d. a new wireless communication tower is designed to accommodate the
applicant’s potential future needs, is of suitable construction, and
consideration has been given in the design of the tower for the co-location of
additional antennae.
8. A written agreement that:
City of Goodyear 4-12 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
a. the wireless communication facility shall be removed within one hundred
eighty (180) days of cessation of use, and to return the area to its condition
prior to the construction of the facility;
b. the applicant’s service is subordinate to essential public communications
services, and agreement to suspend use of any site which may be in conflict
with such services, regardless of the reason for such conflict, until such
conflict is resolved; and
c. all applicable health, nuisance, fire and safety codes are met. If upon
inspection, the City of Goodyear determines that a wireless communications
facility fails to comply with such agreements or applicable codes, the owner of
such facility will have thirty (30) days to bring such facility into compliance.
Failure to bring such facility into compliance within thirty (30) days will
constitute grounds for the removal of such facility at the owner’s expense.
C. DESIGN CRITERIA.
1. To the extent possible, the materials, colors, textures and landscaping of all
wireless communications facilities shall be designed to blend in with the
surrounding setting. All facilities shall be finished or painted so as to minimize
visual obtrusiveness and shall not be illuminated unless otherwise required by
state or federal regulations. Panel antennae and their associated cables and
hardware mounted on or against an existing structure shall be painted to match
the existing facade or be otherwise camouflaged to reduce their visual impact.
2. Equipment shelters for a wireless communications facility shall be designed in
accordance with the City of Goodyear Design Guidelines for commercial
buildings or the prevailing design standards for the property.
3. No commercial signage shall be allowed on an antenna or wireless
communications facility.
4. A wireless communications facility tower must be set back from all nonresidential
lot lines a minimum distance equal to the height of the tower and from
all residential lot lines a minimum distance equal to twice the height of the tower,
unless otherwise approved by City Council at time of Special Use approval.
5. No new wireless communications facilities shall be located within one thousand
three hundred twenty (1,320) feet of an existing wireless communication facility
unless the existing facility does not meet the structural specifications or technical
requirements necessary for additional antenna co-location, or a co-location
agreement could not be obtained at commercial reasonable terms and conditions,
including price. Wireless communications facilities that can be reviewed and
City of Goodyear 4-13 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
approved administratively in accordance with Section 4-2-4(A) shall be exempt
from this requirement.
D. REPLACEMENT AND/OR REBUILDING OF WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
FACILITIES AND TOWERS.
Pre-existing non-conforming wireless communications facilities and towers which have
been destroyed or structurally damaged shall be replaced with facilities meeting the
requirements as provided in this Article, except that they may be rebuilt to their original
height and in their original location, regardless of setback requirements.
Section 4-2-5 Restaurants, Bars/cocktail Lounges, Breweries, Brewpubs and
Microbreweries subject to Special Use Permit for Live Music or
Entertainment Activities
A. REQUIRED INFORMATION – Restaurants, bars/cocktail lounges, breweries,
brewpubs and microbreweries that are required to obtain a Special Use Permit for live
music or entertainment activities shall submit a Special Use Permit application that
specifically addresses the following:
1. Noise study
2. Lighting plan
3. Floor plan (to identify the areas for the primary use and for ancillary functions)
4. Public safety plan, to be reviewed and approved by the Fire and Police
Departments
5. Parking study
6. Traffic analysis (if access to the establishment is from a street other than one
classified by the General Plan as minor collector or greater)
B. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. The application shall demonstrate that:
a. Buffering by a wall and/or landscaping will be provided in a manner which
physically separates and restricts access from the establishment and its
required parking area to residential districts.
b. All patron entrances will be well lit and clearly visible to patrons from the
parking lot or a public street.
City of Goodyear 4-14 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
c. All sound resulting from business activities will be contained within the
building, except where external speakers are permitted.
d. The level of service on all streets accessed by the use meets all standards set
by the City.
e. All external doors shall be closed but not locked during business hours.
2. All approved Special Use Permits for such a use are subject to annual review by
the City Council.
Section 4-2-6 Teen Entertainment Centers
A. REQUIRED INFORMATION
1. Noise study
2. Lighting plan
3. Floor plan (to identify the areas for the primary use and for ancillary functions)
4. Public safety plan, to be reviewed and approved by the Fire and Police
Departments
5. Parking study
6. Traffic analysis (if access to the establishment is from a street other than one
classified by the General Plan as minor collector or greater)
B. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. The application shall demonstrate that:
a. Buffering by a wall and/or landscaping will be provided in a manner which
physically separates and restricts access from the establishment and its
required parking area to residential districts.
b. All patron entrances will be well lit and clearly visible to patrons from the
parking lot or a public street.
c. All sound resulting from business activities will be contained within the
building, except where external speakers are permitted.
City of Goodyear 4-15 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
d. The level of service on all streets accessed by the use meets all standards set
by the City.
e. All external doors shall be closed but not locked during business hours.
f. No portion of a teen entertainment center shall at any time be illuminated with
lighting less than two (2) footcandles per square foot. This requirement shall
apply to parking areas and any other outdoor areas related to the operation.
2. All approved Special Use Permits for such a use are subject to annual review by
the City Council.
3. A patron who leaves the premises shall not be readmitted without paying a
separate fee for readmission.
Section 4-2-7 Large Retail Users
A. APPLICABILITY.
All Large Retail Users shall require a Special Use Permit and Site Plan approval. The
Special Use Permit and Site Plan may be processed concurrently if deemed appropriate
by the Community Development Director. If a unified development of several Large
Retail Users is proposed, then one Special Use Permit application encompassing the
entire development may be submitted. Each individual Large Retail User will then only
require Site Plan approval provided they are in conformance with the approved Special
Use Permit. All Site Plans for Large Retail Users will require Planning and Zoning
Commission review and City Council approval. Property with vested zoning prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance will not be subject to Section 4-2-7.
B. AREA REQUIREMENT
The minimum area for a commercial center containing more than one Large Retail User
shall be ten (10) acres.
C. LOCATION CRITERIA
All Large Retail Users shall meet one of the following four criteria:
1. Be located within a development that is at the intersections of two scenic and/or
major arterials as designated in the City of Goodyear General Plan and/or the
Engineering Procedures Manual, or
2. Be located within a development that is at the intersection of an existing or
proposed freeway and scenic or major arterial as designated in the City of
Goodyear General Plan and/or the Engineering Procedures Manual, or
City of Goodyear 4-16 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
3. Be located within a development that is at the intersection of two existing or
proposed freeways as designated in the City of Goodyear General Plan, or
4. Be located no more than one (1) mile from an existing or proposed freeway
interchange.
D. BUILDING SETBACK
The following building setbacks are required for Large Retail Users. The Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council may increase the building setback due to the
operational characteristics of the Large Retail User such as, but not limited to, hours of
operation and the location of mechanical equipment and loading areas.
1. A minimum building setback of 100 feet is required from proposed and/or
existing residential uses. This setback shall be measured from the property line of
the nearest residential lot or occupied parcel to the nearest exterior wall of the
Large Retail User. Intervening streets or other man-made or natural land use
features may be included within the setback.
2. A minimum building setback of 100 feet is required from proposed and/or
existing public or private elementary, middle, junior high, or high schools. This
setback shall be measured from the nearest occupied building on the school
parcel to the nearest exterior wall of the Large Retail User. Intervening streets
or other man-made or natural land use features may be included within the
setback.
3. When a Large Retail User is developed directly adjacent to a lot or parcel
developed as or proposed for residential use, a landscape buffer with a minimum
width of 40 feet shall be included within the building setback. Said buffer shall
be located along the property line and improved with one 24-inch box tree per 10
feet of length. Trees shall be staggered to achieve maximum buffering of the two
uses.
E. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. The submittal of a traffic study for review and approval by the City Engineer.
2. A Special Use Permit shall be required for any expansion of a Large Retail User
exceeding 10% of the square footage of the floor area existing at the time of the
adoption of this ordinance. Only those portions of the building or site being
expanded will be subject to the requirements of Section 4-2-7.
3. All properties developed with a Large Retail User, whether they are occupied or
not, shall be regularly maintained by the property owner so that they are not
City of Goodyear 4-17 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
allowed to fall into a state of disrepair or neglect; and they shall consistently
present a neat and orderly appearance to the general public as well as adjacent
tenants and property owners. Roofing materials shall be replaced and/or
maintained in a manner to insure weather tight conditions. Building walls shall
be repaired and/or maintained in a safe condition and clean from graffiti. The
landscaping shall be kept in a weed free condition, the irrigation system
maintained, and the plants watered to prevent the loss of vegetation. Outdoor
lighting shall be kept in an operational state and utilized at night.
The property owner is responsible to maintain fire protection systems in working
order and provide hazardous materials closure mitigation and documentation for
the site in compliance with the Fire Code.
If a Large Retail User building is unoccupied or vacated for more than six (6)
months, the property owner shall remove all signs from the building and sign
panels from any freestanding monuments and replace with a color matched blank
panel, the mounting holes patched, and the wall area behind the signs repainted.
F. SITE DESIGN STANDARDS
1. Large Retail Users shall comply with the guidelines contained in Chapter IV –
General Commercial of the City of Goodyear Design Guidelines in addition to
those contained herein.
2. The Large Retail User shall provide at least one percent (1%) of the net site area
of the parcel in which it is located as pedestrian oriented open space. This open
space can include plazas, courtyards, patios, and outdoor seating areas. Sidewalks
shall connect open space areas and contain pedestrian scale lighting, signage, and
landscaping.
3. Parking lots for a standalone Large Retail User shall not occur entirely in front
of the building. A minimum of 15% of the overall parking for the Large Retail
User shall be located to the side and/or rear of the building. This requirement
can be reduced by 2.5% for each of the following design features that are
incorporated into the project. However, said 15% requirement may not be
reduced below 5%.
a. The provision of 1.25% of additional total landscape area above the minimum
required for the site. Multiple increments of additional landscaping may be
counted towards reducing the 15% requirement. The use of this additional
landscaped area for stormwater retention purposes is prohibited.
b. The provision of an additional 1% of the net site area as pedestrian oriented
open space above the minimum required for the site.
City of Goodyear 4-18 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
c. The provision of public art as an integral and significant feature of the site.
Public art shall be dispersed throughout the site and deployed in concert with
the projects pedestrian amenities and plazas.
d. The creation of an enhanced entry to the property that is comprised of a
landscaped boulevard with a landscaped median, decorative pavement, and
architecturally enhanced signage, lighting and pedestrian paths. Parking
spaces located along and directly accessible by the boulevard are prohibited.
The minimum length of the boulevard shall be 150 feet measured from the
property line to the first drive aisle.
e. The creation of an overall theme for the site that is incorporated into the
building architecture, landscaping, light fixtures, signage, and open space
areas.
4. Parking lots for a Large Retail User shall be designed as a series of connected
smaller lots (50-75 parking spaces) utilizing raised landscaped strips at least 10
feet in width with sidewalks and islands at least five feet in width to create a safe
and landscaped pedestrian circulation system.
5. The major entry aisle serving the Large Retail User should be aligned with the
main entry of the building or aligned with a major focal point such as a plaza,
monument, or fountain.
6. Pedestrian walkways serving the Large Retail User shall be differentiated from
driving surfaces through a change of materials, such as decorative concrete,
scored concrete, stone, brick, granite pavers, or exposed aggregate, and/or by a
change of grade.
7. The front and any side exposed to public view of the Large Retail User building
are to be improved with landscaping and enhanced pedestrian pathways.
8. Parking and security lights for the Large Retail User shall not exceed a mounting
height of 30 feet measured from the finished grade to the lens. Light trespass
shall not exceed .8 vertical foot candles at the property line adjacent to any parcel
developed as or proposed for residential use. All light poles and fixtures are to be
reviewed during the site plan review process. Lighting shall comply with all other
prevailing City Code provisions relating to outdoor lighting.
City of Goodyear 4-19 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
9. Overnight parking of semi-trucks, trailers, or recreational vehicles (RVs) is
prohibited.
G. ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS
1. Large Retail Users shall comply with the guidelines contained in Chapter IV –
General Commercial of the City of Goodyear Design Guidelines in addition to
those contained herein.
2. If the Large Retail User is located within a master planned commercial center
containing multiple buildings, then all buildings within the center shall be
architecturally unified. This provision shall apply to new construction, additions,
and remodeling. Architectural unity means that buildings shall be related in
architectural style, color scheme, and building materials.
3. The Large Retail User building shall contain an identifiable base, extending two
or more feet up from the finished grade. This base will incorporate texture
variations, a projection or break in the wall color or material, or some other form
of architectural enhancement. The base material shall be highly resistant to
damage, defacing, and general wear and tear. Pre-cast decorative concrete, stone
masonry, brick, and commercial grade ceramic tile are examples of acceptable
base materials.
4. Flat, monolithic facades are not permitted. A building facade shall employ both
vertical and horizontal articulation. To ensure a minimal amount of horizontal
articulation and undulation, no building wall of the Large Retail User should run
more than approximately 50 feet without employing one or more of the following:
a. A minimum twelve inch offset in wall plane.
b. A column or pier at least twelve inches wide and eight inches deep.
c. A building corner or projection.
d. Some other form of significant architectural enhancement.
5. Building wall articulation is required for Large Retail Users. Exterior wall
treatments can be used to successfully mitigate the appearance of the typical
Large Retail User building. These treatments shall include one (1) or more of
the following: arcades, porticos, insets, colonnades, lower shed roof structures,
and wing walls.
City of Goodyear 4-20 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
6. Distinct and interesting rooflines shall be required. On flat roofed structures, a
parapet wall with a substantial cornice or other design feature should be used to
provide a distinctive cap to the building facade.
7. Large Retail Users that have outdoor storage areas shall incorporate the outdoor
storage area into the architecture of the primary building. Screening materials and
colors shall be consistent with the overall theme of the building.
Section 4-2-8 Non-Chartered Financial Institutions
Non-chartered financial institutions as defined in Section 2-2 of this Ordinance are subject to the
following regulations:
A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1. An application for the establishment of a non-chartered financial institution
must be submitted, reviewed and approved by the Community Development
Director or his designee prior to the issuance of a Zoning Clearance by the City
for the proposed establishment.
2. A proposed non-chartered financial institution shall not be located within 1,320
horizontal feet (one-quarter (1/4) mile) as measured in a straight line in any
direction from the building in which any other non-chartered financial
institution is located.
Section 4-2-9 Freeway Pylon Signs
A. APPLICABILITY
1. Freeway Pylon Signs shall require a Use Permit approved in accordance with the
provisions of Section 1-2-6 of this Ordinance. The authorization of a Use Permit
for a Freeway Pylon Sign shall be upon an additional finding by the City Council
that the proposed Freeway Pylon Sign is consistent with the purpose and intent of
this section and the Freeway Pylon Sign Design Guidelines contained herein, and
that the proposed Freeway Pylon Sign furthers the interests of the community and
is reasonable and necessary to provide business identification and economic vitality.
The burden of proof that the proposed Freeway Pylon Sign meets the required
findings for the Use Permit and is consistent with the provisions of this section
rests with the applicant.
2. Freeway Pylon Sign may be approved only as a component of a Comprehensive
Sign Package for a planned commercial, industrial or mixed-use development
within which it will be located that is on property abutting a freeway, or part of a
complex/center abutting a freeway, that is oriented to and intended to be read from
the freeway for the purpose of identifying an associated commercial, industrial or
mixed-use development.
City of Goodyear 4-21 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
3. A Freeway Pylon Sign shall be subject to Site Plan review and approval in
accordance with provisions of Section 1-2-8. The Use Permit and Site Plan
applications may be processed concurrently, if deemed appropriate by the
Community Development Director.
B. PURPOSE AND INTENT
1. The purpose of the Freeway Pylon Sign Use Permit is to:
a. Provide for the identification of certain existing and proposed regional
commercial, industrial or mixed-use developments, in an appropriate manner
that assists in the achievement of economic sustainability for businesses
within the City.
b. Maintain a balance between the needs of the business community and the
desire of Goodyear’s citizens and visitors to preserve view corridors along the
freeways and maintain a high visual quality for the community.
c. Promote the effectiveness of Freeway Pylon Signs by preventing their over
concentration, improper placement and deterioration, and insuring that they
are well designed, appropriately sited, and aesthetically pleasing.
d. Protect motorists on freeways from injury or damage as a result of distraction
or obstruction of vision attributable to large signs.
e. Assure that benefits derived from expenditures of public funds for the
improvement and beautification of freeways shall be protected by exercising
reasonable control over the character and design of large sign structures.
2. A Use Permit request for a Freeway Pylon Sign shall be evaluated based upon the
Freeway Pylon Sign Design Guidelines contained in this Section and the following
City objectives for Freeway Pylon Signs:
a. Encourage development of property in harmony with the desired character of
the City while providing due regard for the public and private interests involved.
b. Promote the effectiveness of Freeway Pylon Signs by preventing their over
concentration, improper placement, deterioration, and excessive size and
number.
c. Enhance the flow of traffic and the convenience, ease and enjoyment of travel
along Goodyear's freeways.
d. Protect travelers on Goodyear's freeways from injury or damage as a result of
distraction or obstruction of vision attributable to large signs.
City of Goodyear 4-22 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
e. Regulate advertising distractions which may contribute to traffic accidents.
f. Assure that public benefits derived from expenditures of public funds for the
improvement and beautification of freeways and other public structures and
spaces shall be protected by exercising reasonable control over the character and
design of large sign structures.
g. Provide a pleasing visual environment for the citizens of and visitors to the City
of Goodyear.
h. Require that signs are properly maintained for safety and visual appearance.
i. Ensure that the maximum sign height, sign area and the location approved for
each individual Freeway Pylon Sign is the minimum required to provide for
necessary business identification while maintaining public view corridors and
preventing an excessive number of freeway signs.
C. DESIGN GUIDELINES
Although this section does not set forth specific standards or minimum requirements for
Freeway Pylon Signs, a proposed Freeway Pylon Sign should be located, designed,
constructed and maintained in accordance with the following Design Guidelines, and
each individual Use Permit for a proposed Freeway Pylon Sign shall be evaluated based
on the level of conformity of the proposed sign with the following Design Guidelines.
1. The parcel or approved development site upon which the sign is to be located should
contain at least thirty (30) contiguous acres and have a minimum of one thousand feet
(1,000’) of frontage adjacent to the freeway.
2. A minimum separation distance of one-half (1/2) mile should be observed between
any such Freeway Pylon Signs located on the same side of the freeway.
3. Typically, only one (1) Freeway Pylon Sign is considered reasonable and appropriate
for each qualified development site, although consideration for additional signs may
be given for a site that is substantially in excess of thirty (30) acres or has a tenant or
tenants of regional significance that require freeway signage.
4. All proposed signs should be located no greater than two hundred feet (200') from the
right-of-way line of the adjacent freeway, and no part of the sign shall be closer to the
freeway right-of-way than fifteen feet (15’).
5. The proposed maximum height of all signs shall be no greater than that which is
reasonably necessary to be visible from a vehicle approaching on the either side of the
freeway. In determining the maximum height to provide adequate sign visibility, the
applicant shall submit empirical observation (e.g. field test with crane or balloon),
City of Goodyear 4-23 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
computer simulation, or other evidence as required by the Community Development
Director, or his designee.
6. The proposed maximum sign area for each sign shall be no greater than that which is
reasonably necessary in order to provide adequate visibility and identification of the
development name and a reasonable number of the major or significant tenants within
the development as viewed from the adjacent freeway.
7. The sign copy of all Freeway Pylon Signs shall be limited to the development name,
logo identification, and the identification of major or significant tenants. The
inclusion of the name “Goodyear” as a prominent component of the sign is highly
encouraged.
8. All signs shall be of high architectural quality that contributes positively to
Goodyear’s visual environment, promotes creativity, and has a distinctive image for
the development. The architectural form, textures, colors, and materials for each sign
shall be complimentary to the primary building architectural design of the
development and consistent with other proposed signs in the development.
9. The identification of the development name and tenant names on the sign should be in
the form of individual pan channel lettering, aluminum routed lettering with acrylic
background, or other high quality sign design characteristics. Removable tenant
panels made completely of acrylic or plexi-glass materials are discouraged unless
they exhibit a high quality appearance.
10. In general, each sign should have low maintenance, and architectural-grade surfacing
materials such as metal, masonry, ceramic tile, glass or stucco.
11. Freeway Pylon Signs typically should contain only internal illumination of sign
copy. External illumination, exposed neon, argon or krypton tube lighting, exposed
incandescent lighting, or other exposed artificial lighting to outline the sign or portion
thereof, may be considered as a component of the sign provided such illumination:
a. Constitutes a design component of the overall Freeway Pylon Sign architecture;
b. Is an integral component of the primary physical elements of the Freeway Pylon
Sign and is harmonious with the architectural style of the structure;
c. Serves only the purpose of embellishing the nighttime architecture of the
Freeway Pylon Sign, and does not portray an advertising message;
d. Is compatible with the land use and architecture of adjacent developments;
e. Complies with the Outdoor Light Standards contained in Article 10 of this
Ordinance, as evidenced by the submittal of complete lighting design plans and
specifications as prescribed by that Article;
City of Goodyear 4-24 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
f. Is maintained in a fully functional manner, and if any component of the lighting
becomes nonfunctional, then neither the entire lighting system, nor any portion
thereof, may be illuminated until the entire lighting system is repaired.
g. Will not exceed the light intensity levels specified in the approved Outdoor
Lighting Plans, and a certification can be provided from the sign manufacturer
prior to the issuance of a building permit that the light intensity levels that have
been factory pre-set do not exceed those levels.
12. A Freeway Pylon Sign using an electronic message display may be considered for
approval provided the display is limited to text messages only, with no animation or
video, and the message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of
fade or dissolve modes, with each message being displayed for a minimum period of
one hour or at an interval specified by the City Council. Continuous traveling or
scrolling displays are discouraged.
13. The City Council may approve modifications or alternatives to these Design
Guidelines for a specific Freeway Pylon Sign when:
a. An individualized assessment reveals the existence of extraordinary conditions
involving topography, land ownership, adjacent development, parcel
configuration, or other factors relating to the development site; or,
b. The proposed or existing development exhibits unique characteristics of land use,
architectural style, site location, physical scale, historical interest or other
distinguishing features that represent a clear variation from conventional
development; or,
c. The proposed Freeway Pylon Sign incorporates special design features, or
unique architectural elements that represent superior quality; or,
d. Such modifications or alternatives are consistent with the intent of these
Guidelines and will result in conditions that are commensurate with or superior to
the Guidelines.
Section 4-2-10 Massage Establishments, Tattoo Studios, and Body Piercing Studios
Massage establishments, tattoo studios, and body piercing studios as defined in Article 2-2 of
this Ordinance are subject to the following regulations:
A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
1. An application for the establishment of a massage establishment, tattoo studio
or body piercing studio must be submitted, reviewed and approved by the
City of Goodyear 4-25 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
Community Development Director or his designee prior to the issuance of a
Zoning Permit by the City for the proposed establishment.
2. All massage establishments, tattoo studio or body piercing studio shall adhere
to all applicable state and county laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
3. A proposed massage establishment, tattoo studio, or body piercing studio shall
not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet measured in a straight line in any
direction of the lot line from any other massage establishment, tattoo studio, or
body piercing studio, or within one thousand (1,000) feet measured in a straight
line in any direction of the lot line from any adult business, as defined in Article
2-2 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Goodyear adopted May 24, 1999 as
amended. The separation requirements specified herein shall not preclude a
massage establishment, tattoo studio, or body piercing studio from locating
within the same building.
4. A proposed massage establishment, tattoo studio, or body piercing studio
shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet measured in a straight line in
any direction of the lot line from a school as defined in Article 2-2 of the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Goodyear adopted May 24, 1999 as amended.
Section 4-2-11 Medical Marijuana Dispensary
A Medical Marijuana Dispensary as defined in Article 2-2 of this Ordinance is subject to the
following regulations:
A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
1. An application for the establishment of a medical marijuana dispensary must be
submitted, reviewed and approved by the Community Development Director or
his designee prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit by the City for the proposed
establishment.
2. The application shall include:
a. If the application is by someone other than the owner of the property, an
authorization signed by the property owner must be submitted with the
application and include an explicit acknowledgement that the property
owner knows that the proposed use of the property is for a medical
marijuana dispensary.
b. The address and legal name of the medical marijuana dispensary.
c. The name and address of each of principal officer and board member of
the medical marijuana dispensary, including their contact information
and the emergency contact information for one or more registered
dispensary agents responsible for the operation of said dispensary.
d. The name(s) and location(s) of any medical marijuana cultivation
location associated with the medical marijuana dispensary.
City of Goodyear 4-26 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
e. A copy of the operating procedures for the medical marijuana
dispensary adopted in compliance with A.R.S. §36-2804(B)(1)(c).
f. A floor plan showing the layout and dimensions of the medical
marijuana dispensary to demonstrate compliance with the development
standards contained herein and show the security measures proposed to
comply with A.R.S. §36-2806 and the standards contained herein.
3. All medical marijuana dispensaries shall adhere to all applicable state, county
and municipal laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations and shall be
operated in conformance with the provisions of A.R.S. §36-2801, et. seq. and any
rules adopted by the Arizona Department of Health Services pursuant said
statutes.
B. SEPARATION STANDARDS
1. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not be located within five thousand two
hundred and eighty feet (5,280’) measured in a straight line in any direction from
the closest exterior building wall of the medical marijuana dispensary to the
closest exterior building wall of any other medical marijuana dispensary or any
medical marijuana cultivation location, unless the cultivation facility is
associated with said dispensary, in which case no separation is required.
2. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not be located within five hundred feet
(500’) measured in a straight line in any direction from the closest exterior
building wall of the medical marijuana dispensary to the closest property line
of any property in a residential district (not including residentially-zoned public
street right-of-way), as described in Article 3-1 of this ordinance.
3. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not be located within one thousand feet
(1,000’) measured in a straight line in any direction from the closest exterior
building wall of the medical marijuana dispensary to the closest property line
of a public, private, parochial, or charter kindergarten, elementary, secondary or
high school.
4. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not be located within one thousand feet
(1,000’) measured in a straight line in any direction from the closest exterior
building wall of the medical marijuana dispensary to the closest property line
of a licensed preschool, day care or childcare center.
5. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not be located within one thousand feet
(1,000’) measured in a straight line in any direction from the closest exterior
building wall of the medical marijuana dispensary to the closest property line
of a public park, library or public community center.
6. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not be located within one thousand feet
(1,000’) measured in a straight line in any direction from the closest exterior
building wall of the medical marijuana dispensary to the closest property line
of any church or place of worship.
7. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not be located within two thousand feet
(2,000’) measured in a straight line in any direction from the closest exterior
building wall of the medical marijuana dispensary to the closest property line
City of Goodyear 4-27 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
of any licensed residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment facility or
other licensed drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility.
8. A medical marijuana dispensary shall not be located within one thousand feet
(1,000’) measured in a straight line in any direction from the closest exterior
building wall of the medical marijuana dispensary to the closest property line
of any adult businesses as defined in Article 2 of this ordinance.
C. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1. The medical marijuana dispensary must be located in a permanent building and
shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular building,
mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
2. The maximum gross floor area of a medical marijuana dispensary shall not
exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
3. The secure storage area for the medical marijuana stored at the medical
marijuana dispensary shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet of the total
of the two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet maximum gross floor area
of the medical marijuana dispensary.
4. The medical marijuana dispensary shall have an interior customer waiting area
equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross floor area.
5. The permitted hours of operation of a medical marijuana dispensary shall be
limited to between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
6. The medical marijuana dispensary shall not have a drive-through service.
7. The medical marijuana dispensary shall not offer a service that provides off-site
delivery of the medical marijuana.
8. The medical marijuana dispensary shall not provide outdoor seating areas.
9. The operator of the medical marijuana dispensary shall provide unrestricted
access to City code enforcement officers or police officers who request admission
for the purpose of determining compliance with these standards.
10. Within the medical marijuana dispensary there shall be a secure storage area
which has a single point of access and whose walls and roof are constructed of
materials (eight-inch concrete block or equal) sufficient to deter and prevent theft
of marijuana being processed.
11. All marijuana shall be placed within the secure storage area at any time when the
dispensary is not open for business.
12. The operator of the medical marijuana dispensary shall provide for the proper
disposal of marijuana remnants or by-products, and such material shall not be
placed within the dispensary’s exterior refuse containers.
13. The operator of the medical marijuana dispensary shall ensure that there is no
emission of dust, fumes, vapors, or odors into the environment from the
dispensary.
14. The operator of the medical marijuana dispensary shall not allow on-site
consumption of medical marijuana.
15. The medical marijuana dispensary shall have only one secure entrance to the
dispensary and any other doors required for exiting shall be locked to the outside
and have an alarm that sound when opened from the inside;
City of Goodyear 4-28 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
16. The medical marijuana dispensary shall have an alarm system with a redundant
power supply and circuitry to prevent deactivation.
17. The medical marijuana dispensary shall have a video surveillance system that
at all times records all interior areas and the exterior perimeter.
18. The operator of the medical marijuana dispensary shall post and maintain “No
Loitering” sign(s) in sufficient quantity, size and location so that they are clearly
visible by anyone in the immediate vicinity of the entrance or premises.
19. The medical marijuana dispensary shall have adequate exterior security
lighting which also complies with Article 10 of this ordinance.
20. Entry to the medical marijuana dispensary shall be limited only to those
persons who either possess a valid registration card or need access to perform
their duties in enforcing local, state or federal laws or regulations. No one under
eighteen (18) years of age shall be permitted inside the dispensary, unless such
person is a registered qualifying patient and is accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
21. The operator of the medical marijuana dispensary shall develop and maintain a
security plan which demonstrates compliance with all of the minimum standards
specified herein.
Section 4-2-12 Medical Marijuana Cultivation Location
A Medical Marijuana Cultivation Location as defined in Article 2-2 of this Ordinance is
subject to the following regulations:
A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
1. An application for the establishment of a medical marijuana cultivation
location must be submitted, reviewed and approved by the Community
Development Director or his designee prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit by
the City for the proposed establishment.
2. The application shall include:
a. If the application is by someone other than the owner of the property, an
authorization signed by the property owner must be submitted with the
application and include an explicit acknowledgement that the property
owner knows that the proposed use of the property is for a medical
marijuana cultivation location.
b. The address and legal name of the medical marijuana cultivation
location.
c. The name(s) and location(s) of any medical marijuana dispensary
associated with the medical marijuana cultivation location.
d. The name and address of each of principal officer and board member of
any medical marijuana dispensary associated with the medical
marijuana cultivation location, including their contact information and
the emergency contact information for one or more registered dispensary
agents responsible for the operation of said cultivation location.
City of Goodyear 4-29 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
e. A copy of the operating procedures for the medical marijuana
cultivation location adopted in compliance with A.R.S. §36-
2804(B)(1)(c).
f. A floor plan showing the layout and dimensions of the medical
marijuana cultivation location to demonstrate compliance with the
development standards contained herein and show the security measures
proposed to comply with A.R.S. §36-2806 and the standards contained
herein.
3. All medical marijuana cultivation locations shall adhere to all applicable state,
county and municipal laws, codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations and shall be
operated in conformance with the provisions of A.R.S. §36-2801, et. seq. and any
rules adopted by the Arizona Department of Health Services pursuant said
statutes.
B. SEPARATION STANDARDS
1. A medical marijuana cultivation location shall not be located within two five
thousand two hundred and eighty feet (5,280’) measured in a straight line in any
direction from the closest exterior building wall of the medical marijuana
cultivation location to the closest exterior building wall of any medical
marijuana dispensary or other medical marijuana cultivation location, unless
the cultivation facility is associated with said dispensary, in which case no
separation is required.
2. A medical marijuana cultivation location shall not be located within five
hundred feet (500’) measured in a straight line in any direction from the closest
exterior building wall of the medical marijuana cultivation location to the
closest property line of any property in a residential district (not including
residentially-zoned public street right-of-way), as described in Article 3-1 of this
ordinance.
3. A medical marijuana cultivation location shall not be located within one
thousand feet (1,000’) measured in a straight line in any direction from the closest
exterior building wall of the medical marijuana cultivation location to the
closest property line of a public, private, parochial, or charter kindergarten,
elementary, secondary or high school.
4. A medical marijuana cultivation location shall not be located within one
thousand feet (1,000’) measured in a straight line in any direction from the closest
exterior building wall of the medical marijuana cultivation location to the
closest property line of a licensed preschool, day care or childcare center.
5. A medical marijuana cultivation location shall not be located within one
thousand feet (1,000’) measured in a straight line in any direction from the closest
exterior building wall of the medical marijuana cultivation location to the
closest property line of a public park, library or public community center.
6. A medical marijuana cultivation location shall not be located within one
thousand feet (1,000’) measured in a straight line in any direction from the closest
City of Goodyear 4-30 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
exterior building wall of the medical marijuana cultivation location to the
closest property line of any church or place of worship.
7. A medical marijuana cultivation location shall not be located within two
thousand feet (2,000’) measured in a straight line in any direction from the closest
exterior building wall of the medical marijuana cultivation location to the
closest property line of any licensed residential substance abuse diagnostic and
treatment facility or other licensed drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility.
8. A medical marijuana cultivation location shall not be located within one
thousand feet (1,000’) measured in a straight line in any direction from the closest
exterior building wall of the medical marijuana cultivation location to the
closest property line of any adult businesses as defined in Article 2 of this
ordinance.
C. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1. The medical marijuana cultivation location must be located in a permanent
building and shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile or modular
building, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other motor vehicle.
2. The maximum gross floor area of a medical marijuana cultivation location
shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet.
3. The secure storage area for the medical marijuana stored at the medical
marijuana cultivation location shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet
of the five thousand (5,000) square feet maximum gross floor area of the
medical marijuana cultivation location.
4. The operator of the medical marijuana cultivation location shall provide
unrestricted access to City code enforcement officers or police officers who
request admission for the purpose of determining compliance with these
standards.
5. The medical marijuana cultivation location shall be an enclosed, locked facility
which is secured by four solid walls and barrier covering the top of the area that
are constructed of materials (eight-inch concrete block or equal) sufficient to deter
and prevent theft of marijuana being processed.
6. Within the medical marijuana cultivation location there shall be a secure
storage area which has a single point of access and whose walls and roof are
constructed of materials (eight-inch concrete block or equal) sufficient to deter
and prevent theft of marijuana being processed.
7. All marijuana being processed shall be placed within the secure storage area at all
times when the cultivation location is not open for business.
8. The operator of the medical marijuana cultivation location shall provide for the
proper disposal of marijuana remnants or by-products, and such material shall not
be placed within the dispensary’s exterior refuse containers.
9. The operator of the medical marijuana cultivation location shall ensure that
there is be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, or odors into the environment from
the cultivation location.
10. The operator of the medical marijuana cultivation location shall not allow onsite
consumption of medical marijuana.
City of Goodyear 4-31 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
11. The medical marijuana cultivation location shall have only one secure entrance
to the dispensary and any other doors required for exiting shall be locked to the
outside and have an alarm that sound when opened from the inside.
12. The medical marijuana cultivation location shall have an alarm system with a
redundant power supply and circuitry to prevent deactivation.
13. The medical marijuana cultivation location shall have a video surveillance
system that at all times records all interior areas and the exterior perimeter.
14. The medical marijuana cultivation location shall have adequate exterior
security lighting which also complies with Article 10 of this ordinance.
15. Entry to the medical marijuana cultivation location shall be limited only to the
principal officers, board members and designated agents of the medical
marijuana dispensary associated with the medical marijuana cultivation
location or persons who need access to perform their duties in enforcing local,
state or federal laws or regulations.
16. The medical marijuana cultivation location shall develop and maintain a
security plan which demonstrates compliance with all of the minimum standards
specified herein.
Section 4-2-13 Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation and Medical
Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation
Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation and Medical Marijuana Qualifying
Patient Cultivation as defined in Article 2-2 of this Ordinance are subject to the following
regulations:
A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
1. Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation and Medical
Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation is permitted in all residential zoning
districts as a permitted accessory use provided the primary residences of the
registered designated caregiver and registered qualifying patient, for whom the
medical marijuana is being cultivated, are more than twenty-five (25) miles from
an operating medical marijuana dispensary and is done in conformance with the
development standards contained herein.
2. All Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation and Medical
Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation shall be conducted in conformance
with the provisions of A.R.S. §36-2801, et. seq. and any rules adopted by the
Arizona Department of Health Services pursuant said statutes.
B. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
1. Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation.
a. Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation shall only be
conducted at the primary residence of a registered designated caregiver
provided the residence is more than twenty-five (25) miles from an
operating medical marijuana dispensary.
City of Goodyear 4-32 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
b. Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation shall be
conducted in an enclosed, locked facility such as a closet, room
greenhouse or other building that does not exceed two hundred and fifty
(250) square feet.
c. The Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation shall be
conducted in a manner that it is not detectable from the exterior of the
building in which the cultivation takes place.
2. Medical Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation.
a. Medical Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation shall only be
conducted at the primary residence of a registered qualifying patient
provided the residence is more than twenty-five (25) miles from an
operating medical marijuana dispensary.
b. Medical Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation shall be conducted
in an enclosed, locked facility such as a closet, room greenhouse or other
building that does not exceed fifty (50) square feet.
c. The Medical Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation shall be
conducted in a manner that it is not detectable from the exterior of the
building in which the cultivation takes place.
Section 4-2-14 Brewery
A Brewery as defined in Section 2-2 of this Ordinance is subject to the following regulations:
A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1) The building containing the brewery must be at least 300 feet from the property
line of any property zoned for single family residential use and at least 300 feet
from any building containing a school, nursery school or place of worship.
2) A tasting room to sample beer produced onsite or off-site at a facility under
common ownership is considered an accessory use to the brewery. However, no
food or other alcoholic beverages may be served to the public in the tasting room
or anywhere else within the brewery.
3) Live music and entertainment are not permitted except with a Special Use Permit.
4) The brewery shall not produce odors, gas, dust or any other atmospheric pollutant
detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons living or working in
the surrounding area.
5) The owner of the brewery shall provide documentation to the Development
Services Director on the quantity of beer produced onsite for the calendar year.
Documentation will be required to be submitted to the Department by January 31st
of the following year.
City of Goodyear 4-33 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
Section 4-2-15 Brewpub
A brewpub as defined in Section 2-2 of this Ordinance is subject to the following regulation:
A. GENERAL REQUIREMENT
1) At least 40% of the brewpub’s gross revenue shall be derived from the sale of
food. If requested by the Development Services Director, the owner of the
brewpub shall provide to the Department documentation on the facility’s gross
revenue and the percentage of gross revenue derived from the sale of food for the
calendar year. Documentation will be required to be submitted to the Department
by January 31st of the following year.
2) Live music or entertainment shall only be allowed as an accessory use if the
facility is located a minimum of three hundred feet (300’) from the property line
of any residentially zoned or designated property. The area within the facility
designated for music or entertainment activities, including patron dancing, shall
not exceed 5,000 square feet. All noise generated by live music or entertainment
activities shall be fully contained within the indoor space occupied by the
brewpub.
3) The area devoted to patron dancing shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of
the total floor area.
4) The brewpub shall not be open after hours as defined by State law (generally,
closing time of the dance floor is later than that of the bar).
Section 4-2-16 Microbrewery
A microbrewery as defined in Section 2-2 of this Ordinance is subject to the following
regulations:
A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1) The building containing the microbrewery must be at least 300 feet from the
property line of any property zoned for single family residential use and at least
300 feet from any building containing a school, nursery school or place of
worship.
2) The microbrewery shall not produce odors, gas, dust or any other atmospheric
pollutant detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons living or
working in the surrounding area.
City of Goodyear 4-34 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
3) The owner of the microbrewery shall provide documentation to the Development
Services Director on the quantity of beer produced onsite and the amount of beer
sold and delivered to other retailers for the calendar year. Documentation will be
required to be submitted to the Department by January 31st of the following year.
4) Live music or entertainment shall only be allowed as an accessory use if the
facility is located a minimum of three hundred feet (300’) from the property line
of any residentially zoned or designated property. The area within the facility
designated for music or entertainment activities, including patron dancing, shall
not exceed 5,000 square feet. All noise generated by live music or entertainment
activities shall be fully contained within the indoor space occupied by the
microbrewery.
5) The area devoted to patron dancing shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of
the total floor area.
6) The microbrewery shall not be open after hours as defined by State law
(generally, closing time of the dance floor is later than that of the bar).
City of Goodyear 4-35 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
ARTICLE 4-3 NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS
Lawful use of a building or land existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, although such
use does not conform to these provisions, may be continued, provided only reasonable repairs
and alterations are made.
A. USES.
1. Such nonconforming use discontinued for a period of six (6) months shall be
presumed to be abandoned, and any future use of said building or land shall be in
conformity with this Ordinance, unless the owner is able to establish that such use
was not intended to be abandoned.
2. A nonconforming use of a building or land may not be changed to another
nonconforming use. When a nonconforming use has been changed to a
conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use.
3. An existing building or land devoted to a use not permitted under this Ordinance
for the district in which located shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or
structurally altered unless the use conforms with this Ordinance. Reasonable
repairs or alteration shall be permitted, so long as such repairs or alterations do
not permit the expansion of the nonconforming use.
B. BUILDINGS.
1. Any building or land in existence at the effective date of this Ordinance, which
does not conform to the district in which located, that shall be destroyed to extent
of fifty (50) percent of its value, (as determined by three [3] competent appraisers)
then, without further action by Council, said building or land shall, from date of
destruction, be subject to this Ordinance.
2. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted as authorization for continuance of
the use of a building or land in violation of zoning regulations in effect prior to
adoption of this Ordinance.
3. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted to require any changes in:
a. An existing building; or
b. A building for which a building permit has been issued and construction has
been diligently pursued within three (3) months of the date of permit, and
ground story framework (including second tier of beams) has been completed
within six (6) months of date of the permit, and the entire building was
completed within one year from date of this Ordinance.
City of Goodyear 4-36 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
ARTICLE 4-4 TEMPORARY USES
4-4-1 Purpose
4-4-2 General Regulations and Applicability
4-4-3 Application Process
4-4-4 Permitted Temporary Uses
4-4-5 Temporary Uses Not Requiring a Permit
4-4-6 Development Standards
Section 4-4-1 Purpose. The intent of this Section is to allow for specific temporary uses
that may be conducted for specified, limited time periods under special conditions. It is
not the intent of this Section to allow for uses otherwise prohibited by the Zoning
Ordinance or to allow long term or permanent uses to be established.
Section 4-4-2 General Regulations and Applicability
A. Every temporary use shall require a temporary use zoning permit except as
provided in paragraph C below or as regulated by Section 4-4-5
(Temporary Uses Not Requiring a Permit)
B. No temporary use zoning permit shall be issued unless and until the
applicant has submitted an application which includes a signed statement
that upon cessation of the use or expiration of the permit, whichever
occurs first, the premises will be promptly cleaned and restored to
substantially the same condition existing prior to commencement of such
use.
C. Any temporary use that requires a special event license shall not require a
temporary use zoning permit in addition to the special event license;
however the special event license will be reviewed for conformance with
this Section.
D. A temporary use may be considered in any zoning district unless
otherwise noted, but an application for a temporary use zoning permit may
be denied if the proposed temporary use is not compatible with
surrounding land uses or is in close proximity to residences.
Section 4-4-3 Application Process
A. SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS. Temporary use zoning permits shall be
reviewed and approved in accordance with Section 1-2-11 (Zoning
Permits). The following additional information shall accompany
temporary use zoning permit applications:
City of Goodyear 4-37 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
1. A narrative describing the proposed temporary use including the
location, hours of operation, date the temporary use will start and end,
proposed signage, scope and nature of the temporary use. The type of
equipment and materials being displayed, stored, or sold shall be
called out. The narrative shall include the request for any outdoor
music, live entertainment, speakers, or amplifiers if applicable.
2. A site plan showing the location of all structures, carts, tents, signs,
displayed materials, stored materials, parking, fencing or similar
obstructions, both temporary and permanent, including the setbacks of
such structures from property lines and each other.
3. An aerial photo or context plan that depicts all structures and uses
within five-hundred (500) feet of the subject property.
4. The site plan and narrative shall describe the traffic circulation and
parking that is associated with the temporary use. Any permanent
parking spaces being used by the temporary use shall be described and
depicted on the site plan.
5. Authorization of the temporary use in writing from the property
owner.
B. REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
1. All temporary use zoning permit approvals shall be made subject
to a time limit as set forth by the City.
2. Approval of a temporary use zoning permit shall be made by the
Zoning Administrator upon a determination that the application is
in substantial compliance with the development standards specified
herein and all other applicable city codes and ordinances. Such
approval may include any conditions deemed necessary to ensure
compliance with said development standards and city codes and
ordinances and compatibility with surrounding land uses.
Conditions to be considered may include, but are not limited to:
a. Provision of adequate parking for the proposed temporary
use and other surrounding permanent uses.
b. Dust control measures and site lighting.
c. Site vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
City of Goodyear 4-38 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
d. Impact and compatibility with surrounding property and
uses such as, but not limited to noise, lighting, and odor.
e. Hours of operation.
f. Start and end dates of the temporary use.
g. The operation of other temporary uses or special events in
proximity to the proposed temporary use.
h. Proximity of the temporary use to residential uses.
i. Maintenance of a positive appearance, with appropriate
screening and buffering.
j. Record of past code violations or complaints of the
operation of the proposed temporary use or similar
temporary uses at the proposed site.
Section 4-4-4 Permitted Temporary Uses. Temporary uses are limited to the uses and
time limits listed below.
Use
Time
Limit
(days)
Frequency of Use
(calendar year)
Interval Between
Uses (days)5
Carnival or Circus 3 4x/year 30
Crop Maze 30 1x/year 30
Food Vendors 1 3 4x/year 30
Haunted House 30 1x/year 30
Outdoor Fair or
Festival
30 1x/year 30
Outdoor Assembly 2 3 4x/year 30
Seasonal Sales 3 30 1x/year 30
Sport Tournament 3 4x/year 30
Parking Lot Sales 4 10 3x/year 30
1. Food vendors are those vendors that use a portable stand for the retail sale of
food and beverages including food carts, such as hot dog stands, but not
including food sales that take place primarily in a vehicle, such as an ice cream
truck, or that are operated in compliance with Section 4-4-5.
2. Outdoor assembly includes, but is not limited to concerts, tent revivals,
religious events, and fund raisers.
3. Seasonal sales refer to the outdoor sale of goods that are related to a particular
seasonal or cultural activity including, Christmas tree lots and pumpkin patch
sales.
City of Goodyear 4-39 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
4. Parking lot sales include any outdoor retail sale that takes place on a parking
lot.
5. The interval between temporary uses shall be calculated based on the number
of calendar days between temporary uses regardless of the use category.
Section 4-4-5 Temporary Uses Not Requiring a Permit. A temporary use does not
require a temporary use permit so long as it meets all of the following criteria:
A. The duration does not exceed 3 days per event and a special event permit
is obtained.
B. The use does not obstruct or impede required pedestrian and/or ADA
access.
C. The activity is not visible from a public street.
D. The activity has been authorized by the property owner and is accessory to
a permanent existing use.
E. The activity occurs entirely under an arcade or permanent awning attached
to the building.
F. The activity is located within twenty (20) feet of the entrance of said
permanent existing use.
Section 4-4-6 Development Standards
A. A temporary use shall be set back a minimum of one-hundred (100) feet
from a residential use.
B. Tents and canopies may be allowed under the following conditions:
1. Tents that are over 400 square feet may be permitted for temporary
uses whose duration is ten (10) days or less.
2. Canopies that are over 700 square feet may be permitted for
temporary uses whose duration is ten (10) days or less
3. Tents, canopies, and other structures, permanent or temporary, are
subject to all applicable city codes and ordinances, including the
building and fire code regulations.
C. The use of trucks, RVs or similar vehicles for temporary uses is
prohibited, except for RVs used solely by a watchman or caretaker, as
approved by the Zoning Administrator.
City of Goodyear 4-40 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: March 27, 2017
D. All signage shall comply with Article 7 (Signs). Signs for a temporary use
shall be requested in conjunction with the temporary use permit
application.
E. All lighting shall comply with Article 10 (Outdoor Lighting Standards).
F. All surfaces used for the temporary use shall be paved or dust-controlled
as approved by the City Engineer.
G. All surfaces used for parking for the temporary use shall be paved.
H. No temporary use shall locate within a landscape area, required pedestrian
access ways, or public rights-of-way. No temporary use shall locate within
a common area unless the temporary use has been approved by the
homeowner’s association or property owner’s association if applicable.
I. The temporary use shall not impede or cause to be impeded, vehicular or
pedestrian circulation, fire access lanes, accessibility, vehicular or
pedestrian ingress or egress into businesses, or traffic visibility.
J. Only one temporary use may operate on a single parcel or lot at any given
time and there shall be thirty (30) days between any temporary use of the
property.
ARTICLE 5 PROPERTY IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
Considerations of community appearance, security, enjoyment of privacy and amenities require
consistent standards for property improvement installation and maintenance which may occur in
various zoning district. These criteria include:
5-1 Landscaping Standards
5-2 Walls, Fences
5-3 Pools and Spas
ARTICLE 5-1 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
Standards and requirements are provided for the installation of landscaping for all new and
expanded development within the City in order to promote the general welfare of the
community; to effectuate attractive and logical development; to aid in the enhancement of
property values; to create an attractive appearance along City streets; to complement the visual
effect of buildings; to provide appropriate buffers between incompatible land uses and
protection from intense activities; and to aid in conserving water by encouraging the use of
varieties of plants, trees and shrubs indigenous to arid regions which are characterized by
low-water consumption. The standards and regulations of this Article shall be held to be the
minimum requirements necessary for the promotion of the foregoing objectives of this Article.
In those instances where the minimum standards and requirements are not sufficient to achieve
the purpose and objectives of this Article, the Zoning Administrator or designee may impose
such other reasonable requirements as may be deemed appropriate.
5-1-1 General Applicability
5-1-2 Maintenance
5-1-3 Landscape Plan and Design Standards
5-1-4 Single and Two-Family Landscape Design Standards
Section 5-1-1 General Applicability
The requirement for installation and maintenance of landscaping in accordance with the design
standards and provisions of this Article shall apply to all new buildings, all new uses of land,
and any addition to, or expansion of existing buildings and uses, occurring in any Multi-family,
Commercial or Industrial Districts, and to non-residential uses in the AG, AP, AU and in Single
Family and Two Family Districts. The provisions and guidelines of Section 5-1-4 of this Article
shall apply to residential use in the Agricultural, Single-Family and Two-Family zoning
districts.
A. BUILDING AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS.
1. Prior to the issuance of a building or construction permit, the applicant for such
permit shall demonstrate that a landscape plan has been approved for the site by the
Zoning Administrator.
City of Goodyear 5-1 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10,2012
2. In lieu of the installation of plant material prior to issuance of an Occupancy Permit, a
cash deposit or an irrevocable letter of credit in an amount guaranteeing the complete
one hundred (100) percent installation of the plant material within six (6) months may
be accepted by the Community Development Director, or his designee. Failure to
install the material in the six (6) month time period shall be deemed a violation of this
Article, and the City may use the cash deposit or funds set aside by letter of credit to
complete the landscape improvements required.
B. APPROPRIATE USE OF LANDSCAPING.
1. Any landscape areas in the public right-of-way shall comply with all the
requirements of the City Code and with the criteria of the Arizona Department of
Water Resources. These criteria specify plant material which have low water
needs and encourage the conservation of our water resources.
2. Landscaped areas shall not be used for parking of vehicles, display of
merchandise or other uses detrimental to the landscaping, but may be used for
screening and decorative walls and for art.
3. Plant material that is high in pollen production is discouraged. Also, extreme care
should be exercised when using plants that are known to be poisonous.
4. Plants should be placed in such a way as to maximize survivability (i.e., low
water-use plants should not be placed in drainage ways, and the use of
frost-tender plants should be limited to accent locations, not primary focal points).
Section 5-1-2 Property Owner Maintenance
A. All landscape improvements installed in accordance with the requirements
and provisions of this article for new or expanded developments and uses
within on-site landscape areas as well as in the right-of-way, shall be
maintained, in perpetuity, by the property owner or owner's association
(should the property be subdivided) or the lessee of the site.
B. Any areas designated and intended for the purposes of on-site water
retention shall be maintained and reserved for that specific purpose.
C. Any alteration or deterioration of required landscape improvements and
areas shall be considered a violation of this and any applicable Ordinance.
D. Any plant material that does not survive shall be replaced within thirty
(30) days.
E. The removal, failure to maintain or destruction of landscape material
previously approved by the City shall constitute a violation of the Zoning
City of Goodyear 5-2 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10,2012
Ordinance. Replacement of landscape material shall be of like size as that
which was removed or destroyed.
F. Landscaping and irrigation systems shall be reasonably maintained in
accordance with the approved site and/or landscape plan. Plant material
shall not be severely pruned such that the natural growth pattern or
characteristic form are significantly altered. Palm trees shall, however, be
pruned once each year to remove dried fronds and eliminate fire hazard
and insect infestation.
G. Modifications and/or removal of existing landscaping on other than singlefamily
residential property shall require prior approval.
Section 5-1-3 Landscape Plan and Design Standards
A. APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS.
1. Applications for a Landscape Plan approval shall be processed and reviewed in
accordance with the procedures generally described herein and more fully described
in the Administrative Process Manual and in this Ordinance, and in the
Engineering Standards.
a. Applications for approval of a Landscape Plan shall be filed with the
Development Services Department on form(s) provided by the Development
Services Department in conjunction with an application for Site Plan approval and
shall include all of the information identified in the application form(s), in the
Administrative Process Manual, in this Ordinance, in the Engineering
Standards, and any other data that may be required by the Zoning
Administrator that is needed for review of the application.
b. Applications shall be signed by the property owner(s) or an authorized agent of
the property owner(s) and all applicable fees shall be paid when applications are
submitted.
2. The Development Review Committee shall review the application submittal for
compliance with the requirements of Article 5 of this Ordinance, any other
applicable requirements in this Ordinance, applicable Engineering Standards, and
applicable provisions in the Goodyear City Code. Following the completion of the
Committee’s review, the Zoning Administrator shall approve, approve with
conditions or deny the Landscape Plan application.
3. The approval date of Landscape Plan Approval shall be the date on which the
application was approved by the Zoning Administrator. Landscape Plan approvals
are tied to other development approvals, which will be identified in the notification of
City of Goodyear 5-3 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10,2012
Landscape Plan approval; and the Landscape Plan approval expires if such related
development approval expires.
4. Construction plans for landscaping shall conform to the development reflected in the
Landscape Plan as approved by the Zoning Administrator shall be submitted and
approved as a condition precedent for the issuance of a building permit.
B. DESIGN STANDARDS.
1. Each site to be developed shall be required to provide landscape areas and amounts
equal to or exceeding the following minimum amounts.
a. Each site of a multi-family use shall have a minimum of twenty (20) percent of
the net site/lot area in landscaping.
b. Each site of commercial use shall have a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the
net site/lot area in landscaping.
c. Each site of industrial use shall have a minimum of ten (10) percent of the net site
in landscaping.
d. In addition to the minimum on-site landscaping, there shall be landscaping in the
entire area of the right-of-way, between property line and back of street curb
except for approved driveways, walkways and bike paths.
2. Landscape designs shall be compatible with adjacent properties.
3. All on-site water retention areas, other than paved surfaces shall be entirely
landscaped and shall comply with the following criteria:
a. The retention areas shall not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the on-site
street frontage landscape area;
b. All retention areas shall maintain slopes no steeper than 6:1 when adjacent to
public rights-of-way, or when there is pedestrian type access to that portion of the
basin. Side slopes adjacent to walls, fences, hedges and the like (i.e., no or
limited pedestrian type access in that area) may have side slopes up to 4:1;
4. All mounding and berming shall have slopes no steeper than 4:1;
5. All parking areas shall incorporate the following elements:
a. Landscape islands, with raised concrete curbing to define parking lot entrances,
aisles and ends of all parking aisles;
b. Landscape islands to separate rows of more than fifteen (15) parking spaces;
City of Goodyear 5-4 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10,2012
c. Each landscape island shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in total width
including curbing and equal seventy-five (75) percent of the length of the parking
stall(s);
d. Each landscape island shall include a minimum of one (1) tree of fifteen (15)
gallon size and five (5) shrubs of five (5) gallon size for each parking stall length.
6. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the landscaped areas are to be planted with
vegetative ground cover. Minimum size and spacing to be one (1) gallon size plants
at a maximum three (3) feet on center.
C. DESIGN CRITERIA PERTAINING TO SPECIFIC DISTRICTS OR USES.
1. Entry features of future commercial and industrial development sites shall be
landscaped in the first phase of construction.
2. In Multi-family and non-residential uses in the agricultural, single family and
two-family districts, the required front and street side yards shall be entirely
landscaped except for necessary and provided walkways and driveways.
3. In the commercial and industrial development, a minimum of thirty (30) feet of any
yard adjacent to a street shall be entirely landscaped, except for necessary and
provided walkways and driveways.
4. Where multi-family, commercial, office or industrial uses are adjacent to or
separated by an alley or lesser separation from any residential development or
district, such trees shall be planted at twenty (20) feet on center, with every other tree
being a minimum twenty-four (24) inch box size.
5. Where a commercial, office or industrial user of over fifty thousand (50,000) square
feet building area is located adjacent to a residence or residential district, the
landscape buffer described in 5-1-3-C-4, above, shall be increased to fifteen (15) feet
(adjacent to that user), with two (2) rows of trees along the interior side of the
required wall. Each row is to contain minimum fifteen (15) gallon trees spaced
fifteen (15) feet on center, staggered for maximum effect in buffering the two uses.
6. Trees shall be required along all street frontages according to the following criteria:
a. A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted for every twenty-five (25) feet of
lineal street frontage;
b. The trees selected shall be compatible with the overall site and landscape plan, as
well as adjacent sites.
City of Goodyear 5-5 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10,2012
City of Goodyear 5-6 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10,2012
7. All trees shall be planted and staked in accordance with the "Standard Tree Planting
Detail" located below.
8. All developments that back or side onto a street and which have a six (6) foot high
screening wall constructed on the property line shall install within the street
right-of-way contiguous with the property three (3) water conserving variety shrubs
and one (1) water conserving variety tree for every thirty (30) feet of such reverse
street frontage. All such trees and shrubs shall be provided with an automatic drip
or soaker irrigation system. Ground cover shall be one-quarter (1/4) inch minus
decomposed golden granite without plastic liners. A pre-emergent herbicide shall be
applied to the ground prior to and after the placement of natural surface materials
(decomposed granite, river run rock, and the like) in any landscaped area to prevent
weed growth. The foregoing requirement shall apply in lieu of the street frontage
landscape improvements required in 5-1-3-B-6, above.
Figure 13.
Prune tree at time of stake removal.
(2) 2'' diameter x 10' long Lodgepole
Pine tree stakes. Bury 3' in ground
and cut off stake 12'' above vinyl tie.
Stakes shall remain in place For 2
years unless removal is approved
by maintenance director.
Mulch to a depth of 1/2'',5' diameter.
Keep mulch 6'' away from trunk.
Backfill with native soil (no rocks greater
than 1''). Apply fertilizer to surface away
from trunk per specifications.
Scarify one side of root ball prior to planting.
Sufficient clearance shall be maintained
between trees and utility fences so as to
not hinder use of these facilities.
Vinyl Tie, 1'' (min.) in width.
Set top of root ball at soil surface.
Form temporary irrigation border just
outside of root ball. Use water to
settle backfill. Do not pack backfill.
Planting hole shall be 3 times diameter
of root ball and no deeper. Scarify
sides and bottom of planting hole.
TREE PLANTING DETAIL <36'' BOX OR 2'' CALIPER
D. PLANTING SPECIFICATIONS.
1. Unless otherwise specified herein, all required trees shall be a minimum of fifteen
(15) gallons in size and at least fifty (50) percent of those trees must be twenty-four
(24) inch box or larger size.
a. All shrubs shall be a minimum of five (5) gallon in size.
b. All fifteen (15) gallon trees must be a minimum of eight (8) feet in height, four
(4) feet in spread and one and one-quarter (1 1/4) trunk caliper at the ground level.
c. All twenty-four (24) inch box and larger trees shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet
in height, six (6) feet in spread and two (2) inch trunk caliper at the ground level.
d. Upon approval of the Zoning Administrator, or his designee, the installation of
twenty (20) square feet of vegetative groundcover in any landscaped area shall
substitute for one (1) required shrub, up to a maximum of thirty (30) percent of
the required shrubs in any particular landscaped area.
2. Fifteen (15) gallon size trees (of a non-deciduous variety) fifteen (15) feet on center
shall be planted along any property lines of parcels developed for multi-family,
commercial, office, or industrial uses which are adjacent to or separated by an alley
from any residential development or district. Minimum width of landscape buffer
shall be six (6) feet clear.
3. Specified Varieties include:
a. Whenever Olive Trees (Olea Europaea) are specified, they shall be the "Swan
Hill" variety.
b. All Mexican Fan Palms (Washington Robusta), California Fan Palms
(Washingtonia Filifera), and Queen Palms (Cocos Plumosa) shall have a
minimum five (5) foot trunk height measured from the base of the trunk to the
base of the fronds when located within the public right-of-way or within fifty (50)
feet of the street property line.
4. All landscaped areas shall be finished with a natural topping material which may
include, but not limited to, the following: turf, groundcover, planting, decomposed
granite (two (2) inches minimum depth), river run rock, expanded shale, or bark.
a. A pre-emergent herbicide shall be applied to the ground prior to the placement of
natural surface materials (decomposed granite, river run rock, and the like) in any
landscaped area to prevent weed growth.
City of Goodyear 5-7 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10,2012
b. An automatic irrigation system which may be spray, flood, soaker, or drip type
system. A pressure-type vacuum breaker shall be required with the installation of
all sprinkler systems.
c. All irrigation systems and landscaped areas shall be designed, constructed, and
maintained as to promote water conservation and prevent water overflow or
seepage into the street, or parking areas.
5. Landscaped areas along street frontages shall be contoured or bermed to provide
variations in grade, visual relief, parking lot screening, and a more pleasing
aesthetic value. All on-site parking areas shall be screened from street view by a
landscaped berm or decorative wall not less than three (3) feet in height. The
required height of the berm or wall shall be measured from the highest finished grade
of the adjacent on-site parking area or adjacent finished grade of the street,
whichever is greater.
6. All landscaping and landscape materials established in close proximity to a driveway
or street intersection shall be installed and maintained in a manner which does not
effect visibility.
E. ENFORCEMENT.
Where, in the opinion of the Community Development Director, or his designee, there
exists extraordinary conditions of topography, land ownership, site boundaries and
dimensions, adjacent development characteristics or other circumstances not provided
for in this Article, the Community Development Director, or his designee, may modify or
vary the strict provisions of this Article in such a manner and to such an extent as is
deemed appropriate to the public interest, provided that the purpose and intent of this
Article is maintained with such modification or variance.
1. The Community Development Director, or his designee, may accept alternate sizes or
varieties of plant material of comparable value and durability when it is shown that
specified plant materials cannot reasonably be obtained from local nursery stock.
2. All projects required by this Article to be landscaped shall pass a landscape
inspection prior to certificate of occupancy being issued by the City. Such
inspections shall be requested by the applicant at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to
being performed.
a. The City shall have the right to refuse to pass any project not meeting the
provisions of this Article.
b. The City shall also have the right to reject landscape materials which are
substandard as to size, condition or appearance including a pre-inspection of
materials at the supplier if deemed necessary.
City of Goodyear 5-8 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10,2012
Section 5-1-4 Single Family and Two Family Landscape Design Standards
Single family and two-family dwelling homebuilders are required, and homeowners are
encouraged, to observe the following guides when maintaining masterplanned residential
landscaping:
A. General Guidelines
Traditional landscapes with extensive turf areas, trees and shrubs requiring large amounts
of water shall be replaced with low water use landscapes - xeriscapes.
B. Water Conservation Guidelines
In order to conserve water as required by the Department of Water Resources and the
City of Goodyear Water Conservation Plan, the following landscape and irrigation
criteria shall be followed:
1. Grass (turf) use shall be restricted to thirty (30) percent of the “gross” area of single
family and two-family lots.
2. Drip emitters shall be used in watering trees, shrubs, flowers and groundcovers.
3. Landscape plantings should be grouped according to similar water needs.
4. Low water use trees, shrubs, flowers and groundcovers are to be used in conjunction
with desired landscape materials.
City of Goodyear 5-9 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10,2012
ARTICLE 5-2 WALLS, FENCES
Walls or fences include any structure intended for confinement, prevention of intrusion,
boundary identification, or screening of activity. Screening devices are any structure installed to
conceal refuse, mechanical equipment, parking (service and loading bays or lanes), multi-family
habitation and commercial or industrial activities from adjacent residential districts and from
street view.
5-2-1 Placement Regulations
5-2-2 Design, Construction, Maintenance and Development Standards
Section 5-2-1 Placement Regulations
A. No walls, buildings, or other obstructions to view in excess of two (2) feet in height shall
be placed on any corner lot within a triangular area formed by the street right-of-way
lines and a line connecting them at points thirty-three (33) feet from the intersection of
the street right-of-way lines.
B. Height of walls and fences in residential districts shall be measured from the lowest
adjacent grade, except when adjacent to an alley or street right-of-way which has a
higher grade than the adjacent site. Then the height shall be measured from the top of
the crown of road or alley (if no curb). Height of screening devices shall be measured
from the highest adjacent grade.
Section 5-2-2 Design, Construction, Maintenance and Development Standards
A. DESIGN CRITERIA.
1. All fences or walls shall be located entirely upon the private property of the persons,
firms or corporation constructing, or causing the construction, of such fence unless
the owner of the property adjoining agrees, in writing, that such fence or wall may be
erected on the division line of the respective properties.
2. Any fence or wall constructed so as to have only one elevation "finished," which
shall be defined as not having its supporting members significantly visible, shall be
erected such that the finished elevation of the fence is exposed to the adjacent
property.
3. Outdoor storage areas for materials, trash, equipment, vehicles or other similar items
shall be provided with a masonry screening wall six (6) feet in height.
4. Parking areas shall be screened from street view by masonry walls or berms to a
minimum height of three (3) feet above the highest finished grade (may be
supplemented by up to twenty-five (25) percent intermittent landscaping).
City of Goodyear 5-10 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10,2012
5. Masonry walls six (6) feet in height shall be installed along interior boundaries of a
site adjacent to or across from a residential district.
B. CONSTRUCTION MAINTENANCE.
1. Every fence or wall shall be constructed in a substantial, workmanlike manner and of
a substantial material reasonably suited for the purpose for which the fence or wall is
proposed to be used. Every fence or wall shall be maintained in a condition of
reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to become or remain in a condition of
disrepair, damage, or unsightliness, or constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any
such fence or wall which is, or has become, dangerous to the public safety, health or
welfare, or has become unsightly through improper maintenance or neglect is a public
nuisance and the Chief Building Official, or his designee, shall commence proper
proceedings for the abatement thereof.
2. No fence may be constructed of combustible materials, erected, placed or located to
serve as a perimeter fence if within four (4) feet of a property line, except that gates
for such fences may be of a combustible material provided the gate is no wider than
twelve (12) feet.
3. Additional criteria for specified use types and conditions are required:
a. In residential and agricultural districts with residential uses, the maximum height
of any freestanding wall or fence in a required front yard shall be three (3) feet
except for walls that create a portal which shall be designed as an integral
component of the portal fixture, as determined in the required Design Review
process. In rear and side yards, the maximum height shall be six (6) feet.
b. All fences in a side or rear yard of a lot abutting an alley must allow for a three
(3) foot deep by eight (8) foot wide inset with gate for storage of garbage cans.
c. Exterior boundaries of mobile home subdivisions and mobile home parks shall
be bounded by a six (6) foot high masonry wall. Land between the wall and the
public street improvement shall be landscaped with street trees and other
landscaping materials, and shall be maintained by the owners or tenants.
d. In I-1 and I-2 districts, walled areas for storage of materials and equipment may
include three (3) strand barbed wire or barbed tape for maximum security,
(maximum eight (8) foot height).
e. All utility substations, wells, storage facilities, and other utilities shall be screened
from view by a solid masonry wall or landscape screen.
City of Goodyear 5-11 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10,2012
4. Open wire fences exceeding the otherwise permitted heights may be built around
schools and other public or quasi-public facilities when necessary for the safety or
restraint of the occupants.
5. Open wire fences exceeding the otherwise permitted heights may be built around
tennis courts by Use Permit or administrative approval, dependent upon the
following criteria:
a. A Use Permit is required for open wire fences around tennis courts that are
located within five hundred feet (500’) of the nearest property line of any property
zoned or platted for single-family residential development;
b. A Use Permit is not required for open wire fences around tennis courts where
there is no residentially zoned property line within five hundred feet (500’) of the
tennis court.
6. A building permit must be obtained prior to the installation of any fence that exceeds
six feet (6’) in height.
City of Goodyear 5-12 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10,2012
ARTICLE 5-3 POOLS AND SPAS
Outdoor swimming pool, in ground or above ground, wading pools, hot tubs, spas or other
similar pools used or designated to be used for swimming, wading or bathing purposes are
subject to these regulations. Wading pools, fish ponds, or shallow decorative pools less than
eighteen (18) inches deep may be exempt, except where the Chief Building Official, or his
designee, in individual cases deems it a public nuisance and/or dangerous to the public health,
safety, and welfare.
5-3-1 Enclosure Required
5-3-2 Design and Enclosure Details
5-3-3 Zoning Districts: Placement
5-3-4 Permit, Inspection and Maintenance
Section 5-3-1 Enclosure Required
It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance to maintain an outdoor swimming pool, either
above or below ground level, with a maximum depth of eighteen (18) inches or more in the City
of Goodyear unless either the premises upon which the pool is located or the pool itself is
enclosed as required herein. Irrigation and storm water retention facilities, and the water features
in public parks and golf courses are exempt from the fencing requirement of this section.
Section 5-3-2 Design and Enclosure Details
A. All swimming pools, or the property on which they are located, shall be enclosed by
buildings, walls, fences or combinations thereof, not less than five (5) feet nor more than
six (6) feet in height above grade measured on the exterior side of the enclosure.
1. On a portable spa or portable hot tub, which is not more than eight (8) feet in width, a
hard, latched or locked safety cover shall meet the barrier requirements of this
section.
2. A key operated motorized safety cover for portable spas and hot tubs may also be
used to meet the barrier requirements of this section. Approval must be received
from the Chief Building Official, or his designee.
B. All gates shall be substantially the same height as the wall or fence and shall be
self-closing and self-latching. Such gates and fencing shall not be constructed in a
manner as to provide, either intentionally or unintentionally, hand or foot holes for
climbing.
1. The latches shall be at least four and one-half (4.5) feet above the underlying ground
or otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small children. If the material of
construction or design is such that there are openings in the enclosure, such openings
City of Goodyear 5-13 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10,2012
City of Goodyear 5-14 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10,2012
shall be of such size that a spherical object four (4) inches in diameter cannot pass
through or under the fence or gate.
2. Double width gates which are not the sole means of ingress and egress shall not be
required to be self-closing and self-latching but must be padlocked at all times when
not in use.
Section 5-3-3 Zoning Districts: Placement
A. In any AG, AP, AU, R1-10, R1-7, R1-6 or R2 district, private swimming pools shall be
in the side or rear yards and no water surface shall be closer than five (5) feet from any
property line.
B. In other zoning districts or where a private swimming pool is proposed in other than a
side yard or rear, a Use Permit shall be obtained.
C. No public swimming pool shall be closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any property line.
Section 5-3-4 Permit, Inspection, Maintenance
A. A building permit shall not be issued for any swimming pool unless the plans for such
pool provide for an enclosure as required by this Section.
B. No swimming pool shall be filled in whole or in part with water unless the pool
structure has been installed in accordance with this Section and approved by the Chief
Building Official, or his designee.
C. It shall be the responsibility of both the property owner and the occupant of the premises
to install and maintain the fences, locks, latches, and gates in good condition and proper
working order when water is in the pool, and either or both may be deemed in violation
of this Article for failure to do so.
City of Goodyear 6-1 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
ARTICLE 6 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
6-1 Purpose
6-2 General Parking Regulations
6-3 Parking Design Standards
6-4 Parking Requirements
6-5 Off-Street Loading
6-6 Bicycle Parking
ARTICLE 6-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Article is to ensure the provision of adequate off-street parking and loading
spaces and vehicular maneuvering areas to those spaces for the uses permitted in this Ordinance in
a manner which is safe, efficient, convenient and functional. The provisions contained in this Article
are considered reasonable and appropriate, and are established to:
A. Provide standards for the minimum number of required off-street parking and loading
spaces with maneuvering areas, driveways and surface materials for the efficient and safe
movement of vehicular traffic.
B. Provide adequate screening measures for parking and maneuvering areas in a manner that
is visually attractive.
C. Ensure pedestrian-friendly parking areas by providing safe, adequate and convenient
pedestrian routes.
D. Provide for the accessibility needs and requirements of the disabled.
E. Allow flexible parking standards to improve circulation and promote community character.
F. Provide adequate on-site bicycle parking facilities.
ARTICLE 6-2 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS
6-2-1 Off-Street Parking Spaces
6-2-2 Residential Vehicular Access
Section 6-2-1 Off-Street Parking Spaces
A. VEHICULAR PARKING
1. Vehicular parking for a standard vehicle shall be in the form of a rectangle not less
than nine (9) feet in width by twenty (20) feet in depth, excluding driveways or
aisles, with access to a public thoroughfare; except that parking spaces abutting
City of Goodyear 6-2 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
sidewalks, curbs or landscape planters may have a minimum required depth of
eighteen and one-half (18.5) feet with a maximum allowed vehicle overhang of one
and one-half (1.5) feet.
B. BOAT OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SPACE
1. Spaces shall be provided in the form of a rectangle not less than ten (10) feet by
twenty-four (24) feet, or larger as may be required to accommodate the unit, subject
to the screening requirements of Section 6-3-2-E.
Section 6-2-2 Residential Vehicular Access
A. DRIVEWAYS
1. An improved residential driveway shall be provided between a public or private
street or alley and a garage, carport or other parking space. The driveway shall
consist of concrete, asphalt or masonry, except as provided in Subsections 10 and
11 below, and shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in length, as measured from the
back of sidewalk, or right-of-way line if no sidewalk is provided, to the front face of
a garage or carport.
2. Driveways which provide access from a garage to an alley may be less than twenty
(20) feet in length, provided that the total width of the alley and the total length of
the driveway combine to provide a minimum length of twenty-three (23) feet for the
maneuvering area.
3. Driveways shall connect to a public or private street, or may connect to a public or
private street by an alley.
4. Driveways shall not be located closer than three (3) feet to an abutting side property
line, unless a shared driveway is utilized.
5. When a shared driveway is utilized, the driveway shall be constructed so as to deflect
drainage away from contiguous private lots or parcels.
6. The maximum or total defined driveway width may be expanded to accommodate
floor plans that offer a combination of both front and side loading garages.
7. The total or maximum width of the driveway within the front yard for lots that are
one hundred (100) feet wide or less shall be thirty (30) feet or fifty (50) percent of
the lot width, whichever is less.
8. For lots that exceed one hundred (100) feet in width, the total or maximum driveway
width shall be forty (40) feet. In no case shall the front yard exceed a total of fortyfive
(45) percent of improved surface (concrete, asphalt or masonry).
City of Goodyear 6-3 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
9. Lots that exceed one hundred (100) feet in width may incorporate a front yard
circular drive provided the maximum driveway width is forty (40) feet. In no case
shall the front yard exceed a total of forty-five (45) percent of improved surface
(concrete, asphalt or masonry).
10. Residential lots in the Agricultural (AG) District accessed from a paved street shall
include a paved apron that extends from the street a minimum of twenty (20) feet or
to the edge of the public right-of-way, whichever is greater. The driveway may be
paved or may contain a stabilized surface of two (2) inches of aggregate over four
(4) inches of compacted soil properly treated to prevent dust, and shall extend from
the apron to the paved parking spaces as prescribed in Section 6-3-2-C.
11. Driveways on residential lots in the Agricultural Urban (AU) and Agricultural (AG)
Districts accessed from an unpaved street may be paved or may contain a stabilized
surface of two (2) inches of aggregate over four (4) inches of compacted soil
properly treated to prevent dust, and shall extend from the roadway to the paved
parking spaces as prescribed in Section 6-3-2.
B. FRONT YARD
1. Any vehicle which is not otherwise prohibited by the provisions of this Ordinance
from being parked in the front yard of a single family or two family residence lot
may be parked upon a driveway.
ARTICLE 6-3 PARKING DESIGN STANDARDS
6-3-1 Parking Standards Pertaining to All Districts
6-3-2 Parking Standards for Single Family, Two Family and Manufactured Home
Residential Uses
6-3-3 Parking Standards for Multi-family Residential, Commercial, Industrial and
Mixed Uses
Section 6-3-1 Parking Standards Pertaining to All Districts
A. PERMITS
1. No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has presented satisfactory
evidence to the Zoning Administrator that he owns or has otherwise available for his
use, sufficient property to provide required parking.
2. No additions to or enlargement of an existing building or use shall be permitted
unless the parking requirements are met for the entire building or use.
3. For new buildings, building expansions or conversions, plans must show the
arrangement of required parking and loading spaces, and indicate sufficient space
City of Goodyear 6-4 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
for vehicle maneuvering and adequate ingress and egress by patrons and delivery
vehicles to the parking area before a permit is granted. In the design of parking areas,
safe, adequate and convenient pedestrian routes shall be provided. Plans shall be
submitted, fully dimensioned, to the Zoning Administrator for approval prior to the
permit being granted.
B. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SPACES
1. All parking and loading spaces, drive aisles, maneuvering areas, driveways, and fire
lanes shall be paved with an asphalt, concrete, or masonry surface to a sufficient
thickness to withstand repeated vehicular traffic based on an engineered design
approved by the City Engineer, or his designee, except as provided below:
a. The surfacing of the areas referenced above shall not be required by the City
during construction on any site or project which is otherwise covered by an
individual or general air quality permit issued by the Maricopa County Air
Quality Department, but all surfacing improvements related to a specific
building permit shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for such permit.
b. The City Engineer, or his designee, at his discretion, may allow the use of
other materials for surfacing the areas referenced above when these areas:
(1) are in excess of the minimum number of spaces required by this
Article; or,
(2) were established and existing as of October 1, 2008; or,
(3) are temporary in terms of frequency of use (i.e., infrequent or
intermittent use) or duration of use (i.e., only used for a specific
period of time until paved or, for model home complexes, until
substantial completion of a residential development).
c. Any alternative surfacing materials allowed by the City Engineer, or his
designee, shall be appropriate to the use for which they are approved and at
a minimum shall minimize the generation of dust or particulate matter.
d. Any property with parking and loading spaces, drive aisles, maneuvering
areas, driveways, and fire lanes that were not surfaced as of the effective date
of Ordinance No. 08-1108, April 24, 2008, shall be improved with surfacing
to meet the minimum standards specified above no later than October 1,
2008, except for residential property developed with four (4) or fewer
dwelling units that has less than three thousand (3,000) square feet of parking
and loading spaces, drive aisles, maneuvering areas, driveways, and fire
lanes and except for agricultural uses and construction sites operating under
an individual or general air quality permit issued by the Arizona Department
of Air Quality or the Maricopa County Air Quality Department.
City of Goodyear 6-5 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
2. All vehicular egress from parking lots to public right-of-way shall be by forward
motion only, except in the case of single family and two family residences fronting
on a local street or a primary or secondary collector street.
3. The permanent or unauthorized temporary use of off-street parking or loading areas
for other than the said purpose shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. Should
the owner or occupants of a building change the use of the building and thus increase
the requirement for off-street parking, it shall constitute a violation of this
Ordinance, until there is compliance with the parking requirements.
Section 6-3-2 Parking Standards for Single Family, Two Family and Manufactured Home
Residential Uses
A. PARKING SPACE LOCATION
1. No motor vehicle shall be parked in a front yard, except on an authorized driveway.
2. No part of any vehicle parked in the front yard of a single family or two family
residential lot shall extend over the public or private sidewalk, or street curb where
no sidewalk exists; nor shall any such vehicle be parked within the area formed by
a ten by ten (10 x 10) foot triangle as measured from the point of intersection of the
back of the sidewalk, or street curb where no sidewalk exists, and a side property
line extended to the back of the sidewalk, or street curb where no sidewalk exists,
when such side property line is within five (5) feet of a driveway or an improved
parking surface located on an adjacent lot.
B. ENCLOSED PARKING SPACE DIMENSIONS
1. The number of required parking spaces for all residential uses is identified in Section
6-4-2. Required enclosed parking spaces may be either side-by-side or tandem for
single family and two family residential uses. Side-by-side enclosed parking areas
shall at a minimum measure eighteen (18) feet wide by twenty (20) feet deep with
no obstructions. Enclosed tandem spaces shall at a minimum measure nine (9) feet
wide by forty (40) feet deep with no obstructions.
C. RURAL RESIDENTIAL PARKING.
1. For residential lots in the Agricultural (AG) District accessed from a paved street,
two (2) paved parking spaces shall be required in the form of either: (1) an enclosed
garage; or (2) a carport that is located to the rear of the residence and not visible
from the street; or (3) a side-entry carport whose side facing the street is enclosed;
or (4) an alternate location determined to be appropriate and approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
2. For residential lots in the Agricultural Urban (AU) and Agricultural (AG) districts
accessed from an unpaved roadway, two (2) paved parking spaces shall be required
City of Goodyear 6-6 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
in the form of either: (1) an enclosed garage; or (2) a carport that is located to the
rear of the residence and not visible from the street; or (3) a side-entry carport whose
side facing the street is enclosed; or (4) an alternate location determined to be
appropriate and approved by the Zoning Administrator.
D. COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PARKING. Parking of more than one commercial vehicle or
work trailer of two-ton capacity or less, or one commercial vehicle of more than two-ton
capacity on a lot within any residential district shall be considered a commercial use and is
prohibited.
E. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE, BOAT PARKING
1. Parking a recreational vehicle, travel trailer, unmounted camper/camper shell,
accessory trailer, work trailer, inoperable or unlicensed vehicle, or boat under a
carport, in a garage, or in a rear yard screened from public view is permissible.
2. Parking in a required front yard or driveway is prohibited, except for
loading/unloading or repairs for no more than forty-eight (48) hours. The Zoning
Administrator may authorize a longer period of time if an emergency exists, up to a
maximum of five (5) days.
3. Parking within the side yard on the carport/garage side of the residence is
permissible, if there is sufficient space and the parking area is improved with a
paved, uncovered slab and is screened from street view by a minimum six (6) foot
high wall and/or gate.
4. The total number of recreational vehicles, travel trailers, unmounted camper/camper
shells, accessory trailers, work trailers, inoperable or unlicensed vehicles, and boats
parked or stored on any lot outside of a garage shall be restricted to a combination of
not more than two (2).
Section 6-3-3 Parking Standards for Multi-family Residential, Commercial, Industrial and
Mixed-Use Development
A. MAINTENANCE. It shall be the joint and separate responsibility of the lessee and owner
of the principal use, uses or building to maintain in a neat and adequate manner, the parking
spaces, access ways, striping, landscaping, and required walls or screening.
B. PARKING AREA IMPROVEMENTS. For multi-family residential, commercial, industrial
and mixed-use developments, including non-residential uses in a residential District, all
parking areas shall be screened from street view by buildings or by a landscape berm and/or
wall with landscaping. Berms and/or walls (including retaining walls) shall be a minimum
of three (3) feet in height on the parking lot side, and no higher than four and one-half (4.5)
feet in height on the street side. For the purposes of this section, parking areas as used herein
shall include all parking spaces, drive aisles and maneuvering areas.
City of Goodyear 6-7 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
C. ACCESS. Off-street parking spaces shall be connected with a public street by a paved
driveway which affords safe and reasonably convenient ingress and egress. The permissible
location and minimum width of driveways shall be as specified in the City of Goodyear
Engineering Design Standards and Policies Manual and Standard Details.
D. PARKING SPACE LOCATION. All required parking spaces shall be located on the lot
upon which the use is located or on an adjacent lot if a cross access/parking agreement is
provided. Required parking spaces for multi-family, commercial or industrial uses may be
located on an adjacent lot in another district (other than in a single family residential district)
with a cross access/parking agreement.
E. PARKING FOR MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENTS
1. The total requirement for off-street parking spaces for mixed-use developments shall
be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately.
2. A mixed-use shared parking program is an option to reduce the total required parking
in mixed-use developments in which the uses operate at different times or that have
different peak hours of operation from one another throughout the day. If an
applicant for a mixed-use development can demonstrate through a shared parking
study supplied by the applicant and approved by the Zoning Administrator that the
total peak parking demand for the mixed uses will be less than the sum of the parking
spaces required for each use served, a reduction in the total number of required
spaces may be allowed, subject to the following:
a. The approved shared parking plan shall specify a schedule of shared parking
calculations identifying the typical hours of operation with anticipated
periods of greatest parking demand for all uses within the development; and
shall indicate the number, location and convenience of pedestrian access of
all spaces available to serve each use. The total number of parking spaces
required for all uses within the development per Section 6-4-2 shall not be
reduced by a shared parking plan by more than twenty (20) percent.
b. The property owners involved in the shared parking plan shall submit a
written agreement approved by the Zoning Administrator requiring that the
parking spaces shall be maintained as long as the uses requiring parking exist
or unless the required parking is provided elsewhere in accordance with the
provisions of this Article.
c. The shared parking plan shall remain on file with the Community
Development Department for the purpose of monitoring the continuing
adequacy of available parking.
d. At the time of shared parking plan approval, or at any subsequent time when
the uses, intensities of the uses, or the or hours of operation of the uses
change, or upon findings that the parking facilities are inadequate, the
City of Goodyear 6-8 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
Zoning Administrator may require additional site area to be provided, and as
necessary improved, to supply additional required parking facilities.
F. CREDIT FOR ON-STREET PARKING. On-street parking that directly and wholly abuts
the subject property may be counted towards the parking requirement, provided that:
1. Such spaces are clearly marked on the site plan and constructed in accordance with
City standards.
2. Such spaces are publicly accessible and cannot be reserved or restricted by the owner
or tenants of the property.
3. On-street parking on private streets may be counted towards required parking
provided that the street is publicly accessible (not gated) and the streets, parking
spaces and sidewalks constructed are consistent with the standards for public streets
in the City.
G. CREDIT FOR BICYCLE PARKING FACILITIES. The City encourages the use of
alternative transportation modes such as the bicycle through a reduction in the number of
required vehicular parking spaces in favor of additional bicycle parking facilities. The
Zoning Administrator may authorize a credit towards on-site parking requirements for all
non-residential uses for the provision of bicycle facilities beyond those otherwise required
by this Ordinance, subject to the following guidelines:
1. Whenever bicycle parking is provided beyond the amount required per Section 6-6-
A, credit toward required on-site vehicular parking may be granted at a rate of one
(1) vehicular space per ten (10) additional bicycle spaces provided.
2. The number of required vehicle parking spaces shall not be reduced by more than
five (5) percent or ten (10) spaces, whichever is less, for any use or building.
ARTICLE 6-4 PARKING REQUIREMENTS
6-4-1 Determination of Required Spaces
6-4-2 Parking Requirements
Section 6-4-1 Determination of Required Spaces. The calculations to determine the required
number of parking spaces for a use, building or development shall be in accordance with the
following:
A. In the case of fractional results in calculating parking requirements, the required number
shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number if the fraction is one-half (0.5) or greater.
B. Except as otherwise provided herein, building gross floor area shall be used to calculate
parking space requirements.
City of Goodyear 6-9 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
C. All uses not specifically designated, or similar to a specified use, shall have parking space
requirements as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
D. Required accessible parking for non-residential developments shall be provided in
conformance with all applicable accessibility standards of the prevailing Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA), Arizonans with Disabilities Act (AZDA), and the International
Building Code (IBC).
E. Required accessible parking for multi-family residential developments shall be provided in
conformance with all applicable accessibility standards of the prevailing Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA), Federal Fair Housing Act (FFHA), and International Building Code
(IBC).
F. The required minimum number of developed parking spaces for the Manufacturing,
Assembling and Processing Use Classification and the Warehouse or Distribution Facility
Use Classification set forth in paragraph E. (General Industrial Manufacturing and
Warehousing) of the Table in Section 6-4-2 may be reduced for a known user if the known
user’s operations can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator that the
user’s parking needs can be met with fewer parking spaces because of the nature of the
known user’s operations (i.e. a user with a highly automated facility that requires minimal
employees because of the automation). Although a known user may not be required to build
the minimum number of required parking spaces reflected in the Table in Section 6-4-2, the
property shall be developed such that additional parking spaces necessary to meet the
minimum parking requirements in the Table in Section 6-4-2 below can be developed in the
future should the user change. The site plan for the known user shall depict such future
additional parking spaces, including the circulation that will be required to access such
spaces, and the ability to accommodate the drainage for the additional parking.
Section 6-4-2 Parking Requirements. The number of required parking spaces for each for
use, building or development permitted by this Ordinance shall be in accordance with
the following parking standards:
Use Classification Required Minimum Parking
A. Administrative and Financial
Banks and other financial institutions 1 space per 300 sq. ft. floor area
Professional offices 1 space per 300 sq. ft. floor area
B. Automobile Related
Automated or self service car wash 2 spaces
Automobile sales and rentals
1 space per 375 sq. ft. indoor floor area of sales and
service building, but not less than 4 spaces per use.
Outdoor displayed vehicles shall not occupy any
required parking spaces for the use or site
City of Goodyear 6-10 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
General auto repair and service - garage,
service station, full service car wash and
drive-through oil and lube services
1 space per 300 sq. ft. floor area, including service bays,
wash tunnels and retail areas
C. Eating and Drinking Establishments
Restaurants, cafes, bars and similar uses
1 space per 50 sq. ft. indoor dining/seating floor area
1 space per 150 sq. ft. kitchen and employee service
areas
1 space per 150 sq. ft. of outdoor serving (patio) area
D. Entertainment and Recreation
Bowling alleys 5 spaces per lane plus ancillary use requirements
Golf course
1 space per 2 practice tees in driving range, plus 4
spaces per green plus ancillary use requirements
Health spas/clubs, gyms & tennis, handball,
racquetball courts/clubs
1 space per 150 sq. ft. indoor floor area, excluding
courts, which require 2 spaces per court
Miniature golf, amusement parks, carnival
or circus grounds, water parks
1 space per 500 SF outside recreation area
Skating rinks, teen entertainment centers
and similar recreational uses.
1 space per 150 sq. ft. gross floor area used for
recreational activities plus ancillary use requirements
Movie theaters 1 space for every 3 patron seats
E. General Industrial, Manufacturing and Warehousing
Manufacturing, Assembling and Processing
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. for the 1st 10,000 sq. ft. of floor
area & 1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. for the remaining floor
area & 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of office floor area (See
Section 6-4-1 (F). for allowed reduction of required
parking)
Mini-storage or RV storage
1 space per 300 sq. ft. office area and 1 space per 50
storage units
Warehouse or Distribution Facility
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. for the 1st 10,000 sq. ft. of floor
area & 1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. for the remaining floor
area & 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of office floor area (See
Section 6-4-1 (F). for allowed reduction of required
parking)
Motion picture or recording studio 1 space per 500 sq. ft. floor area
Other Industrial Uses
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. for the 1st 10,000 sq. ft. of floor
area & 1 space per 5,000 sq. ft. for the remaining floor
area & 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of office floor area
F. General Retail and Personal Services
Day care facility
1 space per 375 sq. ft. indoor floor area, but not less than
5 spaces
Outdoor sales and service areas (plant
nurseries, building supplies)
1 space per 375 sq. ft. of sales and display area, but not
less than 4 spaces per use
Personal services 1 space per 300 sq. ft. floor area
Retail 1 space per 300 sq. ft. floor area
City of Goodyear 6-11 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
G. Institutional
Auditoriums, theaters, stadiums or similar
places of public assembly
1 space for every 3 patron seats
Elementary and junior high schools 1 space per 375 sq. ft. indoor floor area
Funeral home and mortuaries
1 space per 75 sq. ft. of indoor floor area used for public
assembly
Government offices 1 space per 300 sq. ft. floor area
High schools, academies, colleges,
universities, trade or vocational schools
1 space per 200 sq. ft indoor floor area
Libraries, cultural institutions, museums
and art galleries
1 space per 300 sq. ft. floor area
Places of worship, lodges and fraternal
buildings, assembly halls and community
centers
1 space per 75 sq. ft. of indoor floor area used for public
assembly plus 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of other indoor area
H. Lodging
Hotel and motel
1 space per room or suite of rooms
1 10 x 75 foot space for each 25 rooms for truck trailers
and recreational vehicles
Meeting rooms, restaurant and drinking establishments
open to the public calculated separately
I. Medical
Assisted living facility 0.75 spaces per unit
Hospitals 1 space per 400 sq. ft. indoor floor area
Medical or dental offices and out-patient 1 space per 150 sq. ft. indoor floor area
Nursing home 1 space per 400 sq. ft. indoor floor area
Veterinary clinic, hospital or office 1 space per 150 sq. ft. indoor floor area
J. Residential Uses
Manufactured home / RV park
1 space per dwelling unit, plus 1 visitor parking space
per 10 units.
Manufactured home subdivision 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Single family
2 enclosed* spaces per dwelling unit, side-by-side or
tandem
Two family
2 enclosed spaces per dwelling unit, side-by-side or
tandem
**Multi-family:
Efficiencies, studios 1 space per dwelling unit
One bedroom 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
Two or more bedrooms 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Townhomes 2 spaces per dwelling unit
City of Goodyear 6-12 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
*See Section 6-3-2-C for parking standards pertaining to homes accessed from a paved roadway in the
Agricultural (AG) District, and for homes accessed from an unpaved roadway in the Agricultural (AG)
and Agricultural Urban (AU) districts.
**All multi-family developments with five (5) or more units shall also provide guest parking at one (1)
space per ten (10) units. At least one (1) space per multi-family dwelling unit must be covered and
assigned to a dwelling unit.
ARTICLE 6-5 OFF-STREET LOADING
6-5-1 Spaces Required
6-5-2 Standards for Off-Street Loading Facilities
Section 6-5-1 Spaces Required. All commercial or industrial uses (except self-storage
warehouses) which have an aggregate gross floor area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or
more, that require the delivery or distribution of material or merchandise by trucks measuring thirtysix
(36) feet or more in length, including cab and trailer, shall provide an adequate number of offstreet
truck loading or unloading spaces as determined by the City in the Site Plan Review process.
Section 6-5-2 Standards for Off-Street Loading Facilities. All required off-street loading
facilities shall conform to the following standards:
A. DIMENSIONS
Required loading spaces shall be at least forty-five (45) feet in length, twelve (12) feet in
width and fourteen (14) feet in height, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space.
B. LOCATIONS
1. Loading spaces shall not be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any existing or
planned residentially zoned lot.
2. Sufficient room for turning and maneuvering vehicles shall be provided on the site
so that no backing onto or from a public street is required.
3. Off-street loading facilities for a single use shall not be considered as providing
required off-street loading facilities for any other use.
4. Off-street loading facilities shall be located on the same site with the use for which
the loading spaces are required.
ARTICLE 6-6 BICYCLE PARKING
A. REQUIREMENTS
City of Goodyear 6-13 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
1. Non-residential uses of land or buildings which are required to provide at least forty
(40) vehicle parking spaces shall be required to provide on-site bicycle parking
spaces in a bicycle parking facility at a rate of one (1) for every ten (10) required
vehicle parking spaces.
2. Non-residential uses of land or buildings which are required to provide less than 40
vehicle parking spaces shall be required to provide a minimum of four (4) on-site
bicycle parking spaces in a bicycle parking facility.
3. In no event shall any use or building be required to provide more than one hundred
(100) bicycle parking spaces.
4. The following uses are exempt from the foregoing bicycle parking requirements:
a. All residential uses.
b. Self-storage facilities.
c. Other uses as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
5. Common or shared bicycle parking facilities may be provided for attached or in-line
uses. Bicycle parking in mixed-use commercial centers shall be distributed
throughout the project. A reduction of required bicycle parking spaces may be
authorized by the Zoning Administrator.
6. A bicycle parking facility is a stationary object, typically a bicycle rack or locker,
permanently affixed to the ground or a structure to which the operator can lock the
bicycle frame and wheels to the object.
B. STANDARDS
1. Bicycle parking spaces shall be located on a paved surface within one hundred (100)
feet of a primary building entrance. Bicycle parking spaces shall not encroach into
any required landscaping or pedestrian access areas.
2. A bicycle parking space shall measure two (2) feet by six (6) feet. A premanufactured
bicycle rack or locker which differs from these dimensions may be
approved by the Zoning Administrator.
City of Goodyear 6-14 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 12, 2017
THIS PAGE WAS LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY.
City of Goodyear 7-1 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
ARTICLE 7 SIGN REGULATIONS
7-1 Purpose
7-2 Definitions
7-3 Requirement of Permit
7-4 Requirement of Conformity
7-5 Exemptions
7-6 General Sign Regulations
7-7 Sign Area and Height
7-8 Permitted Signage by Zoning District
7-9 Temporary Signs
7-10 Special Sign Areas
7-11 Prohibited Signs
7-12 Nonconforming and Unsafe Signs
7-13 Violations
7-14 Appeals
7-15 Conflicts and Severability
ARTICLE 7-1 PURPOSE
A. The purpose of this Article regulating signs of all types is: to establish comprehensive
provisions that will promote the public welfare and safety by safe placement and
installation of appropriate signage; to establish reasonable regulations that promote
effective messaging and economic vitality for local businesses and services; and to enhance
the visual environment of the city of Goodyear. The regulation of signs within the city of
Goodyear is necessary and in the public interest for the following reasons:
1. To promote and aid the public and private sectors in the identification, location and
advertisement of goods and services.
2. To balance public and private objectives by allowing adequate avenues for both
commercial and noncommercial messages.
3. To allow for adequate and effective signs in all zoning districts while preventing signs
from dominating the appearance of the area.
4. To maintain high quality signage throughout the City.
5. To provide consistent sign design standards that enable the fair and consistent
enforcement of these regulations.
B. It is the city of Goodyear’s policy to regulate signs in a constitutional manner that does not
favor commercial speech over noncommercial speech and is content neutral as to
noncommercial messages, which are within the protections of the First Amendment to the
City of Goodyear 7-2 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
United States Constitution and corollary provisions of the Arizona Constitution. If any
provision of this Article is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
finding shall not affect the validity of other provisions of this Article, which can be given
effect without the invalid provision.
C. With the property owner’s consent, a protected noncommercial message of any type may
be substituted for any duly permitted or allowed commercial message or any duly permitted
or allowed noncommercial message, provided that the sign structure or mounting device is
permitted without consideration of message content. Such substitution of message may be
made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to
prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over protected noncommercial
speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other
noncommercial message.
D. Nothing in this Code shall be construed to prohibit a person from holding a sign while
picketing or protesting on public property that has been determined to be a traditional or
designated public forum, so long as the person holding the sign does not block ingress and
egress from buildings, create a safety hazard by impeding travel on sidewalks, in bike or
vehicle lanes, or violate any other reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions adopted
by the City.
ARTICLE 7-2 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Article, the following words, terms and phrases are defined herein as
prescribed in Article 2 (Definitions) of this Ordinance:
Abandoned sign. Any sign that has ceased to be actively maintained and is in a dilapidated or
deteriorated condition, or any sign for a business or other premises that has been vacant for
six or more months.
Animated sign. Any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position by any movement,
rotation or undulation or by the movement of any light used in conjunction with a sign such
as blinking, traveling, flashing or changing degree of intensity of any light movement other
than burning continuously.
Awning sign. A sign that is mounted, painted on, or attached to an awning.
City of Goodyear 7-3 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
Banner. A temporary sign of fabric, plastic, paper or other light pliable material not enclosed in a
rigid frame.
Billboard. A permanent sign or structure containing a commercial or noncommercial message,
which directs attention to something offered or existing elsewhere than upon the property
where the sign is located.
Business. For purposes of this Article, any commercial or noncommercial activity conducted
within or outside a building or structure located on a property, parcel, or any part of a
property or parcel.
Cabinet sign. A three-dimensional structure, which includes a frame, borders and sign panel face
and which may include internal lighting.
Canopy sign. A sign that is mounted, painted on, or attached to a canopy.
Commercial sign. A permanent or temporary sign, which identifies, advertises, or directs attention
to a business or is intended to induce a purchase of a good, property, or service, including,
without limitation, any sign naming a brand of good or service and any sign that is not a
noncommercial sign.
Comprehensive sign package. A submittal required for any commercial or industrial
development that contains three or more businesses, for a master planned residential or
mixed-use community, and for all Planned Area Developments (PADs), to provide unified
signage throughout the proposed development.
Construction sign. A temporary sign, limited to the period of construction, located on the
premises of an existing construction project.
Digital marquee signs. A permanent sign or structure, which is capable of displaying words,
symbols, figures or images that can be electronically changed by remote or automatic
means, for the purpose of directing attention to something offered or existing elsewhere
than upon the property where the sign is located.
Directional sign. A permanent or temporary sign typically containing information for the purpose
of directing vehicular traffic or pedestrian travel to the identified property or other location.
Directory sign. A permanent on-site sign typically listing the names, uses and/or locations of
persons, businesses or activities conducted within a building or group of buildings.
City of Goodyear 7-4 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
Electronic message display. A permanent on-site sign capable of displaying words, symbols,
figures or images that can be electronically changed by remote or automatic means.
Embellishment. Irregular forms or similar ornamentation, whether or not attached to, affixed to,
or imposed upon advertising signs.
Figurative sign. An on-site sign that advertises the occupant activity or business through the use
of graphic or crafted symbols, such as shoes, keys, glasses, books, etc. Figurative signs can
be incorporated into any of the allowable sign types identified in this Ordinance.
Flying banner. A type of vertical banner made of flexible material, with the longer dimension
typically attached to a pole or rod attached to the ground. Also sometimes called a feather,
sail or teardrop banner.
Embellishment
SIGN
City of Goodyear 7-5 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
Freeway pylon sign. A permanent freestanding identification sign located on property abutting a
freeway, or part of a complex or center abutting a freeway that is oriented to and intended
to be read from the freeway.
Governmental sign. Any sign erected, constructed, or placed and maintained on governmentowned
or privately-owned real property, including, but not limited to, public buildings,
public rights-of-way, public schools, and community facilities, by the City or any other
governmental entity of the State of Arizona, a public or quasi-public utility, or the Federal
Government or an agency thereof, including any sign placed and maintained pursuant to a
government contract or license. Government signs also include official traffic, fire and
police signs, signals and devices and markings of the State of Arizona and the City of
Goodyear or other authorized public agency, and the posting of notices as required by law.
Illuminated sign. A permanent sign with the surface artificially lighted, either internally or
externally.
Inflatable sign. A type of sign that achieves its shape through inserted air or gas. Includes balloons
and other air or gas blown displays[SC1].
Kiosk sign. A City-installed or licensed informational sign indicating directions to destinations
within the community, including, but not limited to, government and community facilities,
residential developments, schools, and businesses.
Legal Nonconforming sign. A sign lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of this
Ordinance, which does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance.
Maintenance. The replacement or repair of a part or portion of a sign required by ordinary wear,
tear or damage, with like material, color and design.
Menu board sign. A permanent sign typically displaying items for sale at a drive-in or drivethrough
restaurant, with or without ordering capability.
Monument sign. A freestanding, permanent self-supported identification sign that is not attached
to the supportive elements of a building.
City of Goodyear 7-6 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
Noncommercial sign. A permanent or temporary sign, which in no way identifies, advertises, or
directs attention to a business or is intended to induce a purchase of a good, property, or
service, or portrays or symbolizes a good, property, or service, especially, but, without
limitation, a brand or trade name, an identifiable container shape, or a trademark.
Noncommercial signs include, but are not limited to, political and ideological messages.
Off-Site sign: A temporary sign, other than a billboard, that directs attention to an activity,
business, commodity, service, entertainment, product or attraction sold, offered, or existing
elsewhere than upon the property where the sign is located.
Pennant. Any piece of lightweight plastic, fabric or other material suspended from a rope, wire or
string, displayed in series and capable of movement in the wind.
Permanent sign. A sign that is permanently attached to a building, structure, or the ground and
that is intended to be used for an ongoing, indefinite period of time.
Portable sign. A temporary sign not affixed to a structure or ground-mounted on a site, but rather
is self-supporting and designed to be moved from place to place.
Projecting sign.A permanent sign attached to a building or other structure and extending in whole
or in part more than 12 inches beyond the building or other structure.
City of Goodyear 7-7 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
Raceway. A structure used for wall-mounted signage with individual letters or characters located
upon the exterior wall surface between the wall and the letters or sign characters. Raceways
contain wiring, conduit, transformers and other electrical components.
Reader Panel sign. A permanent on-site sign, which is designed to permit immediate change of
copy by manual means.
Roof sign.A permanent sign erected on, above or over the roof so that it projects above the highest
point of the roofline, parapet or fascia.
Shingle sign. A permanent sign suspended from, and located entirely under a covered porch,
covered walkway or an awning and is anchored or rigidly hung to prevent the sign from
swinging due to wind movement.
City of Goodyear 7-8 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
Sign. Any structure, board, poster, placard, or device, which contains or comprises a display
designed, used, or intended to attract the attention of the public. As used in this Article,
sign includes the sign structure, display surface, and all other components.
Sign walker. Any person who wears, holds or balances a sign as defined and regulated by Article
7-9-A-2 and A.R.S. § 9-499.13, as amended.
Special event or temporary use sign. A temporary sign as set forth in Article 7-9.
Temporary sign. A sign that is not permanently affixed or attached to a building, structure, or the
ground and that is intended to be used for limited periods of time.
Vehicle sign. A sign mounted, painted or otherwise placed on a truck, bus, car, boat, trailer or
other vehicle or equipment and used in such a manner that the sign is visible from a public
street or right-of-way and the primary purpose of such vehicle or equipment is for the
display of such signage.
Wall sign. A permanent sign fastened to or painted on the exterior wall of a building or structure
in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for or forms the
background surface of the sign.
City of Goodyear 7-9 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
Window sign. Any poster, cut-out letters, painted text or graphic, or other text or visual
presentation affixed to the interior or exterior of a window, or placed within six feet of a
window pane, and placed so as to be read from the exterior of the building. This does not
include any item, such as merchandise, normally displayed within a store window.
Yard sign. A temporary sign made of corrugated plastic, metal, grey board, or similar type of
material and that is generally supported by stakes inserted into the ground.
ARTICLE 7-3 REQUIREMENT OF PERMIT
A. Except as provided in Section 7-5 (Exceptions), it shall be unlawful for any person to
construct, install, attach, place, paint, alter, relocate or otherwise maintain any sign in the
City without first obtaining a sign permit in accordance with this Article. Application for a
sign permit shall be made on forms provided by the Development Services Department.
The application shall include all plans, drawings, and other documentation as specified on
the form.
B. Before issuing any sign permit required by this Ordinance, the City shall collect a fee in
accordance with a fee schedule established by the City Council. If work for which a permit
is required by this Ordinance is started before a permit has been issued, the fees specified
above shall be doubled. The payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from
complying fully with the requirements of this Ordinance in the execution of the work or
from any penalties prescribed herein.
C. All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspections during various stages
of construction as prescribed by the city of Goodyear Building Safety Division.
ARTICLE 7-4 REQUIREMENT OF CONFORMITY
A. Signs shall not be installed, placed, or maintained in the City except in conformance with
this Article. If provisions of this Article are in conflict with any other City Code
provision(s), the more restrictive requirement(s) shall apply. Signs maintained contrary to
the provisions of this Article are declared to be nuisances and may be abated as provided
by law.
City of Goodyear 7-10 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
ARTICLE 7-5 EXEMPTIONS
A. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to the following:
1. Government signs.
2. Kiosk signs caused by the City to be erected, constructed, or placed, and maintained or
licensed by the City.
3. Flags that do not convey a commercial message.
4. Tablets, grave markers, headstones, statuary or remembrances of persons or events,
noncommercial, on private property.
5. Works of fine art and historic or cultural artifacts when not displayed in conjunction
with a commercial enterprise, which may derive direct commercial gain from such
display.
6. Original works of art that do not convey a commercial message painted on or otherwise
affixed to the side of a building.
7. Temporary decorations or displays, noncommercial, such as for celebrating patriotic,
religious, or other holidays or events, located on private property.
8. Signs required to be installed by the City or any other governmental entity of the State
of Arizona, a public or quasi-public utility, or the Federal Government or an agency
thereof.
9. A digital marquee sign permitted by the City Council on City-owned or leased
property that is zoned agricultural, commercial, industrial, public facilities or planned
area development pursuant to an agreement or license if the City Council determines
that such digital marquee meets a public purpose and serves a City interest.
B. NO SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED. Sign permits are not required for the following
activities provided that such activities are in compliance with all other applicable codes
and ordinances:
1. Routine maintenance of a legal sign that does not include changing the color, size,
design or style of the sign.
2. Replacement of a panel containing the same color, size, design and style as the original
panel on an approved sign structure with removable panels.
City of Goodyear 7-11 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
3. The relocation of any sign as required by the city of Goodyear, the Federal
Government, the State of Arizona, any quasi-public utility, or any other political
subdivision of the State of Arizona.
ARTICLE 7-6 GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS
A. DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF PERMANENT SIGNS. All signs shall be
structurally designed, constructed, erected and maintained in accordance with all
applicable provisions and requirements of the city of Goodyear codes and ordinances.
1. All signs and sign structures, conforming and legally nonconforming, shall be
maintained in good order, repair, and appearance at all times so as not to constitute a
danger or hazard to the public safety or create visual blight as determined by the
Development Services Director or designee.
2. There shall be no visible raceways, angle iron supports, guy wires, braces or secondary
supports, except in the case of projecting signs. All sign supports shall be an integral
part of the design.
3. Illumination of signs shall meet all regulations as set forth in Article 10 (Outdoor
Lighting Standards) of this Ordinance. The source of a sign’s illumination shall not be
visible from any street, sidewalk, or adjacent property. This shall not preclude the use
of exposed neon or LED sign elements within the commercial zoning districts, as long
as such elements are not visible from surrounding residential properties. However,
neon, LED or other forms of illumination shall not be used as a border or outline for
any architectural element of a building. No illuminated wall sign shall be permitted on
a building elevation abutting a residential district or use.
4. Signs shall be compatible with and complement the architecture and design theme of
the specific development in which the signs are located in terms of color, materials and
architectural style.
B. PLACEMENT OF SIGNS.
1. Signs shall not be located in a manner that interferes with pedestrian or vehicular travel,
poses a hazard to either pedestrians or vehicles, or within the specified “sight visibility
triangle” as defined in the Engineering Design Standards & Policies Manual, adopted
December 17, 2012, as amended from time to time.
2. Free-standing signs shall be located a minimum of five feet from a property line and
freeway pylon signs shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from a property line.
Setbacks shall be measured from the property line to the nearest edge of the sign.
3. Signs shall not be located within, on or projecting over any easement, public street
right-of-way or City property.
City of Goodyear 7-12 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
4. Signs shall not be placed in such a manner that obstructs the view or conflict with any
traffic control sign or device or any other governmental-required sign.
ARTICLE 7-7 SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT
A. SIGN AREA. Sign area shall be measured as follows:
1. Sign copy mounted on a panel of a monument sign or other freestanding type sign
shall be measured as that area encompassing the panel. The base of a freestanding
monument sign shall not be calculated as sign area unless said base contains signage
(see definition of a sign).
2. Sign copy mounted as individual letters and/or graphics on a building wall or other
structure that has not been painted, textured or otherwise altered to provide a
distinctive background for the sign copy shall be measured as a sum of the smallest
rectangles that will enclose each word and each graphic in the total sign copy.
SIGN AREAWHEN BACKGROUND NOT PART OF SIGN
3. Sign copy mounted on a background panel or area distinctively painted, textured or
constructed as a background for the sign copy shall be measured as the smallest
rectangle that will enclose both the sign copy and background area together.
4. Multi-face signs shall be measured as follows:
a. Where a sign has two or more faces, if the distance between the two parallel
faces does not exceed four feet or the interior angle between the two nonparallel
sign faces is 60 degrees or less, the area of the sign will be the area
City of Goodyear 7-13 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
of one face only. If the distance between the two parallel faces exceeds four
feet or the interior angle is greater than 60 degrees, the sign area shall be the
sum of the area of the two faces.
b. Where a sign has three or more faces, the area of the sign shall be calculated
as 50 percent of the sum of the area of all faces.
MULTI-FACE SIGNS
c. Where a sign is a spherical, free-form, sculptural, figurative or other nonplanar
sign, the sign area shall be calculated as 50 percent of the sum of the
areas using only the four vertical sides of the smallest four-sided polyhedron
that will encompass the sign structure.
NON-PLANAR SIGNS
B. SIGN HEIGHT. Sign height is defined and shall be measured as follows.
1. The height of a freestanding monument sign located within 30 feet of an adjacent
street right-of-way shall be measured as the vertical distance from the top of the
highest element of the sign structure to the top of the curb or crown of the adjacent
roadway where no curb exists. Any monument base or other structure erected to
support or enhance the sign shall be measured as part of the sign height.
2. The height of all other freestanding monument signs or ground-mounted signs, not
located within 30 feet of an adjacent street right of way, shall be measured as the
vertical distance from the top of the highest element of the sign structure to the
adjacent grade.
City of Goodyear 7-14 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
MEASUREMENT WHEN WITHIN 30 FEET OF RIGHT-OF-WAY
3. A maximum of two feet of additional height may be added to a freestanding
monument sign to provide for the provision of architectural embellishments.
4. The height of a wall sign shall be measured as the vertical distance from the base
of the wall on which the sign is located to the top of the sign structure.
WALL SIGN HEIGHT
ARTICLE 7-8 PERMITTED SIGNAGE BY ZONING DISTRICT
A. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS: For all signs within Residential Districts (AG, AP, AU, R1-
10, R1-7, R1-6, R2, MF-18, MHS, MH/RVP and Residential PADs) the following shall
apply:
1. Single Residence Uses:
a. Wall sign: One wall sign per residence with a maximum area of three square
feet and maximum height of six feet.
2. Multiple Residence Uses (includes apartments, condominiums, townhouses,
manufactured home parks, recreational vehicle parks or similar such uses).
a. Directory Signs:
(1) The maximum sign area is 18 square feet and the maximum height
is six feet.
City of Goodyear 7-15 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
(2) One free-standing sign shall be permitted for each multi-tenant
building onsite. One sign may also be permitted for each entrance to
the property from a street.
(3) Signs shall only be located in pedestrian areas adjacent to the main
building entrance or at the main entrance to the property.
b. Monument Signs:
(1) One monument sign for each driveway onto a public street and at
each public street intersection.
(2) The maximum sign area is 32 square feet and the maximum height
is six feet.
(3) The base of any monument sign shall have a width at least 50% the
width of the sign.
(4) Street address numerals shall be provided on any monument sign
located along the street to which the address numbering applies, in
a contrasting color and/or material from the color and material used
for the background for the numerals on the sign. Numerals shall be
sized in accordance with the International Fire Code, as amended.
c. Sales Office:
(1) Up to eight flags may be placed at the sales office.
(2) Flags shall have a maximum area of 12 square feet and a
maximum height of 25 feet.
(3) Flags shall be removed no later than one year of the issuance of the
first Certificate of Occupancy for the development.
d. Wall Sign: One wall sign per residential unit with a maximum area of three
square feet and maximum height of six feet located within at least three feet
of the main entry.
3. Non-Residential Uses in Residential Districts:
a. Directional Signs:
(1) Each sign shall have a maximum area of six square feet and
maximum height of three feet.
City of Goodyear 7-16 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
(2) One sign shall be permitted at each driveway and at each major
internal intersection.
(3) Signs shall not be located within the sight visibility triangle of any
driveway.
b. Directory Signs:
(1) Signs shall have a maximum area of 18 square feet and a
maximum height of six feet.
(2) One free-standing sign shall be permitted for each multi-tenant
building onsite. One sign may also be permitted for each entrance to
the property from a street.
(3) Signs shall only be located in pedestrian areas adjacent to the main
building entrance or at the main entrance to the property.
c. Monument Sign:
(1) One monument sign per driveway onto a public street.
(2) The sign shall have a maximum area of 32 square feet when adjacent
to an arterial street and 16 square feet when adjacent to a collector
or local street. All signs shall have a maximum height of six feet.
(3) The base of the sign shall have a width at least 50% the width of the
sign.
(4) Street address numerals shall be provided on any monument sign
located along the street to which the address numbering applies, in
a contrasting color and/or material from the color and material used
for the background for the numerals on the sign. Numerals shall be
sized in accordance with the International Fire Code, as amended.
d. Wall sign:
(1) The sign shall have a maximum area of 32 square feet when adjacent
to an arterial street and 16 square feet when adjacent to a collector
or local street.
(2) The maximum height of the sign shall be 10 feet, measured as the
vertical distance from the base of the wall on which the sign is
located to the top of the sign or sign structure.
City of Goodyear 7-17 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
4. The following signs may be utilized in recorded residential subdivisions.
a. Permanent Subdivision Signs. Within a recorded subdivision, monument
signs and/or wall signs may be utilized at an entryway.
(1) A monument sign may be permitted within common areas located
at the entryway(s) of a subdivision. The sign shall be designed to
complement the streetscape and landscaping and have a base with a
width at least 50% the width of the sign. A maximum area of 32
square feet per monument sign is permitted.
(2) Wall signs may be permitted at the entryway(s) to a subdivision.
One wall sign may be permitted on each side of the entryway road.
The signage shall be designed to complement the streetscape and
landscaping. A maximum area of 32 square feet per wall sign is
permitted.
WALL SIGN
(3) The maximum height of any permanent subdivision sign shall be
eight feet. The sign is encouraged to include the name of the
development for efficient wayfinding.
b. Temporary Subdivision Signs:
(1) During the construction phase, each recorded subdivision having
more than 40 lots may have one sign with a maximum area of 96
square feet and a maximum height shall of 12 feet.
(2) The sign shall not be located within 100 feet of any property line of
an existing residence.
(3) Such sign shall not be illuminated.
City of Goodyear 7-18 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
(4) The sign must be removed when 95% of the lots within the
subdivision are sold and/or the on-site sales office closes, whichever
occurs first.
c. Model Homes:
(1) Up to four flags per model home may be placed at any one
subdivision, but the total number shall not exceed eight.
(2) Flags shall have a maximum area of 12 square feet and may not be
maintained higher than 25 feet above the adjoining ground.
(3) Flags shall be removed when 95% of the lots in the subdivision are
sold and/or the on-site sales office closes, whichever occurs first.
B. COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS: Signs within Commercial Districts (C-O, C-1, C-2, CBD and
Commercial PADs) shall comply with the following applicable restrictions. Additionally,
any development containing three or more businesses shall be required to submit a
Comprehensive Sign Package for review and approval subject to the provisions of Article
7-10 (Special Sign Areas) of this Ordinance.
1. Awning Signs:
a. A maximum of 25% percent of the front face area of the awning shall be
used for signage.
2. Canopy Signs:
a. A business utilizing an attached or detached canopy (i.e. gasoline service
station) may use a portion of its wall sign allocation for a sign on the canopy.
However, no canopy sign shall exceed an area of six square feet.
b. One canopy sign may be permitted per street frontage. Said signs may not
extend above the canopy.
c. Signs may not be placed on parking canopies.
3. Directional Signs:
a. One sign shall be permitted at each driveway onto a public street and at each
major internal intersection.
b. The maximum sign copy area shall be six square feet.
City of Goodyear 7-19 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
c. The maximum height shall be three feet.
d. Directional signs shall not be located within the sight visibility triangle of
any driveway.
4. Directory Signs:
a. Signs shall not exceed an area of 18 square feet or height of six feet.
b. One sign shall be permitted for each multi-tenant building onsite.
c. Signs shall only be located in pedestrian areas adjacent to the main
building entrance.
5. Drive-Through Restaurant Menu Boards:
a. A drive-through restaurant may have two menu boards per drive-through
lane. However, only one of the two signs may contain speaker equipment.
b. A menu board shall have a maximum height of eight feet and maximum
copy area of 25 feet. Menu board signs may be freestanding or wallmounted.
c. A menu board shall be located at least 45 feet from any public right-of-way
or residential property line.
d. The front of the menu board(s) shall not be visible from a public street.
Speakers shall be directed away from residential property lines.
e. Freestanding menu boards shall have a monument base with a width at least
50% the width of the sign, be of masonry construction and have a landscape
area at the base of the sign(s) equal to at least two square feet for each square
foot of sign area.
6. Gasoline Service Stations:
a. Electronic Message Display or Reader Panel:
(1) A stand-alone gasoline service station, not part of an existing
Comprehensive Sign Package, may use up to one-half (1/2) of the
allowed freestanding monument sign area for an electronic message
display or reader panel to identify the current price of fuel being
sold. However, the electronic message display shall not exceed 24
square feet.
City of Goodyear 7-20 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
(2) A gasoline service station located in a commercial center and part
of an existing Comprehensive Sign Package shall be permitted one
freestanding sign with an electronic message display or reader panel,
in addition to other permitted freestanding signage. An additional
sign may be permitted for each additional street frontage if that
frontage adjacent to the site is at least 330 feet in length.
i. The electronic message display/reader panel sign shall not
exceed 24 square feet.
ii. The sign shall not exceed a height of six feet.
iii. The base of the sign shall have a width of at least 50% the
width of the sign.
(3) Any electronic message display shall change no more than
necessary to reflect the current price of fuel being sold. The display
shall not exhibit any form of animation or movement.
7. Monument Signs:
a. One monument sign for each driveway onto a public street and at each
public street intersection.
b. The minimum distance between monument signs on the same street side
shall be 150 feet.
c. The maximum height shall be eight feet and the maximum copy area shall
be 32 feet. Within a unified commercial development containing three or
more businesses, the maximum height shall be 12 feet and the maximum
copy area shall be 48 square feet.
d. The base of the monument sign shall have an aggregate width at least 50%
the width of the sign.
e. Street address numerals shall be provided on all monument signs located
along the street to which the address numbering applies, in a contrasting
color and/or material from the color and material used for the background
for the numerals on the sign. Numerals shall be sized in accordance with the
International Fire Code, as amended.
8. Monument Signs, Internal:
a. One internal monument sign per parcel located within a unified, multiparcel
commercial development and approved as part of a Comprehensive
City of Goodyear 7-21 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
Sign Package.
b. The sign shall be located at least 50 feet from any public right-of-way and
may not be visible from the right-of-way.
c. The maximum height shall be six feet and the maximum copy area shall
be 16 square feet.
d. The base of the monument sign shall have an aggregate width at least 50%
the width of the sign.
e. Internal monument signs shall not be located within the sight visibility
triangle of any driveway nor in any other location that restricts or blocks
visibility of vehicles traveling within the development.
9. Projecting Signs:
a. One projecting sign may be permitted per ground floor business. A business
may use a portion of its allocation of wall signage for a projecting sign.
However, no projecting sign shall exceed an area of 15 square feet.
b. A projecting sign shall have an eight-foot minimum clearance between the
bottom of the sign and the sidewalk,
10. Shingle Signs:
a. One shingle sign may be permitted per ground floor business. A shingle
sign shall have a maximum area of three square feet.
b. Shingle signs shall have an eight-foot minimum clearance between the
bottom of the sign and the sidewalk.
11. Wall Signs:
a. One or more wall signs shall be permitted on the exterior walls of the space
occupied by the business in accordance with the following guidelines:
(1) One building elevation: one square foot of sign area for each linear
foot of building frontage or 35 square feet, whichever is greater.
(2) All other elevations: one-half square foot of sign area for each linear
foot of respective building frontage.
b. Signage shall not extend horizontally a distance greater than 80% the width
of the building wall or specific surface plane upon which it is displayed.
City of Goodyear 7-22 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
c. Wall-mounted cabinet signs exceeding 10 square feet in area are prohibited
unless such cabinet sign utilizes a figurative design.
d. For multi-story buildings, wall signs may only be placed on the bottom and
top floors.
12. Window Signs:
a. Signs, including both permanent and temporary, shall not exceed 25% of
the total area of the window through which such signs are located.
b. Window signs shall only be displayed in first floor windows.
c. Permanent window signs may be illuminated but may not be animated or
utilize an electronic message display. Signs must utilize materials and
colors consistent with the building in which the signs are displayed.
C. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS: Signs within Industrial Districts (I-1, I-2 and Industrial
PADs) shall comply with the following applicable restrictions. Additionally, any
development of three or more businesses shall be required to submit a Comprehensive Sign
Package for review and approval subject to the provisions of Article 7-10 (Special Sign
Areas) of this Ordinance.
1. Directional Signs:
a. One sign shall be permitted at each driveway onto a public street and at each
major internal intersection.
b. The maximum sign copy area shall be six square feet.
c. The maximum height shall be three feet.
d. Directional signs shall not be located within the sight visibility triangle of
any driveway.
e. Directional signs along designated, internal truck routes shall not exceed an
area of 12 square feet or height of six feet. Signs shall utilize a monument
base with a width at least 50% the width of the sign and the sign shall be
architecturally compatible with the design of the other onsite monument
signs.
2. Directory Signs:
a. One sign shall be permitted for each multi-tenant building onsite.
City of Goodyear 7-23 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
b. Signs shall not exceed an area of 18 square feet or height of six feet.
c. Signs shall only be located in pedestrian areas adjacent to the main
building entrance.
3. Monument Signs:
a. One monument sign for each driveway onto a public street and at each
public street intersection.
b. The minimum distance between monument signs on the same street shall be
150 feet.
c. The maximum height shall be eight feet and the maximum copy area shall
be 32 feet. Within a unified industrial development containing three or more
businesses, the maximum height shall be 12 feet and the maximum copy
area shall be 48 square feet.
d. The base of the monument sign shall have an aggregate width at least 50%
the width of the sign.
e. Street address numerals shall be provided on all monument signs located
along the street to which the address numbering applies, in a contrasting
color and/or material from the color and material used for the background
for the numerals on the sign. Numerals shall be sized in accordance with the
International Fire Code, as amended.
4. Wall Signs:
a. Wall signs shall be permitted on the exterior walls of the space occupied by
the business in accordance with the following guidelines:
(1) One building elevation: one square foot of sign area for each linear
foot of building frontage or 35 square feet, whichever is greater.
(2) All other elevations: one-half (1/2) square foot of sign area for each
linear foot of respective building frontage.
b. Signage shall not extend horizontally a distance greater than 80% the width
of the building wall or surface plane upon which it is displayed.
c. Wall-mounted cabinet signs exceeding 10 square feet in area are prohibited
unless such cabinet sign utilizes a figurative design.
City of Goodyear 7-24 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
d. For multi-story buildings, wall signs may only be placed on the bottom and
top floors.
5. Window Signs:
a. Signs, including both permanent and temporary, shall not exceed 25% of
the total area of the window through which such signs are located.
b. Window signs shall only be displayed in first floor windows.
c. Permanent window signs may be illuminated but may not be animated or
utilize an electronic display. Signs must utilize materials and colors
consistent with the building in which the signs are displayed.
D. FREEWAY PYLON SIGNS.
1. In addition to the findings required for approval of a Use Permit as specified in
Sections 1-3-2 and 4-2-9 of the Zoning Ordinance, a freeway pylon sign may be
approved only upon a finding by the City Council that such freeway pylon sign is
also consistent with the provisions of this Article 7 (Sign Regulations).
2. An existing freeway pylon sign shall not be modified, altered, or enlarged unless
such change is also deemed consistent with the provisions set forth in this Article
7 (Sign Regulations).
ARTICLE 7-9 TEMPORARY SIGNS
A. TEMPORARY SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A SIGN PERMIT.
1. Directional signs in residential zoning districts:
a. A residence or multiple residence use may display a maximum of four
directional signs during daylight hours.
b. The maximum height shall be three feet and the maximum copy area shall
be six square feet.
c. Directional signs may not be placed within the public right-of-way.
2. Sign Walkers:
a. Sign walkers shall be located only at grade level and at least five feet from
the street, as measured from the back of curb or edge of pavement, if no
curb exists.
City of Goodyear 7-25 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
b. From a street driveway or intersection, sign walkers shall be located 30 feet
from the intersection as measured from the back of curb or edge of
pavement, if no curb exists.
c. Sign walkers shall not be located in raised or painted medians, in parking
aisles or stalls, in driving lanes, on equestrian or multi-use trails or on
fences, boulders, plants, other signs, vehicles, utility facilities or any
structure. Additionally, sign walkers shall not be located:
(1) So that less than a minimum of four feet is clear for pedestrian
passage on all sidewalks and walkways, or so as to cause a hazard
to pedestrian traffic.
(2) Within a minimum distance of 20 feet from any other sign walker.
(3) In a manner that results in sign walkers physically interacting with
motorists, pedestrians or bicyclists.
(4) Sign walkers shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians, bicycles
and all others traveling or located on the sidewalks.
d. Signs shall be displayed only during daylight hours and shall be held, worn
or balanced at all times.
e. All forms of illumination (including flashing, blinking or rotating lights),
animation of the sign itself, mirrors or other reflective materials or
attachments (including, but not limited to, balloons, ribbons, speakers, etc.)
are prohibited.
3. Special Event and Temporary Use Signs:
a. Temporary uses are those that require a Special Event Permit or Temporary
Use Permit with approved sign plan showing the proposed location,
placement, and size of all signs.
4. Vehicle Signs in commercial and industrial zoning districts:
a. One vehicle sign per business.
b. The vehicle upon which the sign is affixed shall be operable and licensed to
operate on a public street.
c. The vehicle shall be used daily in the function of the business.
d. The vehicle shall be parked onsite in a designated parking space.
City of Goodyear 7-26 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
e. Signs may be magnetic, affixed or painted upon an integral part of the
vehicle, as originally intended by the manufacturer. Signs may not break
the silhouette of the vehicle.
f. Vehicle signs may not be illuminated, animated or utilize an electronic
display.
5. Window signs in all zoning districts such that the total area of all window signs,
including both permanent and temporary signs, does not exceed 25% of the total
area of the window through which they are visible. For commercial, industrial and
non-residential uses in residential zones, window signs shall be displayed in first
floor windows only. No window sign may be illuminated, animated or utilize an
electronic display.
6. Yard signs in residential zoning districts that do not exceed a maximum area of six
square feet and a maximum height of six feet. One sign permitted per property.
Such signs shall not be illuminated.
B. TEMPORARY SIGNS REQUIRING A SIGN PERMIT. A permit approving the time,
place and manner of the temporary signage addressed in this Section shall be obtained from
the Zoning Administrator on forms provided by the Department.
1. Construction:
a. A non-illuminated temporary sign may be placed on properties zoned for
commercial, industrial, multi-family or for permitted non-residential uses
in residential districts when active construction is occurring onsite.
b. One sign per business under construction.
c. The maximum copy area shall be 32 square feet and the maximum height
shall be eight feet.
d. A sign permit shall not be issued prior to the issuance of a building permit
for the business to be conducted onsite.
e. The sign shall be removed within 10 days following the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy for the business.
2. Grand Opening and Special Promotions:
a. Temporary signs may be placed on properties zoned for commercial,
industrial, multi-family or for permitted non-residential uses in residential
City of Goodyear 7-27 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
districts at time of grand opening or special promotion for a business onsite.
Signage shall be displayed for a maximum of 30 consecutive days, no more
than four times in any given calendar year.
b. Temporary signs may be displayed on the building or within the parking
area, perimeter landscape or some other area of the property.
c. For every 10,000 square feet of building area of the business observing the
grand opening or special promotion, 50 square feet of temporary signage
shall be permitted. However, the amount of temporary signage shall not
exceed 500 square feet. All forms of display (banners, pennants, inflatables,
balloons, etc.) shall be counted towards the business’s allocation of
temporary signage[SC2].
d. Signs are subject to the following limitations:
(1) Displays shall not be animated by mechanical or other means.
(2) Only one flying banner sign is allowed on the property. (The use of
flying banners is only permitted during the time period of August 1,
2017 to August 1, 2018. Said signs shall be prohibited upon the
conclusion of this time period.)
(3) Animated inflatable signs are not permitted.
(4) Displays shall not be illuminated.
(5) No sign or display shall be placed on or above the roof of any
building.
(6) All balloons shall be tethered and shall not exceed the allowed
building height for the zoning district in which the business is
located.
(7) Displays shall not be placed in any required parking spaces or drive
aisles or on City-owned property or rights-of-way.
3. Portable Signs:
a. Portable signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) One sign per business located on property zoned for commercial,
industrial, multi-family or for permitted non-residential uses in
residential districts.
City of Goodyear 7-28 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
(2) The sign shall be subject to renewal of an annual permit.
(3) Sign may only be displayed during daylight hours.
(4) The maximum copy area shall be six square feet and the maximum
height shall be three feet.
(5) Placement of the sign must allow for a minimum four-foot clear
pedestrian pathway to and from all building entrances or exits;
(6) The sign shall be located within three feet of the building face and
within 10 feet of the building entry.
(7) Portable signs shall be constructed of durable materials with a stable
base and shall be white in color or a color that complements the
existing signage for the building. Sign may not be illuminated or
animated.
(8) Portable signs shall not be affixed or attached to objects such as light
poles, trees, traffic signals, benches, street signs, fencing or bike
racks, and shall not be allowed within the public right-of-way.
4. Sale or Lease:
a. A non-illuminated temporary sign may be placed on properties zoned for
commercial, industrial, multi-family or for permitted non-residential uses
in residential districts when for sale or lease.
(1) For developed property, and undeveloped property less than 40
acres in size, one sign per street frontage for the building or property
for sale or lease. The maximum copy area shall be 32 square feet
and the maximum height shall be eight feet.
(2) For undeveloped commercial or industrial property between 40 and
100 acres in size, one sign per street frontage for the property for
sale or lease. The maximum copy area shall be 96 square feet and
the maximum height shall be 12 feet.
(3) For undeveloped commercial or industrial property over 100 acres
in size and adjacent to a freeway, one sign with a maximum copy
area of 500 square feet and maximum height of 12 feet.
b. A non-illuminated temporary sign may be placed on properties over 40
City of Goodyear 7-29 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
acres in size zoned for agricultural or residential uses when for sale or lease.
The maximum copy area shall be 32 square feet and the maximum height
shall be eight feet.
c. The sign shall be removed within 10 days following the sale or lease of the
building or property.
ARTICLE 7-10 SPECIAL SIGN AREAS
A. COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PACKAGES. The purpose of a Comprehensive Sign Package
is to provide a comprehensive and coordinated approach to the design of signage that
exhibits superior quality and effective messaging. In recognition of the benefits of
cohesive and comprehensive sign design, modifications to the requirements provided in
this Ordinance may be appropriate within a Comprehensive Sign Package.
1. Any commercial, industrial, non-residential use in a residential zoning district, or
mixed-use development containing three or more buildings or businesses and all
Planned Area Developments (PADs) shall be required to prepare and submit a
Comprehensive Sign Package for review and approval prior to the issuance of
individual sign permits.
2. The Zoning Administrator, or designee, shall process an application for a
Comprehensive Sign Package in accordance with the procedures and time frames
outlined in the city of Goodyear Administrative Process Manual. A Comprehensive
Sign Package that is in compliance with all of the requirements provided in this
Article may be approved by the Zoning Administrator after review and approval by
the Development Review Committee. A Comprehensive Sign Package that
proposes modifications to the requirements provided in this Article shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
3. All Comprehensive Sign Packages shall provide for unified signage throughout the
development that is complementary to and integrated with the architectural design
and character of the buildings within the development. The Comprehensive Sign
Package shall describe and illustrate the locations, heights, sizes, colors, function,
materials, design, illumination and all other elements of all proposed signs within
the development.
4. Comprehensive Sign Packages shall be evaluated based upon the following criteria:
a. Size and Height: The Comprehensive Sign Package shall demonstrate that all
proposed signage is no larger than necessary for sufficient visibility and
legibility. Factors to be considered in determining allowed size and height may
include, but are not limited to, topography, traffic volumes, traffic speeds,
visibility ranges, copy size and impact on adjacent property.
City of Goodyear 7-30 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
b. Location and Orientation: Signs should be located and oriented to allow
sufficient visibility and legibility for pedestrian and vehicle traffic. Factors that
may be considered in reviewing the appropriateness of the sign location and
orientation may include, but are not limited to, location relative to the
surrounding streets and land uses, traffic volumes and access points, visibility
angles and topographic features.
c. Design, Colors and Materials: Signs proposed under the Comprehensive Sign
Package shall be harmonious with and enhance the architecture and theme of
the specific development in which the signs are located. Compatibility with the
specific development shall include the use of complementary colors, materials
and architectural style.
d. Surrounding Land Uses: Signs shall not adversely impact adjacent land uses,
especially adjacent residential land uses. The Comprehensive Sign Package
shall demonstrate the measures that will be taken to ensure the proposed signage
will not adversely impact adjacent land uses in terms of lighting, size, location
and orientation.
5. All amendments to an approved Comprehensive Sign Package shall be processed
in accordance with the following procedures:
a. Minor Amendments: Minor amendments shall include any change that does not
increase the number of signs nor increase the size or height of any sign beyond
what was approved under the original Comprehensive Sign Package or any
change that adheres to the provisions of this Article. Minor amendments shall
be approved administratively by staff.
b. Major Amendments: Major amendments shall be defined as those amendments
not meeting the criteria set forth above to qualify as a minor Comprehensive
Sign Package amendment. Major amendments shall be processed and approved
in the same manner as the initial Comprehensive Sign Package submittal.
6. After approval of a Comprehensive Sign Package, or an amended sign package, no
sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained, except in accordance with such
package, and the package may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this
Article.
7. The owner of a premise with a Comprehensive Sign Package approved before the
effective date of this amended Article shall continue to implement the sign package
pursuant to the original sign package.
City of Goodyear 7-31 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
B. MCDOWELL ROAD BUSINESS AND ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT. The intent of
the District is to promote the development of the area as a regional hub of activity within
the City of Goodyear. Commercial properties within the District may develop signage in
accordance with the supplemental sign regulations as established in Article 9-2 (McDowell
Road Business and Entertainment District) of the Zoning Ordinance.
ARTICLE 7-11 PROHIBITED SIGNS. Any sign not specifically listed as being permitted by
this Ordinance is prohibited, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Any sign bearing content or conveying a message that is not protected by the First
Amendment to the United States Constitution or any corollary provisions in the
Arizona Constitution.
2. Billboards.
3. Signs attached to any utility pole or structure, street light, traffic signal, tree, fence,
fire hydrant, bridge, park bench or other location on City-owned property, rightsof-
way or other public property.
4. Signs affixed to any vehicle, except as provided in Article 7-9 (Temporary Signs).
5. Off-site signs.
6. Electronic message displays and signs that are animated or audible, rotate or have
intermittent or flashing illumination or emit audible sound or visible matter except
as otherwise allowed in this Article.
7. Banners, flying banners, pennants, wind-driven spinners, streamers, balloons, flags,
search lights, strobe lights, holographic projections, laser light displays, beacons,
and inflatable signs, except as otherwise provided in Article 7-9 (Temporary Signs).
8. Roof signs.
9. Signs displayed in a manner or location that prevent free ingress and egress from a
door, window or other exit.
10. Portable signs and/or temporary signs except as otherwise provided in Article 7-9
(Temporary Signs).
11. Signs displayed in a location prohibited by this Ordinance.
12. Directional signs, except as otherwise provided for in this Article.
13. Pole signs over six feet in height.
City of Goodyear 7-32 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
14. Nonconforming signs other than legal nonconforming signs.
ARTICLE 7-12 NONCONFORMING AND UNSAFE SIGNS
A. LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
1. Legal nonconforming sign(s) mean signs that lawfully existed at the time of the
enactment of this Ordinance that did not conform to the regulations as specified in
this Ordinance.
2. A legal nonconforming sign may continue to be utilized in perpetuity only in the
manner and to the extent that it existed at the time of the Ordinance adoption,
amendment thereto, or annexation which rendered the sign legally nonconforming,
except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
3. A legal nonconforming sign may not be altered in any manner not in conformance
with this Ordinance, except for reasonable repair and maintenance of the sign or to
a change of copy that does not require structural alterations.
4. Any construction permit which invokes Certificate of Occupancy requirements
shall specify and require that any legal nonconforming sign located within the
boundaries of the development site, and within the limits of the applicant’s control,
authorized by said permit shall be brought into conformance with the provisions of
this Ordinance provided that if the legal nonconforming sign is a type of sign that
is prohibited by this Ordnance, then it shall be removed.
5. Legal nonconforming signs that are located on a parcel of property which is severed
from a larger parcel of property and acquired by a public entity for public use by
condemnation, purchase, or dedication may be relocated on the remaining parcel
without extinguishing the legal nonconforming status of that sign provided that the
nonconforming sign:
a. Is not increased in area or height;
b. Remains structurally unchanged except for reasonable repairs or alterations;
c. Is placed in the most similar position on the remaining property that it
occupied prior to the relocation; and,
d. Is relocated in a manner so as to comply with all applicable safety
requirements.
City of Goodyear 7-33 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
After relocation pursuant to this subsection, the legal nonconforming sign shall be
subject to all provisions of this section in its new location.
6. A nonconforming sign shall not be re-erected, relocated or replaced unless it is
brought into compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
7. A sign approved by variance or Comprehensive Sign Package before the effective
date of this Ordinance or any amendment thereof shall not be considered legally
nonconforming.
8. If the structure of a legal nonconforming sign is changed, the height and area of the
sign shall not be increased to exceed the height and area limits of the site on which
it is located. If the sign exceeds the site’s height and/or area limitations, the excess
height and/or area shall be reduced a minimum of 50%. Two such reductions shall
be permitted. After the third structural change, the sign shall conform to current
standards. Nothing in this Section shall require a legal nonconforming sign to be
reduced to a height or area less than that otherwise allowed on the site.
9. If a legal nonconforming sign is located on a parcel being developed for which Site
Plan and/or Design Review is required, the height and area of the sign shall not be
increased to exceed the height and area limitations of the site. If the sign exceeds
the site’s height and/or area limitations, the excess height and/or area shall be
reduced a minimum of 50%. Two such reductions shall be permitted. After the third
structural change, the sign shall conform to current standards. Nothing in this
Section shall require a legal nonconforming sign to be reduced to a height or area
less than that allowed on the site.
Site Plan and/or Design Review required by one of the following types of
development shall not cause reduction in a sign’s legal nonconforming height
and/or area:
a. An addition of less than 2,000 square feet when the addition is less than
50% of the size of the usable space of the site which is the subject of design
review. A series of additions, which total more than 50%of the usable space
of the site shall require reduction of nonconformities. Usable space shall not
include areas such as restrooms and storage rooms.
b. An addition of more than 2,000 square feet when the addition is less than
10% percent of the size of the usable space of the site which is the subject
of design review. A series of additions, which total more than 10% percent
of the usable space of the site shall require reduction of nonconformities.
Usable space shall not include areas such as restrooms and storage rooms.
c. A modification required by federal, state or local regulations or programs.
City of Goodyear 7-34 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
10. Any legal nonconforming sign shall be removed or rebuilt in full conformity to the
terms of this Ordinance if it is damaged or allowed to deteriorate to such an extent
that the cost of repair or restoration is 50% or more of the cost of replacement of
such sign.
B. SIGNS FOR A LEGAL NONCONFORMING USE:
1. New or additional signs for a legal nonconforming use shall not be permitted.
2. A legal nonconforming sign for a legal nonconforming use, which ceases to be used
for a period of 365 consecutive days or the legal nonconforming use becomes a
conforming use of the site, shall be considered a prohibited sign and shall be
removed or brought into conformance upon establishment of the conforming use.
C. SIGNS RENDERED ABANDONED:
1. Sign structures, which remain vacant, unoccupied or devoid of any message for a
period of six months or pertain to a time, event or purpose that no longer applies,
shall be deemed to be abandoned.
2. A sign whose use has been abandoned is prohibited.
3. Within six months after a use has been abandoned, it shall be the responsibility of
the property owner or the property owner’s authorized leasing agent to remove the
message or copy of an abandoned sign and to patch and conceal any and all damage
to the structure resulting from removal of the sign in a neat and professional
manner. Legally existing cabinet signs and panels on freestanding monument or
pylon signs shall be replaced with a blank panel, consistent with sign panel
replacement as outlined in this Ordinance.
D. UNSAFE SIGNS:
1. If the Building Official, or designee, determines any sign or sign structure to be in
an unsafe condition, he/she shall immediately notify, in writing, the owner of such
sign who shall correct such condition within 48 hours.
2. If the correction has not been made within 48 hours, the Building Official, or
designee, may have the sign removed if it creates a danger to the public safety or
have any necessary repairs or maintenance performed at the expense of the sign
owner or owner or lessee of the property upon which the sign is located.
City of Goodyear 7-35 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
ARTICLE 7-13 VIOLATIONS
A. All violations of this Article shall be prosecuted pursuant to Section 1-2-3 of the City of
Goodyear Zoning Code.
B. The responsible party for any violations of this Ordinance is the owner of the sign or the
real property upon which it is located and/or person in possession or control of the sign or
real property. The responsible party shall be responsible for any violations hereunder
whether or not the responsible party or its agent committed the prohibited act(s) or
neglected to prevent the commission of the prohibited act(s) by another.
C. In any such action under this Section, the court with jurisdiction, in its discretion, may issue
a temporary restraining order, a preliminary injunction, or a permanent injunction upon
such terms and conditions as will do justice and enforce this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 7-14 APPEALS
A. DECISIONS BY THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
1. The approval or denial of a sign permit or any written interpretations of a sign
regulation made by the Zoning Administrator, pursuant to his/her authority under
Section 1-2-2, may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Sections 1-
2-7 (B) and (C).
2. Challenges to the constitutionality of any provision of this Article regulating signs
shall only be processed pursuant to Section 7-14(B) below.
3. Any person with standing who is aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning
Administrator may appeal such decision by filing a written notice of appeal within
15 calendar days of the date the decision was issued.
4. The appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on a form(s) provided by
the Development Services Department and shall be processed in accordance with
the procedures generally described in Section 1-2-7(C) and the Administrative
Process Manual.
5. The Board of Adjustment may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the Zoning
Administrator, which decision will be final.
6. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board may, at any time within 30 days
after a decision has been rendered, file a complaint for special action in the superior
court of Maricopa County pursuant to Section 1-2-7(D).
City of Goodyear 7-36 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
B. CONSTITUTIONAL ISSUES INVOLVING APPLICATION OF SIGN
REGULATIONS
1. When an appeal raises an issue(s) involving the application of Federal or Arizona
constitutional law in the issuance or denial of a sign permit, the revocation of a
sign permit, or an order to alter or remove a sign, the constitutional issue(s) shall
be referred to a hearing officer appointed by the City for hearing and decision.
2. The appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on a form(s) provided by
the Development Services Department.
3. The appeal shall be in writing and shall include the following information:
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. The ordinance, code provision, or other City document or policy statement
that is alleged to be unconstitutional.
c. Any relevant facts and supporting documents.
d. The names and addresses of any witnesses.
4. The Zoning Administrator shall forward the appeal and all supporting documents
to the hearing officer within 10 working days of receipt with a copy to the
applicant.
5. The Zoning Administrator may prepare and include with the transmittal to the
hearing officer a written statement of the City’s response to the appeal
accompanied by any supporting documents, names of witnesses, and any other
matters considered relevant.
6. Upon receipt of the appeal, the hearing officer shall contact the Zoning
Administrator and the applicant acknowledging receipt and scheduling a time for
the appeal to be heard not later than 30 days after receipt. The applicant shall be
given at least 10-days’ notice of the time when the appeal will be heard unless
he/she agrees to a shorter time period.
7. The applicant shall bear the burden to establish that the subject ordinance, code
provision, or other City document or policy statement is unconstitutional.
8. The hearing officer shall decide the appeal and issue a written decision setting
forth findings of fact and conclusions of law within five working days after the
appeal is heard.
9. The decision shall be transmitted to the Zoning Administrator and the applicant at
the address provided by the applicant.
City of Goodyear 7-37 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
10. If the hearing officer finds that the subject ordinance, code provision, or other
City document or policy is unconstitutional, in whole or in part, the City shall
issue within 30 days of the hearing’s office decision a written notice to the
applicant stating that it will either (1) repeal or otherwise amend the challenged
ordinance, code provision, or other document or policy to cure the constitutional
deficiency or (2) take no action.
11. Any person aggrieved by the City’s response to the hearing officer’s decision
may file, at any time within 30 days thereafter, a complaint in a court of
competent jurisdiction to review the City’s response based upon the record of the
appeal to the hearing officer.
ARTICLE 7-15 CONFLICT AND SEVERABILITY
A. CONFLICT
1. In the event any provision of this Article is found to be in conflict with any other
zoning, building, fire safety, health, or other code provision of the City, the
provision which establishes a higher standard for the promotion and protection of
the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City shall prevail.
B. SEVERABILITY
1. A finding by a court of competent jurisdiction that any part, section, subsection,
paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, term, or word within this Article
is declared invalid shall not invalidate the remaining portions. A permit issued
pursuant to this Article does not grant any authority to violate any other law or
regulation that may apply. Any permit or approval issued in conflict with this
Article shall be void.
City of Goodyear 7-38 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
THIS PAGE WAS LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY.
City of Goodyear 8-1 Zoning Ordinance
Community Development May 24, 1999
Revised: January 12, 2009
ARTICLE 8 GENERAL PROVISIONS
These provisions are generally applicable throughout the City irrespective of zoning district
designation, as supplemental regulations.
8-1 General Requirements
8-2 Detached Accessory Buildings, Guest Houses, Ventilation Courts, and Portable
Storage Containers
8-3 Height Limitations
8-4 Hazardous Materials
8-5 Miscellaneous
ARTICLE 8-1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. DESIGN STANDARDS. General design requirements, as set forth below and/or as may
be supplemented by additional considerations promulgated by the City and approved by
City Council, shall be addressed:
1. Residential Design Standards. Neighborhood or individual lot layouts shall
consider functional and visually-appealing features that contribute to residential
livability and community sustainability appropriate to the district classification.
Design solutions should address compatibility at the neighborhood, block and
individual lot perspectives.
a. Architectural themes. Masonry, stucco and horizontal, treated siding materials
are preferred, with tile roofs in varied roofline treatments. Porches or deeplyshaded
eaves are encouraged.
b. Variety. Colored elevations shall
illustrate that a minimum of three (3)
different elevations are provided in
each block face. Developments of
forty (40) dwelling units or more
should offer a minimum of five (5) different elevations. Two-story homes are
discouraged on corner lots, on more than three (3) consecutive lots, or on lots
abutting major or minor arterials (unless additional open space is provided).
c. Street appearance. Landscaping plans establish street tree themes --
recommended minimum two (2) trees, plus shrubs per lot. Garage fronts
should not predominate; they should be recessed and/or constitute less than
fifty (50) percent of the residential facade.
d. Residential streets. Designs discourage through traffic, reduced street paving
widths may be considered where off-street guest parking bays are installed.
Figure 16.
City of Goodyear 8-2 Zoning Ordinance
Community Development May 24, 1999
Revised: January 12, 2009
2. Non-Residential Use Design Standards. Building elevations in landscaped
settings are expected to project a positive image of the City’s commercial,
industrial and institutional development.
a. Architectural themes. Colored elevation drawings shall indicate that structures
are provided with appropriate surfacing, architectural detailing and roofline
treatments from all sides visible from streets or residences.
b. Streetscape. Landscaping and street furniture complement residential
surroundings.
c. Construction materials. Appearance compatibility with residential
neighborhoods is stressed, discouraging metal-finished buildings and highlyreflective
glass. Tilt-up slab construction should include vertical architectural
elements.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove topsoil for sale
or for use other than on the premises from which the same shall be taken (except in
connection with the construction or alteration of a building on such premises and
excavation or grading incidental thereto).
C. Every dwelling shall be located and maintained on a lot as defined herein.
D. No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking or other requirements
of this Ordinance for a lot or building may be sold or leased away from such lot or
building.
E. No parcel of land which has less than the minimum width and area requirements for the
zone in which it is located may be cut off from a larger parcel of land for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of building or development as a lot.
F. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except for
accessory buildings in a rear yard.
1. The projections of skylights, window sills, belt courses, cornices, chimneys, flues
and other ornamental features and open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, fireproof
outside stairways and balconies may project into a yard not more than five (5)
feet except in the case of a side yard where it shall not come nearer than three (3)
feet to the side lot line.
2. Bay windows, including their cornices and eaves, may project into any required
yard not more than two (2) feet, provided, however, that the sum of such
projections on any wall does not exceed one third (1/3) the length of said wall.
City of Goodyear 8-3 Zoning Ordinance
Community Development May 24, 1999
Revised: January 12, 2009
3. There shall be an unobstructed opening or gate not less than three (3) feet wide
into the rear yard from one side of the house for emergency ingress.
4. Portals may project into a side yard up to the property line of a defined lot. No
part of the portal structure shall encroach into an adjacent property.
G. No lot shall be divided in such a way that any division of such a lot shall contain more
dwelling units than are permitted by the zoning regulations of the district in which such
lot is situated.
H. On an interior lot, in any Residential District, having no access to an alley and where the
garage or carport is not attached to the main building, required side yards shall be
maintained.
I. No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved, altered, added to
or enlarged, nor shall any land be used, designed, or intended for any purpose, or in any
manner other than is included among the uses as permitted in the district in which
located (provided that any building may be moved off any lot).
J. No building shall be erected, nor shall any required open space be encroached upon or
reduced, except in conformity to the yard, lot areas, open space, building location, and
off-street parking regulations designated for the district in which it is located.
K. No yard or other space on one lot shall be considered as providing yard or open space
for a building on any other lot.
L. A mobile home, recreational vehicle, or similar vehicle shall not be considered a
dwelling unit, nor occupied as such, unless located in a recreational vehicle or mobile
home park or mobile home subdivision. A mobile home, recreational vehicle, or
similar vehicle shall be prohibited as a facility for any non-residential use permitted in
this Ordinance, except as an office when construction is on-going on a site.
M. Any enclosed or roofed porch shall be considered a part of the main building in the
determination of the size of yard or lot coverage.
N. A portal may encroach into the side yard setback and will not be counted as part of the
main building in the determination of the size of yard or lot coverage.
O. Where two (2) or more lots are used as a building site and where main buildings cross
lot lines, then the entire area shall be considered as one (1) lot, except that the front of the
parcel shall be determined to be the front of the individual lots as originally platted or
laid out.
P. In all zones which require a front yard, no obstruction to view in excess of three (3) feet
in height shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular area formed by the street
City of Goodyear 8-4 Zoning Ordinance
Community Development May 24, 1999
Revised: January 12, 2009
property lines and a line connecting them at points thirty-three (33) feet from the
intersection of the street lines, except trees pruned high to permit unobstructed vision for
automobile drivers; and pedestal type identification signs and pumps at gasoline service
stations.
Q. Mechanical equipment, including but not limited to heating/cooling equipment, pool
pumps, electrical equipment and motors directly related to the primary use of the
property, shall be restricted from locating in the front yard.
City of Goodyear 8-5 Zoning Ordinance
Community Development May 24, 1999
Revised: January 12, 2009
ARTICLE 8-2 DETACHED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, GUEST HOUSES,
VENTILATION COURTS, AND PORTABLE STORAGE
CONTAINERS
A. DETACHED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS. In all Residential Districts, detached
accessory buildings shall conform to the following restrictions concerning locations
within lots:
1. Location. Detached accessory buildings or pads may be located in the front
or rear of a lot. The location of the accessory building will determine the
setback requirements, use and height of said accessory buildings which
include the following criteria:
a. Front accessory buildings are defined as buildings located in the
front half of the lot. These buildings are limited in use to either a
garage or a casita. A casita being defined as a living area used as a
bedroom, home office or other use that would be allowed and typical
within the main building. The casita may also include a bathroom,
but no kitchen facilities.
1) Architecture of accessory buildings must be the same as the
main building. When viewed from the front of the lot, the
accessory building should appear as an extension of the
main building.
2) Setback and height requirements for a front accessory
building must be the same standards as for the main
building, but shall not exceed the height of the main
building.
b. Rear accessory buildings are defined as buildings located in the rear
half of the lot. Their use is limited to standard uses that are allowed
in the main building, with the exception of the kitchen.
1) Setback requirements for rear accessory buildings are
modified to allow encroachment into the required side and
rear yard except for the following:
a) One (1) foot setback shall be required on all sides of
an accessory building for each one (1) foot in
height (to the peak of the building) above the lot
perimeter fence or wall, which shall not exceed six
(6) feet in height.
City of Goodyear 8-6 Zoning Ordinance
Community Development May 24, 1999
Revised: January 12, 2009
b) Through lot. The accessory building shall not be
located closer to the rear property lines than the
distance required for front yard setback.
c) Corner lot. The accessory building shall not be
located closer to the street or side property line than
the setback required for the main building.
d) Corner lot contiguous to key lot. No detached rear
accessory building shall be located closer to the
street side of a corner lot than the front yard
required on the key lot, except such setback need
not be greater than one-half (1/2) the width of the
corner lot.
2) No building, which is accessory to any residential building,
shall be erected to a height greater than twelve (12) feet
unless it is within the same setback requirements as the main
building, but may not exceed the height of the main
building.
3) All accessory buildings designed or used for sleeping or
living purposes shall be within the same setback
requirements as that of the main building.
2. Detached accessory buildings shall be permanently affixed to the ground by
anchoring or slab attachment.
3. No accessory buildings shall occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the
area lying between the rear of the main building and the rear property line.
B. Guest House shall be restricted to lots having areas of not less than fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet. Guest house, whether detached or attached, shall not have an
address separate from the principal residence on the lot or parcel. Where a guest house
is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all
regulations of this Ordinance applicable to the main building. Not more than one (1)
guest house shall be permitted on any one (1) lot or parcel.
1. General Provisions:
a) A guest house shall be constructed of similar materials, colors and
architectural style to the main building.
b) On lots having principal building and guest house, maximum lot
coverage of all buildings shall not exceed sixty (60) percent.
City of Goodyear 8-7 Zoning Ordinance
Community Development May 24, 1999
Revised: January 12, 2009
c) A guest house shall have no separate utility services and no entry
visible from public right-of-way.
d) No guest house shall be leased or rented.
e) A guest house shall have no separate driveway or parking area from
that of the principal residence. The principal residence shall have not
less than three (3) enclosed covered parking spaces and paved access
to each of the spaces.
f) No guest house shall be constructed on any lot or parcel until the main
building has been fully constructed and ready for occupancy.
2. Detached guest house is subject to the following additional criteria:
a) Detached guest house may encroach into the required site and rear
yard setback of the lot, provided that setbacks of five (5) feet shall be
maintained from side and rear property lines. On a through lot, the
detached guest house shall not be located closer to the rear property
line than the distance required for front yard setback. On any corner
lot, the detached guest house shall not be located closer to the street
side property line than the setback required for the main building.
b) No detached guest house shall have floor areas exceeding fifty (50)
percent of the principal building nor exceed a height of twenty (20)
feet.
C. VENTILATION COURTS. Rooms in which persons live or sleep, not having at least
one wall abutting on a street or alley, or on a yard, shall be supplied natural light and
air from a ventilation court conforming to the following:
Number of Stories Above Minimum Width of
Bottom of Court Court in Feet
1 20
2 30
3 40
4 or more 50
City of Goodyear 8-8 Zoning Ordinance
Community Development May 24, 1999
Revised: January 12, 2009
D. PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS.
1. In all Multi-Family, Commercial, and Industrial zoning districts, portable
storage containers are permitted only in accordance with the following:
a. As a temporary use during construction, remodeling, or redevelopment
of permanent onsite buildings and facilities, subject to approval of a
Zoning Permit by the Community Development Department. Such
permit shall specify and limit the number, size, location, and duration
of the storage containers.
b. As a periodic, intermittent, or recurring use accessory to a primary
permitted use, subject to approval of a Zoning Permit by the
Community Development Department. In addition to specifying and
limiting the number, size, location, and duration of the storage
containers, the Zoning Permit may require additional measures, such
as increased setbacks, screen walls, landscaping, exterior materials,
and colors, to ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses. Zoning
Permits granted for portable storage containers in Commercial and
Industrial zoning districts shall be permitted for a period of time not to
exceed sixty (60) days, with one renewal permitted for a period of time
not to exceed thirty (30) days, in a calendar year.
c. In no case shall storage containers be located in required yards,
landscape areas, open space, retention basins, drive aisles, required
parking spaces, fire lanes, loading zones, or any other location that
may cause hazardous conditions, constitute a threat to the public
safety, or create a condition detrimental to surrounding land uses and
developments.
2. In all Single-Family zoning districts, portable storage containers are permitted
only for the purpose of loading and unloading household contents for a period
of time not to exceed ten (10) days in a calendar year.
E. DONATION DROP-OFF BOXES. In all non-residential zoning districts, Donation
Drop-Off Boxes are permitted only in accordance with the following standards and
procedures:
1. Donation Drop-Off Boxes are permitted only as a use accessory to an
established and primary permitted use. Donation Drop-Off Boxes are subject
to the approval of a Zoning Permit by the Community Development
Department, and upon receipt of written authorization by the property owner,
or his legal representative.
City of Goodyear 8-9 Zoning Ordinance
Community Development May 24, 1999
Revised: January 12, 2009
2. Donation Drop-Off Boxes shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular
circulation, nor be located in public rights-of-way, required building setbacks,
landscape areas, drive aisles, required parking spaces, fire lanes, loading
zones, or any other location that may cause hazardous conditions, constitute a
threat to the public safety, or create a condition detrimental to surrounding
land uses and developments.
3. Each Donation Drop-Off Box shall have a firmly closing lid and shall have a
capacity no greater than six (6) cubic yards. No Donation Drop-Off Box shall
exceed seven (7) feet in height.
4. Donation Drop-Off Boxes may be constructed of painted metal, rubber, wood,
or plastic and shall be properly maintained in a safe and good condition.
5. Donation Drop-Off Boxes shall be clearly marked to identify the specific
items and materials requested to be left for donation, the name of the operator
or owners of the donation container, and a telephone number where the owner,
operator or agent of the owner or operator may be reached at any time. The
Donation Drop-Off Box shall also display a notice stating that no items or
materials shall be left outside of the Donation Drop-Off Box.
6. Occupation of parking spaces by the Donation Drop-Off Boxes shall not
reduce the number of available parking spaces below the minimum number
required for the site.
7. All donated items must be collected and stored in the Donation Drop-Off Box.
Donated items or materials shall not be left outside of Donation Drop-Off
Boxes, and the area around each Donation Drop-Off Box shall be maintained
by the owner or operator, or the property owner, free of litter and any other
undesirable materials.
8. Donation Drop-Off Boxes not located or maintained in compliance with this
Article shall be subject to revocation of the Zoning Permit.
ARTICLE 8-3 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS
The following limitations shall apply:
A. Attached church spires, crosses, belfries, cupolas, flag poles, clock towers, or similar
features may extend above the roof no more than the height of the building. Detached
features shall be no greater than twice the height of the highest building on site.
City of Goodyear 8-10 Zoning Ordinance
Community Development May 24, 1999
Revised: January 12, 2009
B. The maximum building height permitted for non-residential uses may be increased 10
feet above the building height limit for unoccupied building architectural elements, such
as parapet walls, chimneys, towers, domes and decorative masonry or metal framework,
that are necessary to achieve the objectives and requirements of the City Design
Guidelines to provide architectural interest and diversity in building elevations or
variations in roof form and horizontal lines; provided that the total amount of such
architectural elements that exceed the building height limit do not exceed 50% of the
linear length of any building elevation or exceed 50% of the total roof area of the
building.
C. Parapet walls or cornices may extend to five (5) feet above the maximum building height
limit to provide required screening of mechanical equipment from street view.
D. Notwithstanding this Ordinance, no exceptions to the height limit shall be permitted in
any district combined with an airport hazard district, except to the extent that the height
limit in an airport hazard district exceeds the height limit in the use district.
E. No building shall be erected to exceed the height limit designated for the district in
which located, whether the height be designated in number of stories, number of feet, or
otherwise.
ARTICLE 8-4 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
A. Storage of hazardous materials in any District will be subject to Fire Department
review.
B. If any such storage becomes obnoxious, offensive by reasons of emission of odor, smoke,
gas fumes or refuse, or places the public at risk, materials shall be removed by order of
the Fire Chief.
C. Uses or operations of products within the I-2 District shall be permitted unless such uses
are or may become obnoxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust,
smoke, noise, gas fumes, cinders, vibrations, glare, refuse, or air or water pollution.
D. Explosive or hazardous processes require approval by the Goodyear Fire Department that
all manufacturing, storage and water processes meet all safety and environmental
standards administered by said department.
City of Goodyear 8-11 Zoning Ordinance
Community Development May 24, 1999
Revised: January 12, 2009
ARTICLE 8-5 MISCELLANEOUS
A. A residence shall not be used as the location of a yard sale, garage sale or carport sale
(or any combination there of) more than four times in any calendar year, nor longer than
two (2) days for any single event.
B. No more than three (3) children, other than those residing therein, may be taken in for
child care or baby-sitting in a private residence.
C. No mobile home or house trailer shall be parked or stored in a residential zone district.
A camping trailer, motor home or camper may be permitted within an owner's residential
property, subject to compliance with Off-Street Parking and Loading criteria of the
Zoning Ordinance. No mobile home, house trailer, camping trailer or camper shall be
occupied or lived in other than in a mobile home or recreational vehicle park or mobile
home subdivision as permitted.
D. There shall be no parking of recreational vehicles (trailers, boats, campers, etc.) on a
public street when not attached to a vehicle. If attached to a vehicle, parking on a public
street is permitted for a maximum period of forty-eight (48) hours.
E. Setbacks for all buildings in all districts shall be measured from property lines.
F. Mechanical work on vehicles that may take more than seventy-two (72) hours to
complete must be done inside a garage, carport or rear yard in residential areas. Such
work shall be restricted to vehicles licensed to the resident of the property upon which the
work is being done.
G. Neither building permits nor certificates of occupancy shall be issued until use of the
land and/or building conforms to this Ordinance.
H. Non-commercial, non-business wireless communications equipment shall be considered a
permitted accessory use in all Districts when it complies with the following conditions:
1. Equipment is used to provide fixed wireless communications service(s) to, and is
located on the same property as, a single structure or group of structures under
common ownership used for substantially the same purpose.
2. Equipment mounted on the roof of the served structure does not extend more
than five (5) feet above the roofline.
3. Equipment mounted on an exterior wall of the served structure does not extend
more than twelve (12) inches from the mounting wall.
City of Goodyear 8-12 Zoning Ordinance
Community Development May 24, 1999
Revised: January 12, 2009
4. Equipment mounted on a pedestal, foundation, or on the ground in rear or side
yards does not extend above the height of a solid, screening wall and/or
vegetation provided and maintained on the subject property.
5. Equipment is camouflaged and/or screened from view from surrounding
properties.
6. All antennae and towers greater than thirty-five (35) feet measured from grade
shall require a Use Permit and shall be located at least one (1) foot from all
property lines for every foot of the antenna’s or tower’s height above grade.
I. The sale and/or planting in the City of Goodyear of pollen producing varieties of trees
such as the male mulberry tree (Morus Alba) and the olive tree (Olea Europea) which
produce large amounts of allergenic, airborne pollens is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance. Specifically excluded from the provisions of this section are non-pollinating
varieties of olive and male mulberry trees.
City of Goodyear 9-1 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
ARTICLE 9 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
There exists within the City of Goodyear areas that, due to the unique nature of the area,
surrounding land uses and/or physical improvements or natural features, require special
regulations and approval processes above and beyond the regulations and approval processes of
the underlying zoning districts. In order to insure the orderly development of the area, and protect
the public health, safety and welfare, the districts contained in this Article are specific to these
unique geographic areas, and the regulations and approval processes are intended to be applicable
to all property within the geographic boundaries of the individual districts, regardless of the
individual zoning of the underlying parcels.
9-1 Freeway Development Overlay District
9-2 McDowell Road Business and Entertainment District
ARTICLE 9-1 FREEWAY DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
9-1-1 Purpose
9-1-2 Applicability
9-1-3 Sound Attenuation Plan Standards
9-1-4 Sound Attenuation Improvements
9-1-5 Administration
9-1-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Overlay District is to provide the appropriate and necessary off-site and onsite
improvements to protect and enhance the livability of properties near the Papago Freeway
(Interstate 10) and the Loop 303 Freeway within the City of Goodyear. These Freeway corridors
will have a significant impact on the surrounding land uses. Noise and traffic generated by these
Freeways will impact residential land uses and other noise sensitive uses that may be constructed
adjacent to the Freeway corridors.
It is the intent of the City to ensure that future freeway noise impacts are mitigated by establishing
noise attenuation requirements applicable to future development of residential land uses and other
noise sensitive uses as defined in this Overlay District.
9-1-2 APPLICABILITY
All residential development and other noise sensitive land uses located within five hundred (500)
feet of the Papago and Loop 303 Freeway alignments shall comply with the provisions of this
Overlay District. Noise sensitive land uses shall include schools, places of worship, childcare
facilities, hospitals, nursing homes, libraries, and similar facilities, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, or his designee. Abatement measures are generally not required for new
commercial and industrial developments. Abatement measures are generally required only with
respect to structures designed for human occupancy within the specified distance from the freeway
right-of-way boundaries.
City of Goodyear 9-2 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
All residential development and other noise sensitive uses within five hundred (500) feet of the
future Papago and Loop 303 Freeway right-of-way boundaries shall submit a sound attenuation
plan prior to rezoning, use permit, or site plan approval.
Any property or lot completely or partially located within five hundred (500) feet of the exterior
edge of the planned right-of-way boundary on each side of the Papago and Loop 303 Freeway
alignments shall comply with the provisions of this Overlay District.
9-1-3 SOUND ATTENUATION PLAN
A. EXTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS
1. The sound attenuation plan shall include a noise analysis of the property that details
the projected freeway noise levels based upon the most current projected traffic
volumes available from the Maricopa Association of Governments. The time
period for the projected traffic volumes and traffic characteristics shall be a
minimum of fifteen (15) years from the date of the submittal of the sound
attenuation plan, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, or his designee.
In the event that the design and development of the projected freeway is not at a
stage for which a noise analysis is reasonably feasible, then no such noise analysis
shall be required, but the sound attenuation plan shall obligate the property owner
to construct or otherwise provide for a sound barrier wall of a minimum of eight
(8) feet in height, or an acceptable equivalent, and install landscape treatments,
subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator, or his designee.
2. The sound attenuation plan shall include the proposed attenuation measures needed
to reasonably predict that the projected exterior noise levels on the property at
ground level shall not exceed the (Leq) sixty-four (64) dBA noise level. For the
purposes of this Overlay District, the noise measurement method used by the
Arizona Department of Transportation (ADOT) and the Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA) will be used. In addition to any proposed attenuation
measures, a sound attenuation plan may also identify who, in place of the property
owner, may be responsible for specific measures, the timing for installing the
specific attenuation measures, and describe or provide for proposed alternative
means of compliance as to any specific attenuation measures as may be approved
by the City Engineer, or his designee.
3. The sound attenuation plan shall include a certification by a qualified transportation
noise analyst as to the projected exterior noise levels on the site and that the sound
attenuation measures will meet the (Leq) sixty- four (64) dBA noise level.
B. INTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS
1. The sound attenuation plan shall also include measures needed to reasonably
predict that the projected interior noise levels for each dwelling unit or building unit
City of Goodyear 9-3 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
or building determined to have a noise sensitive use shall achieve a maximum
interior noise level of (Leq) forty-five (45) decibels. In order to comply with this
maximum noise level, a minimum of R18 exterior wall assembly, a minimum of
R30 roof/ceiling assembly, dual-glazed windows and solid wood, and foam-filled
fiberglass or metal doors to the exterior shall be required of new buildings or
dwelling units. As an alternative, a certification by an architect or engineer to
achieve a maximum interior noise level of (Leq) forty-five (45) decibels at the time
of final construction may be submitted. The sound attenuation standards within
this Overlay District shall not apply to accessory buildings used on a property with
the primary building.
9-1-4 SOUND ATTENUATION IMPROVEMENTS
Sound attenuation improvements shall include all reasonable and feasible measures necessary to
meet the required standard including the construction of freeway walls and earthen berms. If there
are special characteristics within a freeway corridor, such as the topography of the area, drainage,
maintenance requirements, or safety considerations, as determined by the City Engineer, or his
designee, then the construction of a noise barrier of greater than 20 feet in height should be
avoided. Reasonable and feasible measures may include, without limitation, achieving a noise
reduction of at least 5 dBA, barrier height, aesthetic issues relating to a proposed barrier, or such
other measures as consistent with the ADOT (Arizona Department of Transportation) Noise
Abatement Policy and approved by the City Engineer, or his designee. The sound attenuation
measures shall utilize designs that minimize the visual impact on the site with appropriate use of
colors and materials. Any landscape plan proposed for any site subject to the freeway development
standards whereby a wall or berm is required shall include, where appropriate, visual mitigation
measures, such as colors, materials, styles, designs, or additional landscape treatments to minimize
the visual impacts of walls or berms.
9-1-5 ADMINISTRATION
A. PROCEDURES AND CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL
1. The City Engineer, or his designee, shall review the sound attenuation plan and its
proposed improvements for compliance with the intent of this Overlay District.
2. The approval of the sound attenuation plan shall occur prior to any rezoning, use
permit, or site plan approval.
3. Notwithstanding the approval of a particular sound attenuation plan, where changed
conditions or circumstances have occurred, any property owner (or its successor in
interest) for whom a sound attenuation plan has been approved, may apply to the
City Engineer, or his designee, to amend the plan. Changed conditions or
circumstances may include, without limitation, changes in the location, grade, or
design of a proposed freeway, changes in the proposed land use adjacent to the
City of Goodyear 9-4 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
freeway, or any changes significantly affecting the noise analysis of the subject
property.
B. PROVISIONS FOR "IN LIEU OF" PAYMENT
1. Subject to the approval of the City Engineer, or his designee, a development shall
have the option of complying with an approved sound attenuation plan (or a portion
thereof) by placing on deposit with the City for deposit in an interest bearing
account (with interest to accrue to and be made part of such deposit) a sum
equivalent to the cost of the applicable noise mitigation measures specified in the
plan, in lieu of actual construction of any particular such measures for which a
deposit is made. This deposit shall be made prior to recordation of the final plat,
or prior to issuance of a building permit for a project with an approved site plan or
use permit, and except to the extent expended for the noise mitigation measures
specified, shall be reimbursed to the party making the deposit, upon the earlier to
occur of:
a. a determination by the Arizona Department of Transportation (ADOT), the
Maricopa County Department of Transportation (MCDOT), or other
applicable governmental authority not to construct or extend the Papago
(Interstate 10) or Loop 303 freeway, including any redesignation reducing
the status from freeway to some other roadway, in the proximity of the
subject property; or
b. a change in the location or alignment of the Papago or Loop 303 freeway
(or right-of-way boundaries) as a result of which the subject property ceases
to be within the freeway proximity for which this Ordinance requires a
sound attenuation plan; or
c. that date which is twenty (20) years after the date of deposit (the
“Reimbursement Date”), unless on or prior to the Reimbursement Date,
ADOT, MCDOT, or other applicable governmental authority confirms in
writing the continued plan for a freeway within the proximity to the subject
property for which this Ordinance requires a sound attenuation plan, in
which event the Reimbursement Date shall be extended up to an additional
ten (10) years from the date of such confirmation. In no event may the
Reimbursement Date be extended beyond the date which is thirty (30) years
after the date of the deposit.
C. APPEAL PROCESS
1. If the City Engineer, or his designee, determines that the sound attenuation plan
(including a proposed amended plan) does not meet the intent of this Overlay
District that decision may be appealed to the City Council within forty-five (45)
days of the decision.
City of Goodyear 9-5 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
ARTICLE 9-2 MCDOWELL ROAD BUSINESS AND ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT
9-2-1 Purpose
9-2-2 Applicability
9-2-3 Supplemental Sign Regulations
9-2-1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this District is to promote the development of a specified part of the McDowell
Road corridor as a regional hub of employment, commercial and entertainment uses. Because of
the unique features of this mixed-use area and the regional nature of the uses, it is appropriate to
create an Overlay District to ensure that development occurs in accordance with the City’s intent
for the area.
9-2-2 APPLICABILITY
A. The Overlay District shall apply to developments having frontage along McDowell Road
between North 145th Avenue on the east and North Sarival Avenue on the west.
B. Land use regulations and development standards applicable to this Overlay District shall
be those of the underlying zoning districts, except to those regulations that may be
specifically modified by this Article.
C. If any regulations in this Overlay District are in conflict with requirements of the
underlying zoning districts, the regulations in this Overlay District shall prevail.
9-2-3 SUPPLEMENTAL SIGN REGULATIONS
A. To promote the intent of the District as a regional hub of activity, properties zoned C-2,
General Commercial, or Planned Area Developments with underlying C-2, General
Commercial, zoning may utilize monument signs with the following elements:
1. Electronic Message Display:
a. A monument sign may utilize one electronic message display per side
through approval of a major amendment to the Comprehensive Sign
Package for that development or, if no Comprehensive Sign Package
exists, then through the approval of a new Comprehensive Package for the
development.
b. An electronic message display may not occupy more than 50% of the
allowable sign area of the monument sign.
c. The electronic message display shall be static. The display of video,
City of Goodyear 9-6 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: July 26, 2017
animation, or special effects, such as traveling, scrolling, fading,
dissolving, and bursting, shall be prohibited.
d. Static displays shall not be changed more than once every eight seconds.
Change of copy shall occur through an immediate transition.
e. The message display shall include technology to control and vary the
intensity of lighting depending on the amount of the ambient light that
is present. The intensity of the lighting shall not exceed 300 nits from dusk
till dawn.
f. The electronic message display shall be shut off between the hours of 11
PM and sunrise when such display is located within 150 feet of a single
family dwelling.
g. Should the electronic message display malfunction, the display shall be
shut off until such time that repairs have been completed to restore the
electronic messaging system.
h. The use of the electronic message display for off-site advertising is
prohibited.
i. The standards of this section do not apply to freeway pylons. All
modifications to freeway pylon signs shall be made in conformance with
Section 4-2-9 of the Zoning Ordinance.
City of Goodyear 10-1 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10, 2012
ARTICLE 10 OUTDOOR LIGHTING STANDARDS
10-1 Purpose
10-2 Applicability
10-3 Lighting Zones
10-4 Operating Hours
10-5 Light Sources and Fixture Shielding
10-6 Fixture Mounting Height and Equipment Finishes
10-7 Illuminance Levels
10-8 Lighting Standards Matrix
10-9 Non-Residential Driveways
10-10 Parking Canopies
10-11 Parking Structures
10-12 Gas Stations/Convenience Stores
10-13 Drive-Throughs
10-14 Banks/ATMs
10-15 Religious Facilities
10-16 Automotive Dealerships
10-17 Flagpole Lighting
10-18 Sportslighting For All Private and Public Facilities
10-19 Single Family Residences, Attached and Detached
10-20 Utility Exceptions
10-21 Other Exceptions
10-22 Equipment Substitutions or Alterations
10-23 Verification
10-24 Other Types of Lighting
ARTICLE 10-1 PURPOSE.
The purpose of these standards is to establish comprehensive provisions for outdoor lighting
within the City of Goodyear. This document intends to achieve a fair balance between safety
and aesthetics, to encourage designs that provide for the proper quality and quantity of nighttime
illumination, while minimizing negative impacts on the surrounding neighborhoods and our
night sky. Proper exterior lighting design creates lighting systems that are sensitive to the
surrounding neighborhoods by confining the illumination as much as possible within the
boundaries of the project site. It also provides appropriate quantities and uniformity of both
horizontal and vertical illumination on the site. This will involve the use of not only the
appropriate fixtures and light sources, but also proper placement and operating schedules.
The City of Goodyear recognizes the intentions of the Recommended Practices and Design
Guidelines put forth by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA), and
has incorporated those recommendations into these standards. Applicants may acquire more
information by obtaining copies of the most recent IESNA publications.
City of Goodyear 10-2 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10, 2012
ARTICLE 10-2 APPLICABILITY.
A. The requirements of Article 10 of this Ordinance apply to the development identified
below, and approval of an Outdoor Lighting Plan is required prior to development of any
outdoor lighting improvements associated with such development.
1. NEW DEVELOPMENT. All new residential and nonresidential development
shall comply with the standards and requirements set forth in Article 10 of this
Ordinance.
2. ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS AND RESTORATION OF RESIDENTIAL
AND NON-RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTIONS. Building additions,
alterations, and/or restorations that meet one of the following criteria listed below
shall comply with the standards and requirements set forth in Article 10 of this
Ordinance.
a. Additions, alterations, and/or restorations that will increase the square footage
of the facility by 50% or more.
b. Alterations, and/or restorations that involve work to 50% or more of the
square 50% of the facility.
c. Additions, alterations, and/or restorations the cost of which represents 50% or
more of the value of the existing facility prior to such addition, alteration o
restoration.
3. With respect to new construction of residential (attached and detached) and
additions, alterations, and restorations of existing residential (attached and
detached) only sections 10-19 through 10-24 of Article 10 apply.
B. APPLICATION REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS
1. Applications for Outdoor Lighting Plan approval shall be processed and reviewed
in accordance with the procedures generally described herein and more fully
described in the Administrative Process Manual and in this Ordinance, and in
the Engineering Standards.
a. Applications for approval of an Outdoor Lighting Plan shall be filed with the
Development Services Department on form(s) provided by the Development
Services Department in conjunction with an application for Site Plan approval
and shall include all of the information identified in the application form(s), in
the Administrative Process Manual, in this Ordinance, in the Engineering
Standards, and any other data that may be required by the Zoning
Administrator that is needed for review of the application.
City of Goodyear 10-3 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10, 2012
b. Applications shall be signed by the property owner(s) or an authorized agent
of the property owner(s) and all applicable fees shall be paid when
applications are submitted.
2. The Development Review Committee shall review the application submittal for
compliance with the requirements of Article 10 of this Ordinance, any other
applicable requirements in this Ordinance, applicable Engineering Standards,
and applicable provisions in the Goodyear City Code. Following the completion
of the Committee’s review, the Zoning Administrator shall approve, approve
with conditions or deny the Outdoor Lighting Plan application.
3. The approval date of the Outdoor Lighting Plan Approval shall be the date on
which the application was approved by the Zoning Administrator. Outdoor
Lighting Plan approvals are tied to other development approvals, which will be
identified in the notification of Outdoor Lighting Plan approval; and the Outdoor
Lighting Plan approval expires if such related development approval expires.
C. COMPLIANCE
Construction plans for outdoor lighting installations shall conform to the development
reflected in the Outdoor Lighting Plan as approved by the Zoning Administrator shall
be submitted and approved as a condition precedent for the issuance of a building permit.
ARTICLE 10-3 LIGHTING ZONES.
In order to be more responsive to the special needs of different portions of the City, a system of
four different lighting “zones” has been established based upon the current and/or planned Uses
and ambient brightness of the area. Each “zone” will have different development requirements
and lighting restrictions. The “zone” for a particular project shall be assigned by City Planning
staff during the development review process.
ZONE 1. Low ambient light areas -- Rural residential areas or low density residential
areas with limited commercial
ZONE 2. Medium ambient light areas -- Urban residential areas mixed with light
commercial
ZONE 3. High ambient light areas -- Urban areas having both residential and
commercial use and experiencing high levels of night time activity.
ZONE 4. Special light areas -- Downtown and other special areas requiring thematic
lighting or extreme light levels due to the nature of the events taking place
in these areas.
City of Goodyear 10-4 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10, 2012
ARTICLE 10-4 OPERATING HOURS.
Depending upon the “zone” that a project site is to be located in, there will be different
restrictions on the hours that the outdoor lighting may operate. Every project shall be
encouraged to reduce as much as possible the amount of outdoor lighting that operates after
10:00 PM, while projects in certain lighting zones shall be required to turn off all non-security
lighting (except for flagpole lighting) as follows:
ZONES 1 & 2. Security lighting only after 10:00 PM or within 1-hour after the closeof-
business, whichever is later. All fixtures that are not Full-Cutoff shall be
turned off at this time.
ZONE 3. All outdoor lighting shall be reduced by a minimum of 50% after 10:00 PM
or within 1-hour after the close-of-business, whichever is later. All fixtures
that are not Full-Cutoff shall be turned off at this time.
ARTICLE 10-5 LIGHT SOURCES AND FIXTURE SHIELDING.
Mercury Vapor light sources shall not be allowed. Searchlights and strobe/ flashing lights are
not allowed in any Zone without a separate permit, and the duration of the allowed use may be
limited by Planning & Zoning staff. Lasers, exposed neon, and other intense linear light sources
are not allowed in Zone 1, but are allowed in Zones 2 and 3 and subject to approval and
stipulations by Planning & Zoning staff during the design review process. Lasers must be aimed
at-or-below the horizontal plane and terminated on an opaque surface within the project site.
ZONE 1. Pole or wall-mounted fixtures shall be full-cutoff fixtures only. All
perimeter fixtures shall possess house-side shielding Bollards shall be
louvered and utilize coated lamps. All light sources shall have a color
temperature of less than or equal to 3,200 Kelvin. Wall-mounted fixtures of
greater than 1,800 lumens shall possess house-side shields. Uplighting
fixtures shall not exceed 1,800 lumens.
ZONE 2. Pole or wall-mounted fixtures of less than or equal to 1,800 lumens may be
Semi-Cutoff or Cutoff. All other pole or wall-mounted fixtures shall be
Full-Cutoff. All perimeter fixtures shall possess house-side shielding.
Bollards shall be louvered with coated lamps or of a type where the lamp is
recessed and not directly visible. Wall-mounted fixtures of greater than
3,500 lumens shall possess house-side shields. Uplighting fixtures shall not
exceed 3,500 lumens.
ZONE 3. Pole or wall-mounted fixtures of less than or equal to 3,500 lumens may be
Semi-Cutoff or Cutoff. All other pole or wall-mounted fixtures shall be
Full-Cutoff. All perimeter fixtures located within 30-feet of a single-family
residential property line, excluding bollards, shall possess house-side
shielding, and those fixtures that will also operate after 10:00 PM shall
possess external shielding to the satisfaction of Planning & Zoning staff.
Bollards shall be louvered with coated lamps or of a type where the lamp is
shielded and not directly visible. Wall-mounted fixtures of greater than
6,500 lumens shall possess house-side shields. Uplighting fixtures shall not
exceed 6,500 lumens.
ARTICLE 10-6 FIXTURE MOUNTING HEIGHT AND EQUIPMENT FINISHES.
The mounting height of a fixture is to be measured from finished grade to the fixture lens or
luminous opening. Pole bases shall be finished in a fashion other than exposed concrete
(brushed finish, painted, etc.). No portion of any fixture that is attached to a wall that is common
with another property shall be allowed to protrude above the top of the wall.
ZONE 1. Fixtures located within 30 feet of a residential property line shall not exceed
6 feet in height. All others shall not exceed 15 feet in height, and the pole
color shall be dark and non-reflective (such as dark bronze or black).
City of Goodyear 10-5 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10, 2012
ZONE 2. Fixtures located within 30 feet of a residential property line shall not exceed
6 feet in height. Fixtures located greater than 30 feet and less than or equal
to 150 feet from a residential property line, and not blocked from direct
view by a structure, shall not exceed 15 feet in height. All others shall not
exceed 25 feet in height or the predominant height of the perimeter
buildings (as determined by Planning & Zoning staff), whichever is less.
City of Goodyear 10-6 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10, 2012
Pole color shall be dark and non-reflective (such as dark bronze or black, or
as otherwise approved by Planning & Zoning staff).
ZONE 3. Fixtures located within 150 feet of a residential property line, and not
blocked from direct view by a structure, shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
All others shall not exceed 30 feet in height or the predominant height of the
perimeter buildings (as determined by Planning & Zoning staff), whichever
is less. Pole color to be approved by Planning & Zoning staff.
ARTICLE 10-7 ILLUMINANCE LEVELS.
Planning & Zoning staff shall place a limitation on the on-site horizontal average illuminance for
all projects, and the perimeter vertical illuminance when the site is within 150 feet of a
residential property line. On-site illuminance shall be based upon a “maintained” average
horizontal value at finished grade, and the perimeter illuminance shall be based upon an “initial”
maximum vertical value at 6 feet above finished grade. These illuminance limitations shall be
different for each lighting “zone”. The Light Loss Factor for all “initial” illuminance
calculations shall be no less than 0.95. The Light Loss Factor for all “maintained” calculations
shall be determined by the designer, and based upon the actual lamps selected and the projected
operating conditions, to the satisfaction of Planning & Zoning staff.
City of Goodyear 10-7 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10, 2012
ARTICLE 10-8 LIGHTING STANDARDS MATRIX
Lighting
Zone
Operating
Hours
Light Sources
and
Fixture Shielding
Mounting Height
& Pole Color
On-Site and
Perimeter
Illuminance
Levels
Uplighting
1
Low
Ambient
Light Areas
Security
Lighting only
after 10:00
PM. or 1-hour
after Close
of Business
Light Sources <= 3,200K.
Full-Cutoff fixtures only.
HSS on Perimeter
Fixtures
6’ height <= 30’
from Residential
Property Line.
15’ height > 30’.
Dark and Non-
Reflective Colors.
1.50 FC
Average
0.30 VFC
Maximum
<= 1,800
Lumens
Turn off at
10:00 PM. or
1-hour after
Close of Business.
2
Medium
Ambient
Light Areas
Security
Lighting only
after 10:00
PM. or 1-hour
after Close
of Business
All Light Sources.
Semi-Cutoff and Cutoff
fixtures <= 1,800L.
Full-Cutoff > 1,800L.
HSS on Perimeter
Fixtures
6’ height <= 30’
from Residential
Property Line.
>30’ 15’ ht. <=150’
25’ height >150’.
Dark and Non-
Reflective Colors.
3.00 FC
Average
0.80 VFC
Maximum
<= 3,500
Lumens
Turn off at
10:00 PM. or
1-hour after
Close of Business.
3
High
Ambient
Light Areas
50%
Reduction
after 10:00 PM
or 1-Hour
after Close
of Business
All Light Sources.
Semi-Cutoff and Cutoff
fixtures <= 3,500L.
Full-Cutoff > 3,500L.
HSS on Perimeter
Fixtures
External shielding
after 10:00 PM.
15’ height <=150’
from Residential
Property Line.
30’ height >150’.
Any Color,
as approved
by P & Z Staff
4.50 FC
Average
1.50 VFC
Maximum
<= 6,500
Lumens.
Turn off at
10:00 PM. or
1-hour after
Close of Business.
4
Special
Light Areas
*** *** *** *** ***
*** To be determined by Planning & Zoning Staff.
Kelvin (K) <= 3,200K = A light source with a color temperature of less than or equal to
3,200 degrees Kelvin (“warm” colored light).
Light Sources <= 1,800L = A light source which produces less than 1,800 initial Lumens.
Fixture Shielding HSS <= 25 feet = Fixtures located less than or equal to 25 feet from a
residential property line shall possess a external shielding on the rear and sides of
the fixture in order to prevent direct view of the fixture lens or lamp from a
residential property line.
Mounting Height 15’ <=150’ = Mounting height of 15’ or less when the fixture is located less
than or equal to 150 feet from a residential property line.
Pole Color Dark = Dark, non-reflective colors such as Dark Bronze or Black.
Fuel canopy fixtures shall be recessed into the canopy ceiling, with a lens that is flat and flush to
the ceiling. The canopy light source shall be metal halide or any other source as approved by
Planning & Zoning staff. In the event that the canopy is located within 150 feet of a residential
property line, the canopy fascia shall be extended to a minimum depth of 12 inches below the
canopy ceiling. Exposed light sources (such as neon or fluorescent) on the canopy are not
allowed. Back-lighted fascias are not allowed in lighting zones 1 and 2. Maintained average
horizontal illuminance at grade under the canopy shall be calculated separately from the rest of
the site and shall not exceed 20.0 footcandles in Zones 1 and 2, and shall not exceed 30.0
footcandles in Zones 3 and 4.
City of Goodyear 10-8 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10, 2012
Illuminance Levels On-site maintained horizontal average illuminance and perimeter initial vertical
illuminance (spill light).
ARTICLE 10-9 NON-RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS.
In order to maximize pedestrian safety, and to help improve emergency vehicle access, City
sidewalks/paths that cross driveways shall be illuminated to a maintained average of not less than
1.0 footcandles. This lighting shall operate from dusk until dawn. This requirement shall be
waived if a city streetlight is located within 20 feet of the driveway. The perimeter spill light
limitation shall be waived within 20 feet of a driveway.
ARTICLE 10-10 PARKING CANOPIES.
Full-cutoff fixtures only in Zone 1. Non-cutoff fixtures are allowed in Zones 2, 3, and 4, but the
fixtures must possess a diffusing lens and be located so that the sides of the canopy will block
any direct view of the lens or fixtures from beyond the property lines.
ARTICLE 10-11 PARKING STRUCTURES.
ZONE 1. NOT ALLOWED.
ZONE 2. Interior fixtures and roof-top fixtures shall be full-cutoff and incorporated
into the architecture of the structure. The interior fixtures shall be attached
to the ceiling or mounted no lower than the bottom of the support beams.
Roof-top fixtures shall be set-back a minimum of 25 feet from the perimeter,
and shall not exceed 14 feet in mounting height.
ZONE 3. Fixtures shall be incorporated into the architecture of the structure. Interior
fixtures visible from any residential properties shall be full-cutoff. All
others may be semi-cutoff, cutoff, but shall possess diffusing lenses or
shielding so that the lamp is not directly visible from off-site. Rooftop
fixtures shall be full-cutoff, set-back a minimum of 25 feet from the
perimeter, and shall not exceed 16 feet in mounting height.
ARTICLE 10-12 GAS STATIONS / CONVENIENCE STORES.
City of Goodyear 10-9 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10, 2012
ARTICLE 10-13 DRIVE-THROUGHS.
All fixtures are to be full-cutoff and either recessed into the canopy ceiling, or mounted so that
the lowest portion of the fixture is higher than the canopy fascia. All non-security lighting is to
be turned off by 10:00 PM or within 1-hour after close of business, whichever is later.
ARTICLE 10-14 BANKS/ATMs.
All fixtures for the ATM or teller areas shall be full-cutoff. The fixtures at drive-up canopies
shall be either recessed into the canopy ceiling, or mounted so that the lowest portion of the
fixture is higher than the canopy fascia. Maintained average horizontal illuminance at grade
under the canopy or adjacent to the ATM shall be calculated separately from the rest of the site
and shall not exceed 20.0 footcandles in Zones 1 and 2, and shall not exceed 30.0 footcandles in
Zones 3 and 4.
ARTICLE 10-15 RELIGIOUS FACILITIES.
Metal halide lighting sources are not allowed in Zones 1 and 2, and all other light sources must
have a color temperature of less than or equal to 3,200K. Any facility in any Zone that is located
within 150 feet of a residential property line must utilize light sources with a color temperature
of less than or equal to 3,200K. All non-security lighting shall be turned off within 1-hour after
the completion of the last service/event. Any fixtures located within 30 feet of a residential
property line shall be included in the fixtures being turned off. All non-security outdoor lighting
shall be automatically controlled by the equivalent of a 7-day timer, and programmed so that the
lighting only activates on evenings when the facility is actually in use. In the event that the
parking lot is sized for peak usage (holidays, etc.), control of the lighting is to be divided into
“Tiers”, so that the parking lot lighting in the peak-usage areas only operates during those peak
times of the year.
ARTICLE 10-16 AUTOMOTIVE DEALERSHIPS.
A minimum of 50% of the outdoor illumination shall be turned off within 1-hour after the
close of business. All non-full-cutoff fixtures shall be automatically turned off at this time. All
perimeter fixtures shall possess house-side shields. This Use is subject to all other applicable
provisions of Article 10 except for the horizontal and vertical footcandle limitations.
ZONE 1. NOT ALLOWED.
ZONE 2. Maintained average illuminance at grade in the sales areas shall not exceed
40.0 footcandles. Other areas shall not exceed an average of 10.0
footcandles. Poles shall be a dark non-reflective color such as dark bronze
or black. Under-canopy lighting shall be full-cutoff, or the canopy fascia
shall be extended on all sides so that is lower than any portion of the fixture
lens.
City of Goodyear 10-10 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10, 2012
ZONE 3. Maintained average illuminance at grade in the sales areas shall not exceed
60.0 footcandles. Other areas shall not exceed an average of 10.0
footcandles.
ARTICLE 10-17 FLAGPOLE LIGHTING.
Flagpole uplighting in Zone 1 shall not exceed the equivalent of two fixtures of 1,800 initial
lumens each per flagpole. Uplighting in all other Zones shall not exceed the equivalent of two
fixtures of 6,500 initial lumens each per flagpole. Flagpole lighting may operate all night, but is
to be turned off at dusk if the flag is lowered.
ARTICLE 10-18 SPORTSLIGHTING FOR ALL PRIVATE AND PUBLIC FACILITIES.
All sports, path and parking lot lighting are to be illuminated in conformance with this Ordinance
and the Recommended Practices prepared by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America (IESNA). All sports-fields shall utilize shielded luminaires from a list of manufacturers
that have been pre-approved by the Planning & Zoning and Public Works departments.
Luminaires on sports field poles with multiple cross-arms shall have a black exterior finish. All
sport-courts shall be lighted with full-cutoff luminaires, and are to utilize “On” & “Off” pushbuttons
so that the lighting does not operate unless the courts are in actual use. All park
luminaires shall be shielded and/or located so that no light source is directly visible from beyond
the park property lines. Sports field poles are to be set-back a minimum of 50 feet from any
residential property line or right-of-way. Initial vertical illuminance (spill light) shall be
calculated along all park property lines at a height of 6 feet above finished grade. Automatic
time-clocks or other programmable controllers are to turn off all non-security lighting at a curfew
time to be determined by city staff.
Zone 1: “Dark Sky” Neighborhood Park or School.
Sports field lighting shall not exceed 80 feet in height. Path and parking lot
lighting shall not exceed 16 feet in height. Sport courts shall not exceed 25
feet in height, and all fixtures shall possess 4-sided shielding/skirting.
Sportslighting shall not operate after 10:30 PM. Spill light shall not exceed
0.80 footcandles at any point along a residential property line and 2.00
footcandles along any other property line.
Zone 2: “Standard” Neighborhood Park or Elementary/Middle School.
Sports field lighting shall not exceed 80 feet in height. Path and parking lot
lighting shall not exceed 20 feet. Sport courts shall not exceed 25 feet in
height. Sportslighting shall not operate after 10:30 PM. Spill light shall not
exceed 1.0 footcandles at any point along a residential property line and
2.50 footcandles along any other property line.
City of Goodyear 10-11 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10, 2012
Zone 3: “Regional” Neighborhood Park or High School.
Sports field lighting shall not exceed 90 feet in height. Path and parking lot
lighting shall not exceed 25 feet. Sport courts shall not exceed 40 feet in
height. Sportslighting shall not operate after 11:00 PM. Spill light shall not
exceed 1.0 footcandles at any point along a residential property line and
2.50 footcandles along any other property line.
Zone 4: To be approved by Planning & Zoning staff.
ARTICLE 10-19 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCES, ATTACHED AND DETACHED.
A. RESIDENTIAL SPORT COURTS IN ALL ZONES. All fixtures shall be fullcutoff
and must be turned off by 10:00 PM. Fixtures located within 20 feet of a
property line must possess external house-side shielding. The mounting height of
the fixtures shall not exceed 20 feet.
B. Mercury Vapor light sources are not allowed.
C. Motion sensor controlled fixtures are exempt from Sections D and E.
D. ZONE 1. All fixtures shall be shielded and/or located so that the light source is
not directly visible from beyond any of the property lines. The mounting height
of any fixture shall not exceed 15-feet from finished grade to the center of the
fixture. Architectural and landscape uplighting shall be turned off by 10:00 PM.
Vertical illuminance at any of the property lines shall not exceed 0.30 footcandles
between the hours of 10:00 PM and 6:00 AM.
E. ZONES 2 & 3. All fixtures of > 1,200 lumens shall be shielded and/or located so
that the light source is not directly visible from any of the property lines. The
mounting height of any fixture shall not exceed 20-feet from finished grade to the
center of the fixture. Vertical illuminance at any of the property lines shall not
exceed 0.80 footcandles between the hours of 10:00 PM and 6:00 AM. All nonconforming
fixtures shall be turned off between the hours of 10:00 PM and 6:00
AM.
ARTICLE 10-20 UTILITY EXCEPTIONS.
Electric utility leased lighting shall not exceed a mounting height of 20.5 feet in Zone 1 and 27.5
feet in Zone 2. The light sources utilized in Zone 1 shall not exceed a color temperature of 3,500
degrees Kelvin. Planning & Zoning staff, at its discretion, may approve the use of the equivalent
of a “Half-Night Photocell” instead of a 10:00 PM timed shutdown.
City of Goodyear 10-12 Zoning Ordinance
Development Services May 24, 1999
Revised: December 10, 2012
ARTICLE 10-21 OTHER EXCEPTIONS.
Exceptions to any portion of Article 10 may be granted by the Community Development
Director, and subject to appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council.
ARTICLE 10-22 EQUIPMENT SUBSTITUTIONS OR ALTERATIONS.
The outdoor lighting equipment installed at a project site (fixtures, lamps, poles, finishes,
controls, etc.) and the locations thereof shall not be substituted or altered in any way from the
approved plans (except for the use of alternate manufacturers already listed in the Fixture
Schedule of the approved plans) without first submitting the change to Planning & Zoning staff
and receiving written approval. Failure to comply with this Article can result in penalty action
from the City, including a decline to issue the final Certificate of Occupancy or final Certificate
of Completion until the project is brought into conformance with the approved plans, to the
satisfaction of Planning & Zoning staff.
ARTICLE 10-23 VERIFICATION.
All outdoor lighting installations are subject to inspection/verification of the lighting equipment
and illumination levels (adjusted for Light Loss Factors) by Planning & Zoning staff or their
designee, prior to the issuance of the final Certificate of Occupancy or final Certificate of
Completion. Installations that are determined by Planning and Zoning staff to not be in
compliance with the approved plans shall be corrected and brought into compliance with the
approved plans prior to the issuance of the final Certificate of Occupancy or final Certificate of
Completion.
ARTICLE 10-24 OTHER TYPES OF LIGHTING.
All other types of outdoor lighting not specifically addressed in Article 10 shall be handled by
Planning & Zoning staff as a Zone 4 Special Light Area.
Effective Date COAC No. Ord. No. Description of Amendment
5/24/1999 99-440 99-655 Adoption of "City of Goodyear Zoning Ordinance of May, 1999"
8/28/2000 00-844 00-701 Citizen Review Process - New Section 1-3-5
2/26/2001 01-941 01-735 Approval of the City of Goodyear Design Guidelines Manual
2/26/2001 01-941 01-739 Establishment of Design Guidelines Review and Approval Process
Article 1-4
8/27/2001 01-1174 01-767 Exceptions to Yard Requirements; Building Coverage, Casitas and
Portals; Driveway standards.
7/22/2002 02-1349 02-789 Freeway Development Overlay District - New Article 9
7/29/2002 01-1261 02-781 Sign Regulations - Amendment of Article 7
11/12/2002 02-1531 02-826 Tennis Court Fences - When Use Permit is Required
3/24/2003 03-1661 03-839 Veterinary Hospital, Veterinary Office
8/11/2003 03-1671 03-850 City Center Gateway Overlay District
8/11/2003 03-1671 03-851 City Center Gateway Streetscape Plan Manual and Design Review
Process
8/11/2003 03-1671 Res. 03-882 City Center Gateway Streetscape Plan Manual
4/28/2003 03-1677 03-841 Parking standards for Restaurant, Bar
10/14/2003 03-1873 03-871 Assisted Living Home
1/24/2004 03-1951 04-879 Bar/Cocktail Lounge, Bar/Microbrewery, Teen Entertainment Center
6/14/2004 04-2141 04-905 Large Retail User ("Big Box")
6/14/2004 04-2142 04-906 Change R1-5.5 to R1-6; Lot widths in R1-6 and 1-7; Lot area in R1-
6; Lot depth in R1-6 and R1-10
8/24/2004 04-2201 04-909 Trash containers in Commercial districts - distance from residential
uses
10/25/2004 04-2266 04-918 Portable storage containers - Zoning Permit required
4/25/2005 05-2370 Res. 05-975 Extending the boundaries of the City Center Gateway Streetscape
Plan
4/25/2005 05-2444 05-939 Veterinary Hospital and Animal Boarding permitted in I-1 District
5/23/2005 05-2529 05-943 City Center Gateway Overlay District Clarification
10/24/2005 05-2654 05-967 Increase the allowable building height in the C-2 Zoning District from
30 feet to 56 feet
SUMMARY OF ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
Since Adoption on May 24, 1999
April 27, 2017
Effective Date COAC No. Ord. No. Description of Amendment
12/12/2005 05-2644 05-963 Outdoor Lighting Standards
3/20/2006 06-2812 06-979
Parking Standards for large warehouse or distribution facility over
200,000 sq.ft.
3/20/2006 06-2813 06-984 HOA responsible for landscaping maintenance in ROW of collector
streets (except for entry median)
5/8/2006 06-2841 06-1005
Non-Chartered Financial Institutions
6/12/2006 06-2905 06-1008
Freeway Pylon Signs
8/28/2006 06-2840 06-1004
Massage Establishment, Body Piercing Studio, Tattoo Studio
12/4/2006 06-3160 06-1053
Comprehensive Sign PackageAdministrative Review/Approval
Procedure
6/25/2007 07-3434 07-1076
Public, Parochial and Charter Schools as Special Uses in any
District
9/24/2007 07-3533 07-1087
Standards & review procedures for commercial wireless
communications facilities
3/24/2008 08-3748 08-1108
Paving Requirements for PM-10
4/14/2008 08-3766 08-1109
Temporary Signs for Multi-family Residences
1/12/2009 09-4056 09-1155
Donation Drop-Off Boxes
3/23/2009 09-1172 09-4118
Article 7 Sign Ordinance
4/13/2009 09-4141 09-1174
Article 6 Off-Street Parking and Loading
1/11/2010 09-4337 10-1205
Sign Ordinance - Articles 7-6-B Placement of Signs & Article
7-5 Definitions
5/24/2010 10-4421 10-1217 Energy Generating Facilities
11/15/2010 10-4531 10-1225 Temporary Signs Allowed by Permit/Subdivision Signs
11/15/2010 10-4531 10-1226 Digital Marquee Signs
1/4/2011 10-4543 10-1228 Temporary Uses
1/24/2011 11-4568 11-1231 Medical Marijuana
1/24/2011 10-4544 11-1233 Landscape Maintenance (Property Owner Maintenance)
7/11/2011 11-4626 11-1242
Adoption of Updated City of Goodyear Design Guidelines
Manual
7/27/2011 11-4655 11-1241 Vehicle Signs
12/10/2012 12-4923 12-1271 Amendments Clarifying Zoning Procedures and Processes
12/18/2013 13-5099 13-1289 Revisions to Brewery, Microbrewery and Brewpub
Effective Date COAC No. Ord. No. Description of Amendment
5/9/2014 14-5121A 14-1292 Adoption of Updated City of Goodyear Design Guidelines
Manual
9/22/2014 14-5357 14-1311 Modify Sec. 3-4-3 Industrial District standards to increase the
I-1 Light Industrial District Height to 50'
8/29/2016 16-5891 16-1336
Modify Sec. 3-4-3 Industrial District standards for roll-up
doors facing the street
4/27/2017 17-6020 17-1342 Article 2 Add (Definition) and Artile 4-1-2 (Special Uses) to
add Inert Material Landfill.
4/27/2017 17-6021 17-1343 Establish an expiration date for inactive land use and
development applications.
4/27/2017 17-6022 17-1344
Deleting Article 9.2 of the Zoning Ordinance eliminating the
City Center Gateway Overlay District and amending Article 1-
5-1 to replace reference in Article 1-5-1 from Article 9 to
Article 1-5-2B.