CODE OF THE CITY OF GLENDALE, ARIZONA 1985 
  
A Codification of the General Ordinances
of the City of Glendale, Arizona 
  
Originally published by:
Municipal Code Corporation
Codified 1985 
  
Revised and Republished 1998 by:
Matthew Bender & Co., Inc.
701 East Water Street
Charlottesville, VA 22902
866-501-5155 
  
Currently Supplemented by: 

> 
OFFICIALS AT CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Jerry P. Weiers 
Mayor 
____________ 
Yvonne J. Knaack 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Norma S. Alvarez 
Samuel U. Chavira 
Ian Hugh 
Manuel D. Martinez 
Gary D. Sherwood 
Councilmembers 
____________ 
Brenda Fischer 
City Manager 
____________ 
Michael Bailey 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Pamela Hanna 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Elizabeth Finn 
Presiding City Judge 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Jerry P. Weiers 
Mayor 
____________ 
Joyce V. Clark 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Jamie Aldama 
Ian Hugh 
Ray Malnar 
Lauren Tolmachoff 
Bart Turner 
Councilmembers 
____________ 
Kevin Phelps 
City Manager 
____________ 
Michael Bailey 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Julie K. Bower, MMC 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Elizabeth Finn 
Presiding City Judge 
SUPPLEMENT PREFACE 
    As of July 2004, the Code of the City of Glendale is being supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capitol Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Glendale, Arizona of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the City's 1963 Code, and ordinances adopted by the Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1963 Code, as supplemented, and any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the twenty-fifth section of Chapter 33 is 33-25. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 33-25 and 33-26 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 33-25.1, 33-25.2 and 33-25.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 33 and 34, it will be designated as Chapter 33.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into this Code, may be cited as a part hereof. 
      
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and Roger D. Merriam, of the editorial staff of Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
      
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 1379 NEW SERIES 
An Ordinance of the Council of the City of Glendale, Maricopa County, Arizona, Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Glendale, Arizona; Establishing the Same and Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Herein; Providing for the Manner of Amending and Supplementing Such Code; and Providing When Such Code Shall Become Effective; and Declaring an Emergency. 
Be it Ordained by the Council of the City of Glendale as follows: 
    Section 1.  That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1-33, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "The Code of the City of Glendale," which Code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the city adopted on or before March 31, 1985, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
    Section 2.  All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the city adopted on final passage on or before March 31, 1985, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference herein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of such Code. 
    Section 3.  The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4.  Whenever in such Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of such Code or any ordinance shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor and punished as a Class 1 misdemeanor under state law. Each day any violation of any provision of such Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of such Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the city, abated as provided by law and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
    Section 5.  Any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of such Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code, so that reference to such Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
    Section 6.  In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty, as provided in Section 4 of this ordinance, and in Section 1-7 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case the amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless the penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
    Section 7.  Any ordinance adopted after March 31, 1985, which amends or refers to ordinances which have been codified in such Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of such Code. 
    Section 8.  Whereas the immediate operation of the provisions of this ordinance is necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, and safety of the City of Glendale, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, and this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, adoption, and approval by the mayor and council of the City of Glendale, and it is hereby exempt from the referendum provisions of the constitution and the laws of the State of Arizona. 
    Passed, adopted and approved by the mayor and council of the City of Glendale, Maricopa County, Arizona, this 30th day of July, 1985. 
      George R. Renner       
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
Lavergne Behm 
City Clerk 
(SEAL) 
Approved as to form: 
Peter Van Haren 
City Attorney 
Reviewed by: 
Martin Vanacour 
City Manager 
STATE OF ARIZONA       ) County of Maricopa       ) ss City of Glendale       )  
    I, the undersigned, Lavergne Behm, being the duly appointed, qualified and acting city clerk of Glendale, Maricopa County, Arizona, certify that the foregoing Ordinance No. 1379 New Series is a true, correct, and accurate copy of Ordinance No. 1379 New Series, passed and adopted at a regular meeting of the council of the City of Glendale, held on the 30th day of July, 1985, at which a quorum was present and voted in favor of said ordinance. 
    Given under my hand and seal this 31st day of July, 1985. 
/s/ Lavergne Behm 
      City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this City of Glendale, Arizona Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord./Res. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 2750 11- 9-2010 Include 79 2753 11-23-2010 Include 79 4441(Res.) 11-23-2010 Include 79 2763  2-22-2011 Include 79 2764  2-22-2011 Include 79 2769  4-12-2011 Include 79 4472(Res.)  4-12-2011 Include 79 2772  6-14-2011 Include 79 2773  6-14-2011 Include 79 4491(Res.)  6-14-2011 Include 79 2774  6-28-2011 Include 80 2784  9-13-2011 Include 80 2785 10-11-2011 Include 80 2786 11-22-2011 Include 80 2792 12-13-2011 Include 80 2801  4-24-2012 Include 80 2802  5-22-2012 Include 80 2805  6-26-2012 Include 80 2806  6-12-2012 Include 80 2807  6-12-2012 Include 80 2809  6-26-2012 Include 80 2819 10- 9-2012 Include 81 2821 10-23-2012 Include 81 2829 12-11-2012 Include 82 2837  1-22-2013 Include 82 2838  2-26-2013 Include 82 2843  5-14-2013 Include 82 Notice of Errata  6-17-2013 Include 82 2849  6-25-2013 Include 82 2850  6-25-2013 Include 82 2858  8-13-2013 Include 82 2861  9-24-2013 Include 82 2863 11-13-2013 Include 82 4742(Res.) 11-13-2013 Include 82 2870  1-14-2014 Include 82 2871  1-14-2014 Include 82 2874  1-28-2014 Include 82 2880  2-25-2014 Include 82 2881  2-25-2014 Include 82 2886  4- 8-2014 Include 83 2891  5-13-2014 Include 83 4798(Res.)  5-13-2014 Include 83 2892  5-27-2014 Include 83 2899  6-24-2014 Include 83 2901  8-12-2014 Include 83 2902  8-12-2014 Include 83 4839(Res.)  8-12-2014 Include 83 2907 10-14-2014 Include 83 2925 12-18-2014 Include 83 4911 (Res.) 12-18-2014 Include 83 4956(Res.)  5-26-2015 Include 84 2944  6-23-2015 Include 84 2945  6-23-2015 Include 84 4997(Res.)  6-23-2015 Include 84 4998(Res.)  6-23-2015 Include 84 5034(Res.) 11-10-2015 Omit 84 2972  1-12-2016 Include 84 2976  2-23-2016 Include 85 5072(Res.)  2-23-2016 Omit 85 2984  4-12-2016 Include 85 2990  5-24-2016 Include 85 2991  5-24-2016 Include 85 5123(Res.)  6-14-2016 Omit 85 2993  6-14-2016 Include 85 2994  6-28-2016 Include 85 3001  8- 9-2016 Include 85 3003  9-27-2016 Include 86 3004  9-27-2016 Include 86 3033 12-20-2016 Include 86 O17-06  1-24-2017 Include 86 O17-18  5- 9-2017 Include 87 O17-21  5-23-2017 Include 87 O17-24  6-13-2017 Include 87 O17-25  6-13-2017 Include 87 O17-49  9-26-2017 Include 88 O17-51 10-24-2017 Include 88 O17-65 12-12-2017 Include 88 R17-101 10-24-2017 Included 89 018-16  3-27-2018 Included 89 018-31  5- 8-2018 Included 89 018-55  8-14-2018 Included 89 018-60  8-14-2018 Included 89 O18-76 10-23-2018 Included 90 O18-77 10-23-2018 Included 90 O18-85 12-11-2018 Included 90 O18-86 12-11-2018 Included 90 O19-01  1-8-2019 Included 90 O19-19  2-12-2019 Included 91 O19-20  2-12-2019 Included 91 O19-21  2-12-2019 Included 91 O19-35  3-26-2019 Included 91  
PART I - THE CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption of charters, A.R.S. § 9-281. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, POWERS AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the City of Glendale, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by law, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity, under the name of the "City of Glendale". 
Sec. 2. - Form of government. 
    The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as the COUNCIL-MANAGER GOVERNMENT. Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution and by this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as "the council", which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and appoint the city manager and such other officers deemed necessary and proper for the orderly government and administration of the affairs of the city, as prescribed by the constitution and applicable laws, and ordinances hereafter adopted by the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
Sec. 3. - Powers of city. 
    The city shall have all the powers granted to municipal corporations and to cities by the constitution and laws of this state and by this charter, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. The city may acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any city purpose, in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation, and may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interests may require. Except as prohibited by the constitution of this state or restricted by this charter, the city shall and may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever, and especially to enter into contracts, cooperative and otherwise, with the government of the United States, the State of Arizona, Maricopa County, or any other municipal corporation of this state for the construction, maintenance and operation of roads, highways, parks, sewers, waterworks, public utilities, and buildings (when used for public purposes), all when deemed for the best interest of the city. The enumeration of particular powers by this charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the city shall have and may exercise all powers which under the constitution of this state, it would be competent for this charter specifically to enumerate. 
    The city may require all persons, firms or corporations responsible for new physical development within the city to provide for or furnish, or pay a fee in lieu of providing for or furnishing: 
(1)  Public utility easements. 
(2)  Water production, storage and transmission. 
(3)  Sewage collection, treatment and disposal. 
(4)  Park land and development. 
(5)  School sites. 
(6)  Dedication and improvement of public rights-of-way. 
(7)  Bike paths and other necessary transportation. 
(8)  Drainage. 
(9)  Flood control. 
(10)  Other public facilities necessary to maintain satisfactory levels of service for said new development as provided by ordinance, which shall include definite standards basing the foregoing requirements on the needs of the inhabitants of said new development. 
(3-16-76) 
Sec. 4. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the city shall be the boundaries as established at the time this charter takes effect, or as such boundaries may be changed thereafter in the manner authorized by law. 
ARTICLE II. - THE COUNCIL 

Sec. 1. - Powers of the council. 
    All powers of the city, not in conflict with the constitution and subject to the limitations of this charter, shall be vested in the council, who shall enact appropriate legislation and do and perform any and all acts and things which may be necessary and proper to carry out these powers or any of the provisions of this charter. 
Sec. 2. - Number; selection. 
    The council shall consist of a mayor and six (6) other members to be elected by the qualified electors of the City of Glendale as follows: 
(a)  The mayor shall be elected from the city at large, pursuant to the election procedure (primary and general elections) specified in ordinances which are adopted according to law or as provided for under the City of Glendale Charter. 
(b)  The six (6) other council members shall be elected from six (6) geographic districts within the City of Glendale. Each district shall contain a substantially equal number of electors. Electors in each district shall vote only for the council candidates nominated from the district in which the electors reside. 
(c)  Each candidate for one of the six (6) council seats shall at the time of nomination and during his tenure maintain his permanent residence within the district from which he is nominated. 
(d)  No candidate for the six (6) council seats may run for more than one district in any regular election. 
(2-9-88) 
Sec. 3. - Term of mayor. 
    The term of the office of Mayor shall commence at 7:00 p.m. on the first regularly scheduled meeting in December following the election for such office, and it shall be for four (4) years or until a successor is elected and qualified. 
(5-25-70; 5-18-04; Res. No. 3824(Prop. 101), 1-25-05) 
Sec. 4. - Terms of council members. 
    The term of the office of council members shall commence at 7:00 p.m. on the first regularly scheduled meeting in December following the election for such office, and it shall be for four (4) years or until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(5-25-70; 5-18-04; Res. No. 3824(Prop. 101), 1-25-05) 
Sec. 5. - Qualifications. 
    The mayor shall be at least twenty-five (25) years of age on the date of his election or appointment; the mayor and council members shall be qualified electors of the city at the time of election; shall hold no other public office for which they receive compensation except that of a notary public or member of the national guard or naval or military reserve; and shall have resided in said city for one (1) year next preceding the date of such election or appointment. If the mayor or any councilman shall cease to possess any of these qualifications or shall be convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, his office shall immediately become vacant. 
(3-16-76) 
Sec. 6. - Duties of mayor. 
    The mayor shall be the chairman of the council and preside over its deliberations. He may make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote in all its proceedings. He shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no regular administrative duties. 
Sec. 7. - Vice mayor. 
    The council shall designate one (1) of its members as vice mayor, who shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the council. The vice mayor shall perform the duties of the mayor during the mayor's absence or disability. 
(3-15-88) 
Sec. 8. - Salaries of mayor and council members. 
    The annual salary of the mayor and council members shall be payable in installments consistent with the city employee payroll system but not to exceed the annual salary as set in the following manner. A salary commission may be appointed by the city council. The commission shall be composed of five members, none of which are city employees or city elected officials. The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. The commission shall conduct a review of the rates of pay for elected city officials. Such review by the commission shall be made for the purpose of determining and providing the pay levels appropriate to the duties and responsibilities of the offices. The commission may hold public hearings to aid it in its work. The commission shall submit to the city council a report of the results of the review conducted by the commission of the offices subject to this section together with its recommendations. The council may accept, reject or modify the recommendations of the commission. Any proposed increase in council salaries must be approved by the voters at the next election. The salaries shall become effective immediately after the voters approve the recommendations. The salaries in effect at the time of this charter amendment remain in effect until amended in the fashion herein prescribed. 
    [The annual salary of the mayor and council members shall be as follows:] 
Mayor ..... $48,000.00 
Council member ..... $34,000.00 
(3-15-88; Res. No. 3107, § 1, 2-25-97; Res. No. 3948, §§ 1, 2, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 9. - Council to be judge of qualifications of its members. 
    The council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members and for such purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses and require the production of records, but the decision of the council in any such case shall be subject to review by the courts. 
Sec. 10. - Induction of mayor and council members into office. 
    At 7:00 p.m. on the day set for the first regularly scheduled meeting in December following the general election, the council shall hold a meeting for the purpose of inducting the newly elected mayor and council members, and to organize the council. 
(5-25-70; 5-18-04; Res. No. 3824(Prop. 101), 1-25-05) 
Sec. 11. - Absence to terminate membership. 
    If any councilman shall be absent from more than two (2) consecutive regular meetings without the consent of the council, he shall thereupon cease to hold office. 
    If the mayor shall be absent for more than two consecutive regular meetings without the consent of the council, he shall thereupon cease to hold office. 
Sec. 12. - Vacancies in council and office of mayor. 
    The council, by a majority vote of its remaining members, shall fill the vacancies in its own membership and in the office of mayor for the unexpired terms. 
Sec. 13. - Council meetings; open to public. 
    The council shall meet regularly at such times and at such place as may be prescribed by its rules, but not less frequently than two (2) times each month. All meetings of the council shall be open to the public and shall be in compliance with the provisions of the laws of the state pertaining to public meetings and proceedings. 
(3-16-76) 
Sec. 14. - Special meetings. 
    (Covered under section 13 by reference to Arizona Revised Statutes, § 38-501 as amended.) 
(3-16-76) 
Sec. 15. - Rules of procedure; journal. 
    The council shall determine its own rules and order of business subject to the provisions of this charter. It shall keep a journal of its proceedings and the journal shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 16. - Quorum; ayes and nays. 
    A majority of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day or from time to time. The vote on any question shall be ayes and nays and shall be entered in the journal. 
Sec. 17. - Failure to vote. 
    No member of the council shall be excused from voting, except upon matters involving the consideration of his own official conduct or if a conflict of interest exists as defined by the laws of this state pertaining to conflict of interest of officials and employees. In all other cases a failure to vote shall be entered on the minutes as an affirmative vote. 
(3-16-76) 
Sec. 18. - Consideration of citizen requests. 
    Any citizen of the city may appear before the council at any regular meeting and present a request. The council shall take action or direct that action be taken on such request within thirty (30) days. 
(3-15-88) 
Sec. 19. - Interference in administrative service. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, neither the council nor any of its members shall interfere with the execution by the city manager of his powers and duties, or order, directly or indirectly, the appointment by the city manager of any person to an office or employment or his removal therefrom. Except for purposes of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service under the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the city manager, either publicly or privately. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed, however, as prohibiting the council while in open session from fully and freely discussing with or suggesting to the city manager anything pertaining to city affairs or the interests of the city. 
Sec. 20. - Conduct of council as to powers authorized by charter when no procedure established by state law. 
    Whenever, by any provisions of this charter, it is prescribed that any power, duty or procedure shall or may be exercised, performed or adopted in the manner established by any law of this state, and there be no procedure established by law therefor, then the council shall by ordinance prescribe the procedure. 
ARTICLE III. - THE CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 1. - Appointment of city manager. 
    The council shall appoint an officer of the city who shall have the title of city manager and shall have the powers and perform the duties provided in this charter. No councilman shall receive such appointment during the term for which he shall have been elected, nor within one (1) year after the expiration of his term. 
Sec. 2. - The city manager; qualifications. 
    The city manager shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office as hereinafter set forth. At the time of his appointment, he need not be a resident of the city or state, but during his tenure of office he shall reside within the city. 
Sec. 3. - City manager; powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall be chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the city government. He shall be responsible for the proper administration of all affairs of the city and to that end, subject to the provisions of this charter, he shall have the power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties, attend all meetings of the council unless excused therefrom by the council or the mayor; 
(2)  See that all ordinances are enforced and that the provisions of all franchises, leases, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city are observed; 
(3)  Appoint, and when deemed necessary for the good of the service, lay-off, suspend, transfer, demote or remove all department heads, officers and employees of the city, subject to such merit system regulations as the council may adopt; 
(4)  Prepare the annual budget estimates and submit them to the council and be responsible for the administration of the budget after adoption; 
(5)  Keep the council advised at all times of the affairs and needs of the city, and make reports annually, or more frequently if requested by the council, of all the affairs of the city; 
(6)  Repealed (3-16-76); 
(7)  Have such other powers, duties and functions as this charter may prescribe, and such powers, duties and functions consistent with this charter as the council may prescribe. 
Sec. 4. - Right of city manager to seat in council. 
    The city manager shall be entitled to a seat in the council, but shall have no vote therein. The city manager shall have the right to take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the council. 
Sec. 5. - Assistant city manager. 
    The assistant city manager shall be appointed in accordance with the personnel provisions and shall act on behalf of the city manager in his or her absence. In the event the city manager resigns or is removed for any reason, the council shall appoint an acting city manager at the first regular meeting following such vacancy. 
(3-24-76; 3-15-88) 
Sec. 6. - Removal of city manager. 
    The council shall appoint the city manager for an indefinite term and may remove him by a majority vote of its members. At least thirty (30) days before such removal shall become effective, the council shall by a majority vote of its members adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for his removal. Within ten days, the city manager may reply in writing and may request a public hearing, which shall be held not earlier than twenty (20) days nor later than thirty (30) days after the filing of such request. After such public hearing, if one be requested, and after full consideration, the council by majority vote of its members may adopt a final resolution of removal. By the preliminary resolution the council may suspend the manager from duty. If the removal is for malfeasance, or misfeasance in the performance of his duties or he shall be convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, the council shall cause to be paid him any salary due him to the date of the preliminary resolution. Otherwise, the manager shall be paid forthwith upon his removal his salary for the next two calendar months following the adoption of the preliminary resolution of removal. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 1. - Administrative departments and offices. 
    The council, by ordinance not inconsistent with this charter, shall provide for the organization, conduct and operation of the several offices and departments of the city as established by this charter, for the creation of additional departments, divisions, offices and agencies and for their consolidation, alteration or abolition. 
    The council, by ordinance not inconsistent with this charter, may assign additional functions or duties to offices, departments or agencies. Where the positions are not incompatible, the council may combine in one person the powers and duties of two or more offices created or authorized by this charter. 
    The council shall provide for the number, titles, qualifications, powers, duties and compensation of all officers and employees of the city. 
Sec. 2. - City clerk. 
    The council shall appoint an officer of the city, who shall have the title of city clerk, and who shall give notice of all council meetings, keep the journal of the council's proceedings, authenticate by his signature and record in full in books kept for the purposes all ordinances and resolutions, and shall perform such other duties as shall be required by this charter or by ordinance. He will serve at the pleasure of the council. 
Sec. 3. - City treasurer. 
    The council shall appoint an officer of the city, who shall have the title of city treasurer, and who shall receive and have custody of all the money of the city and shall keep and save said money and dispense the same only as provided by the laws of this state, or as provided by ordinance and who shall always be bound by the constitution, laws and ordinances and upon whom legal garnishments and demands may be served. He will serve at the pleasure of the council. 
Sec. 4. - City attorney. 
    The council shall appoint the city attorney who shall be the chief legal adviser of all officers, departments and agencies and of all officers and employees in matters relating to their official powers and duties. He shall represent the city in all legal proceedings. It shall be his duty to perform all services incident to his position as may be required by statute, by this charter or by ordinance. He will serve at the pleasure of the council. 
Sec. 5. - Merit basis of appointment. 
    Appointments and promotions in the administrative service of the city shall be made in accordance to merit and fitness to be ascertained, so far as practicable, by competitive examination. 
Sec. 6. - Merit system to be established. 
    The council shall, by ordinance, provide for the establishment of a merit system for the purpose of regulating and controlling the appointments, promotions, demotions, discharges and reinstatements of all officers and employees of the city except those elected by the people and also except the city manager, city clerk, city treasurer, city attorney and city judge. 
ARTICLE V. - APPOINTIVE BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 1. - Appointive boards and commissions. 
    The council may, by ordinance, create boards or commissions as in its judgment are required or as are now or hereafter provided by law, and may grant to them such power and duties as are not consistent with the provisions of this charter. 
Sec. 2. - Mayor and city manager ex-officio members. 
    The mayor and city manager shall be ex-officio members, without voting privileges, of all boards and commissions. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE AND TAXATION 

Sec. 1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall commence on the first day of July of each year. 
Sec. 2. - Council to provide for tax system; use of county services. 
    The council shall by ordinance provide a system for the assessment, levy and collection of all city taxes, not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter. 
    The council shall have power to avail itself by ordinance of any law of this state, now or hereafter in force and comply with the requirements thereof whereby assessments may be made by the assessor of the county in which the city is situated, and taxes collected by the tax collector of said county for and in behalf of the city. Other provisions of this charter concerning the assessments, levy and collection of taxes shall be subject to the provisions of any such ordinance while the same shall be in force. 
Sec. 3. - Submissions of estimates to council; scope of city manager's estimate. 
    On or before the first regular council meeting in June of each year, or on such date in each year as shall be fixed by the council, the city manager shall prepare and submit in writing to the council the estimates of each department and his own personal report and recommendation and estimate as to the probable expenditures of the city for the next ensuing fiscal year, stating the amount in detail required to meet all expenditures necessary for city purposes, including interest and sinking funds, and outstanding indebtedness, if there be any; also an estimate of the amount of income expected from all sources in each department, and the probable amount required to be raised by taxation to cover such expenditures, interest and sinking fund. 
Sec. 4. - Preparation and tentative adoption of a budget; publication of budget and notice of meeting to fix tax levies. 
    The council shall meet annually prior to fixing the tax levy, and make a budget of the estimated amounts required to pay the expenses of conducting the business of the city for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be prepared in such detail as to show the aggregate sum and the items thereof allowed for each and every purpose, and such budget, together with a notice that the council will meet for the purpose of making tax levies, in accordance with said budget, at the time and place set out in said notice, shall be published in the official newspaper of the city once a week for at least two (2) consecutive weeks following the tentative adoption of such budget. 
Sec. 5. - Public hearing and adoption of budget. 
    The council shall hold a public hearing at the regularly scheduled meeting at which it levies taxes as designated in the following section at which time and place any taxpayer who may appear shall be heard in favor of or against any proposed expenditure or tax levy. When such hearing shall have been concluded, the council shall finally determine and adopt estimates or proposed expenditures for the various purposes as set forth in the published proposal and such adopted estimates will constitute the budget for the current fiscal year. The total amounts in the budget proposed for expenditure shall not exceed the total amounts proposed for expenditure in the published estimate. 
(5-25-70; 5-18-04) 
Sec. 6. - Adoption of ordinance fixing tax rate. 
    On the day set for making tax levies, but not later than the third Monday in August, the council shall meet and adopt an ordinance levying upon the assessed valuation of the property within the city, subject to the provisions of this charter, a rate of taxation upon each one hundred dollars of valuation, sufficient to raise the amounts estimated to be required in the annual budget, less the amounts estimated to be received from fines, licenses and other sources of revenue. 
Sec. 7. - Additional taxes for special purposes. 
    The council shall have the power to levy and collect taxes in addition to the taxes herein authorized to be levied and collected, sufficient to pay the interest and maintain the sinking fund of the bonded indebtedness of the city, and to provide for the establishment and support of free public libraries, and for advertising the advantages of the city, and an additional amount deemed to be advisable and necessary to create a reserve fund to provide for replacement of equipment for the furnishing of city services and the maintenance of all municipally owned and operated utilities. 
    The council shall have the power to levy a transaction privilege tax (sales tax) subject to approval by a majority of the qualified electors voting in the election. 
Sec. 8. - Taxes to be uniform and for public purposes only; property to be assessed as provided by law. 
    All taxes shall be uniform upon the same class of property within the corporate limits, and shall be levied and collected for public purposes only. All property shall be assessed as provided by law. 
Sec. 9. - Tax exempt property. 
    All the property within the city shall be subject to taxation, to be ascertained as provided by ordinance, except that property which is exempt from taxes under the laws of the United States, the laws of this state, under this charter and ordinances of this city. 
Sec. 10. - Budget establishes appropriations; method of expenditure. 
    From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named and may be changed only by ordinance. The council shall, by ordinance, provide for the method of expending the appropriations subject to the limitations of this charter and any applicable state law. 
(3-15-88) 
Sec. 11. - Transfer of appropriations. 
    The city manager may at any time transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof between general classifications of expenditures within an office, department or agency. At the request of the city manager and within the last three months of the fiscal year, the council may by ordinance transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one office, department or agency to another. 
Sec. 12. - Appropriations lapse at end of year. 
    All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered. 
Sec. 13. - Claims or demands against the city. 
    The council shall prescribe by ordinance the manner in which claims or demands against the city shall be presented, audited and paid. 
Sec. 14. - Cash basis fund set up; transfer of sums from cash basis fund to other funds. 
    The council may by ordinance create and maintain a permanent revolving fund to be known as the cash basis fund, for the purpose of putting the payment of the running expenses of the city on a cash basis. For this purpose the council may provide that from the money collected from the annual tax levy, and from the money received from other sources, a sum equal to not less than two and one-half cents ($.021/2) on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value of said property shall be placed in such fund until the accumulated amount of such fund shall be sufficient to meet all legal demands against the treasury for the first four (4) months or other necessary period of the succeeding fiscal year. 
    The council shall have the power to transfer from the cash basis fund to any other fund or funds such sum or sums as may be required for the purpose of placing such fund or funds, as nearly as possible, on a cash basis. It shall be the duty of the council to provide that all moneys so transferred from the cash basis fund shall be returned thereto before the end of the fiscal year. 
Sec. 15. - Transfer of sums from any funds to interest funds; and investments in depositories. 
    Whenever there shall not be sufficient moneys, in any of the interest funds for the bonded indebtedness of the city to pay the interest on such bonded indebtedness when due, the council shall direct the transfer from the general or any other fund having moneys therein to such interest funds the necessary amounts of money to pay the interest on said bonded indebtedness, and the amount so transferred shall be returned to the respective funds from which such transfer was made whenever sufficient moneys shall accrue in said bonded indebtedness funds, from the regular tax levied therefor. 
    The council may cause city moneys to be deposited or invested in any depository or other investment so long as such deposit or investment is not contrary to the laws of the state. 
(3-16-76) 
Sec. 16. - Independent annual audit. 
    Prior to the end of each fiscal year the council shall designate qualified public accountants who, as of the end of the fiscal year, shall make an independent audit of accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the city government and shall submit their report to the council and to the city manager. This section shall not preclude the city council from executing a contract with an accounting firm for more than one year subject to annual appropriation and a maximum three-year agreement. (3-15-88) 
    Such accountants shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or of any of its officers. They shall not maintain any accounts or records of the city business, but, within specifications approved by the council, shall post-audit the books and documents kept by the city and any separate or subordinate accounts kept by any other office, department or agency of the city government. 
ARTICLE VII. - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 

Sec. 1. - Council to act by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
    The council shall act by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
(3-15-88) 
Sec. 2. - Ayes and nays to be recorded. 
    The ayes and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions and entered upon the journal of the proceedings of the council. 
Sec. 3. - When majority vote required. 
    A majority vote of all the members of the council shall be necessary to pass any ordinance or resolution having the effect of an ordinance. 
Sec. 4. - Enacting style. 
    The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the council shall be in these words: "Be it ordained by the council of the City of Glendale as follows:" 
Sec. 5. - When actions to be taken by ordinance. 
    In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provisions of this charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the city council shall be by ordinance which: 
(a)  Adopt or amend a city code or establish, alter or abolish any city department, office or agency. 
(b)  Provide for a fine or penalty or establish a rule or regulation for violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed. 
(c)  Levy any tax or assessment. 
(d)  Sale or lease of public property. 
(e)  Provide or establish fire limits. 
(5-25-70; 3-24-76; 3-15-88) 
Sec. 6. - Reading and passage of ordinances and resolutions; effective date. 
    All proposed ordinances and resolutions shall be subject to the following requirements for passage at any meeting of the council: 
(a)  Copies of a proposed ordinance and proposed resolution shall be in possession of the mayor and council at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the meeting and shall be posted in compliance with the provisions of the laws of the state. 
(b)  By request of the mayor or any member of the council, a full reading of the proposed ordinance or resolution shall be ordered, otherwise such ordinance or resolution heretofore mentioned shall be read by number and title only. The measure may be passed and adopted at any time after such reading. 
(c)  Copies of titles of proposed ordinances and resolutions heretofore mentioned shall be available to the public for examination and posted at city hall seventy-two (72) hours before the hour the city council convenes to act upon the ordinance or resolution. 
Should copies be not so available, such ordinance or resolution must be read in full before the vote thereon. 
    Ordinances without the emergency clause shall take effect and become operative thirty (30) days after the date of their passage. 
(5-25-70; 3-24-76; 3-15-88) 
Sec. 7. - Emergency measures; effective date. 
    An emergency measure is one passed by the affirmative vote of five-sevenths of the members of the council for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, in which the emergency is set forth and defined. An emergency measure shall take effect immediately upon its passage. 
(5-25-70; 3-16-76) 
Sec. 8. - Motions to reconsider. 
    When an ordinance put upon final passage fails to pass, and a motion is made to reconsider, the vote on such motion shall not be taken within twenty-four (24) hours thereafter. 
Sec. 9. - Signing of ordinances and resolutions. 
    All ordinances and resolutions shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk. 
Sec. 10. - Publication of ordinances and resolutions. 
    All ordinances, except those necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health or safety of the city, and resolutions having the effect of ordinances, shall be published at least once in the official newspaper of the city before they become effective and operative. 
    Emergency ordinances necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health or safety of the city which have been passed by the necessary five-sevenths vote of the members of the council and become effective and operative immediately, shall be published in the official newspaper of the city within fifteen (15) days after their passage. 
(5-25-70) 
Sec. 11. - How ordinances to be revised, re-enacted and amended. 
    Ordinances shall not be revised, re-enacted or amended by reference to title only, but the ordinance to be revised or re-enacted, or the section or sections thereof to be amended, or the new section or sections to be added thereto, shall be set forth and adopted in the method provided in this charter for the adoption of ordinances. 
Sec. 12. - How ordinances to be repealed or suspended. 
    No ordinance or section thereof shall be repealed or suspended except by ordinance adopted in the manner provided in this charter. 
Sec. 13. - Ordinances and resolutions to be filed, recorded and certified; ordinances and resolutions as evidence. 
    All ordinances and resolutions shall be filed and safely kept by the city clerk and duly recorded and certified by him in files or in books for that purpose; and record copies thereof certified by the city clerk, or the originals thereof shall be prima facie evidence of the contents of such ordinances or resolutions and of the due passage and publication of the same, and shall be admissible in evidence in any court of this state, or in any proceeding where the contents of such ordinance or resolution, or any of them, is in question; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the proof of the passage and publication of any ordinance or resolution in the manner otherwise prescribed by law. 
(3-16-76) 
Sec. 14. - Procedure for adoption by reference. 
    The council may enact the provisions of a code or public record theretofore in existence without setting forth such provisions, but the adopting ordinance shall be published in full. At least three (3) copies of the code or public record shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and kept available for public use and inspection. A code or public record enacted by reference may be amended in the same manner. 
    A penalty clause may be enacted by reference thereto, without setting forth in full such penalty clause. 
(3-16-76) 
Sec. 15. - Recording of certain ordinances. 
    All ordinances extending or changing the boundaries of the city, zoning territory or establishing or vacating of streets, alleys or subdivisions, after publication, shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Maricopa County and, after being so recorded, the same shall constitute public notice to all parties of the legal import thereof. 
Sec. 16. - Codification of ordinances. 
    Any and all ordinances of the city which have been enacted and published in the manner required at the time of their adoption, and which have not been repealed, may be compiled, consolidated, revised, indexed and arranged as a comprehensive ordinance code, and such code may be adopted by reference, with the same effect as an ordinance, by the passage of any ordinance for such purpose. Such code need not be published in the manner required for other ordinances, but not less than three (3) copies thereof shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the city clerk prior to the adoption thereof. Ordinances codified shall be repealed as of the effective date of the code. Amendments to the code shall be enacted in the same manner as ordinances. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CONTRACTS 

Sec. 1. - Preparation. 
    All contracts shall be drawn under the supervision of the city attorney, must be in writing, executed in the name of the City of Glendale by the mayor or the city manager, except as it may be otherwise provided either by this charter or by law, and must be countersigned by the city clerk, who shall number and register the same in files or in books kept for that purpose. 
(3-16-76) 
Sec. 2. - Competitive bidding. 
    The city council shall establish by ordinance formal guidelines regulating the purchase of goods and services by the city. Such ordinance shall specify the conditions pursuant to which formal competitive bidding shall be required, conditions pursuant to which informal competitive bidding shall be required and those conditions under which no bidding for city contracts shall be required. 
(3-15-88) 
Sec. 3. - Purchases. 
    The council, by ordinance, not inconsistent with this charter, shall provide for the organization, conduct and operation of a purchasing department. 
(5-25-70; 3-16-76) 
Sec. 4. - Bids. 
    The advertisement for bids shall distinctly and specifically state the character of the city improvement contemplated and/or the kind of supplies, materials, equipment and services required. Such notice shall be published at least once in the official newspaper, not less than five (5) days prior to the opening of bids. Bidding will be by sealed proposals only and under such regulations as may be prescribed by the council or in compliance with the laws of this state. 
(3-16-76) 
Sec. 5. - Transfer and sale of property. 
    The city manager may transfer to or between offices, departments and agencies, or sell surplus or obsolete supplies, materials and equipment, subject to such regulations as the council may prescribe. 
Sec. 6. - Contracts for official advertising. 
    The city manager shall let annually contracts for official advertising for the ensuing fiscal year. For this purpose he or she shall submit to each legal newspaper published in the city, a notice describing the contemplated advertising and asking for sealed proposals. The proposals shall specify the type and spacing to be used at the rate or rates named in the bid. The city manager shall let the contracts for such official advertising to the lowest and best bidder publishing a newspaper of general circulation in the city; provided that in his or her discretion he or she may reject any and all bids and proceed to secure new bids in the manner provided herein. This section shall not preclude the city council from executing a contract for more than one year subject to annual appropriation. (3-15-88) 
    The newspaper to which the award for such advertising is made shall be known and designated as the official newspaper. 
Sec. 7. - Fraud and collusion. 
    Any member of the council or any officer or employee of the city who shall aid or assist a bidder in securing a contract to furnish labor, materials, equipment, supplies or services at a higher price than proposed by any other bidder, or who shall favor one bidder over another by giving or withholding information or who shall willfully mislead any bidder in regard to the character of the labor, material, equipment, supplies or services called for or the conditions under which the proposed work is to be done, or who shall knowingly accept materials, supplies or equipment of a quality inferior to those called for by any contract, or who shall knowingly certify to a greater amount of labor or service performed than has been actually performed, or to receipt of a greater amount or different kind of material, supplies or equipment than has been actually received, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be removed from office. 
Sec. 8. - Avoidance of contracts made through fraud and collusion. 
    If at any time it shall be found that the person to whom a contract has been awarded has, in presenting any bid or bids, colluded with any other party or parties for the purpose of preventing any other bid being made, then the contract so awarded shall be null and void, and the city manager shall advertise for new bids for said city improvements and/or supplies, materials, equipment and services required, or the council may provide for such public work to be done by the city under the direction of the city manager. 
Sec. 9. - Personal interest. 
    No member of the council or any officer or employee of the city shall have a financial interest as defined by the laws of this state pertaining to conflict of interest of officers and employees, direct or indirect or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract or in the sale to the city or to a contractor supplying the city of any land or rights or interests in any land, material, supplies, equipment or services. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any officer or employee of the city found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his office or position. Any violation of this section with the knowledge express or implied of the person or corporation contracting with the city shall render the contract voidable by the city manager or the council. 
(3-16-76) 
ARTICLE IX. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 1. - Permitted types of elections. 
    Elections to be held in the city shall be either primary, general or special. 
(a)  Primary elections shall be held for the purpose of making nominations for the general elections and electing officers as hereinafter provided, and for such other purposes as the council may prescribe. 
(b)  General elections shall be held for the purpose of electing officers of the city and such other purposes as the council may prescribe. 
(c)  All other municipal elections that may be held by authority of this charter, or of any law, shall be known as special elections. 
Sec. 2. - Application of state law. 
    The provisions of the laws of this state relating to and governing the nomination of elective officers and the conduct of elections, and each and every provision of said law, with all amendments thereto shall apply and shall govern the nomination of elective officers and the conduct of elections, except as otherwise provided in this charter. The council shall have the power to make any further and additional provisions relating to the nomination of officers and to the conduct of elections not repugnant nor contrary to the provisions of the laws of this state or the provisions of this charter. The nomination petition for mayor shall be signed by qualified electors in the City of Glendale from the city at large. The nomination petition for any member of the six council seats shall only be signed by qualified electors who reside within the district that said councilman seeks to be nominated from. 
(2-9-88) 
Sec. 3. - Qualifications of electors; registration. 
    The qualifications of electors shall be as required by the constitution and laws of this state for state and county electors. 
    Registration of voters shall be as required by the laws of this state and the register of qualified electors shall be compiled from the general county register. 
(3-16-76) 
Sec. 4. - Arrangement of names not to reveal source of candidacy or support of candidacy or support of candidates. 
    The names of the candidates for each office shall be arranged as provided by law and nothing on the ballot shall be indicative of the source of the candidacy or of the support of any candidate. 
Sec. 5. - Time of holding primary elections. 
    Primary elections shall be held in even numbered years on the eighth Tuesday before the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November. 
(5-25-70; 5-18-04; Res. No. 3824(Prop. 101), 1-25-05) 
Sec. 6. - Majority to elect in primary. 
    At the primary election any candidate who shall receive a majority of all the votes cast at such election shall be declared elected to the office for which he is a candidate, and no further election shall be held as to said candidate. 
Sec. 7. - Nomination for general election. 
    If at any primary election there be any office or offices to which no candidate therefor was elected, then, said election shall be considered to be a primary election for the nomination of candidates for such office or offices, and a second or general election shall be held to vote for candidates to fill such office or offices. The candidates, not elected at such first election, equal in number to twice the number to be elected to any given office, or less if so there be, and who received the highest number of votes for the respective offices at such first election, shall be the only candidates at such second election; provided, that if there be any person who under the provisions of this section, would have been entitled to become a candidate for any office except for the fact that some other candidate received an equal number of votes therefor, then all such persons receiving said equal number of votes shall likewise become candidates for such office. 
Sec. 8. - Time of holding general elections. 
    General elections shall be held in even numbered years on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November. 
(5-25-70; 5-18-04; Res. No. 3824(Prop. 101), 1-25-05) 
Sec. 9. - Candidates receiving most votes to be elected. 
    The candidates equal in number to the persons to be elected who shall receive the highest number of votes at said general election shall be declared elected to such office. 
Sec. 10. - Special elections. 
    The council shall provide the time, manner and means of holding any special election. All special elections shall be conducted in the same manner and under the same provisions as are provided for the holding of general elections. 
ARTICLE X. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 

Sec. 1. - Initiative; referendum; recall. 
    There is hereby reserved to the electors of the city the powers of the initiative and referendum and of the recall of elective officers. The provisions of the constitution and general laws of this state, as the same now exists or hereafter may be amended, governing the initiative and referendum and the recall of elective officers, shall apply to the use thereof in the city so far as such provisions are not in conflict with the provisions of this charter. 
ARTICLE XI. - CITY COURT 

Sec. 1. - Establishment. 
    There shall be and is hereby established in the city a municipal court, to be known and designated "The City Court of the City of Glendale, Maricopa County, State of Arizona." 
Sec. 2. - When open; transaction of certain business on non-juridical days. 
    The city court shall always be open, except on non-juridical days, and on such non-juridical days it may transact such business within its jurisdiction as is authorized by law to be transacted by courts of justice of the peace, relative to businesses within their jurisdiction. 
Sec. 3. - Jurisdiction generally. 
    Said court shall, within the territorial limits of said city, have and exercise jurisdiction as follows: 
(a)  It shall have and exercise exclusive original jurisdiction of all proceedings of a criminal nature for the violation of any ordinance of said city, and of every action of a civil nature for the enforcement of a penalty, or the recovery of a penalty or forfeiture imposed by any ordinance of the city for violation thereof, or for neglect to perform any duty by any ordinance imposed, and of every action for the collection of any license, fine or penalty due from any person to said city, and required to be paid, or which is due and collectible under the ordinance of said city. 
(b)  The city court shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the justices of the peace, in the precincts where said city is established, over all violations of the laws of the state committed within the limits of said city; said concurrent jurisdiction shall be subject to the rules of civil procedure applicable to trials before justices of the peace. 
Sec. 4. - Presiding officer; appointment; term; justice of peace as city judge. 
    The presiding officer of the city court shall be a city judge, who shall be appointed by the council and shall hold office during the pleasure of the council. 
    A justice of the peace in the city shall be eligible to the office of city judge without forfeiting his office as justice of the peace. 
Sec. 5. - Disposition of fines, penalties and fees. 
    All fines, penalties and fees collected by the city judge shall be paid to the properly designated officer of the city authorized to receive them. 
Sec. 6. - Power of city judge to issue writs and processes and to hear cases; nature of writs and processes; records to be kept; duty of police to execute, serve and make proper return of writs and processes. 
    For the proper carrying out of the jurisdiction, vested in said city judge, he shall be entitled and authorized to issue and cause to be served, any and all writs and processes, and he shall have full authority to hear and determine all matters properly coming before him and coming within his jurisdiction herein specified. The writs and processes to be used shall be similar to those used by justices of the peace in cases of a similar nature, and proper record shall be kept of the issuance of writs and processes and returns, and of any kind and all other actions taken relative thereto, and the actions of the court thereon. The police of the city are hereby authorized and directed to execute and serve any and all writs and processes issued out of said city court by said judge, and proper return shall be made by such officer to the same extent as is required of constables and sheriffs in the service and execution of similar papers. 
Sec. 7. - Ordinances to give effect. 
    The council shall pass all necessary ordinances to give effect to the provisions of this article, not otherwise herein provided. 
ARTICLE XII. - FRANCHISE AND PUBLIC UTILITIES 

Sec. 1. - Elections for approval of franchises. 
    No franchise shall be granted, extended or renewed by the city without the approval of a majority of the qualified electors residing within its corporate limits voting thereon at a primary, general or special election; the council shall submit any matter for approval or disapproval to such election at any primary or general election or call a special election for such purpose at any time upon thirty days' notice; and the council shall require, before calling any such election, that the estimated expense thereof (to be determined by the council) shall be first deposited by the applicant for such franchise with the city clerk. 
Sec. 2. - Establishment of municipally owned and operated utilities. 
    The city shall have power to own and operate any public utility, to construct and install all facilities that are reasonably needed, and to lease or purchase any existing utility properties used or useful to public service. The city may also furnish service to adjacent and near-by territories which may be conveniently and economically served by the municipally owned and operated utility, subject to the limitations of the provisions of the general laws of this state. The council may provide by ordinance for the establishment of such utility and provide for its regulation and control and the fixing of rates to be charged. The council may by ordinance provide for the extension, enlargement or improvement of existing utility, and provide reasonable reserves for such purpose. 
ARTICLE XIII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1. - Publicity of records. 
    All records and accounts of every office, department or agency of the city shall be open to inspection by any citizen, any representative of a citizens' organization or any representative of the press at all reasonable times and under reasonable regulations established by the city manager, except records and documents the disclosure of which would tend to defeat the lawful purpose which they are intended to accomplish. 
Sec. 2. - Official bonds. 
    All elected and appointed officers and such other employees as the council may by general ordinance require to do so, shall give bond in such amount and with such surety as may be approved by the council. The premiums on such bonds shall be paid by the city. 
Sec. 3. - Oath of office. 
    Every officer of the city, whether elected or appointed under the provisions of this charter, or under any ordinance of the city, shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe an oath of office, in the form of the official oath required by the constitution. 
Sec. 4. - Liability insurance. 
    The council shall provide liability protection covering the city and its officers, agents, and employees while engaged in governmental or proprietary capacities. 
(3-15-88) 
Sec. 5. - Short title. 
    This charter, adopted by the people of the city of Glendale, shall be known and may be cited as the "Council-Manager Charter of Glendale." 
Sec. 6. - Separability clause. 
    If any section or part of section of this charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with this section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply. 
Sec. 7. - Violations of charter and city ordinances; imprisonment of violators. 
    The violation of any provision of this charter, or any ordinance of the city, shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and may be prosecuted by the authorities of the city in the name of the state of Arizona, or may be redressed by civil action, at the option of the council. Any person sentenced to imprisonment for violation of a provision of this charter, or of an ordinance may be imprisoned in the city jail, or, if the council, by ordinance, shall so prescribe, in the county jail of this county, in which case the expense of such imprisonment shall be a charge in favor of said county against the city. 
Sec. 8. - Plenary and implied powers of the council. 
    The council shall have plenary power to enact and make all proper and necessary ordinances, resolutions and orders to carry out and give effect to the express, as well as the implied powers granted in this charter to the end that a complete, harmonious and effective municipal government may be initiated, installed, operated and maintained in the city, and thereby protect and safeguard the rights, interests, safety, morality, health and welfare of the city and its inhabitants. 
ARTICLE XIV. - SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 1. - Rights of officers and employees preserved. 
    Nothing in this charter contained, except as specifically provided, shall affect or impair the rights or privileges of officers or employees of the city or of any office, department or agency existing at the time when this charter shall take effect, or any provision of law in force at the time when this charter shall take effect and not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter, in relation to the personnel, appointment, rank, grades, tenure of office, promotion, removal, pension and retirement rights, civil rights or any other rights or privileges of officers or employees of the city or any office, department or agency. 
Sec. 2. - Continuance of present officers. 
    All persons holding administrative office at the time this charter takes effect shall continue in office and in the performance of their duties until provisions shall have been made in accordance therewith for the performance of such duties or the discontinuance of such office. 
Sec. 3. - Continuance of present offices, departments or agencies. 
    Any office, department or agency provided for in this charter to be named or with powers and duties the same or substantially the same as those heretofore existing, shall be deemed a continuation of such office, department or agency and shall have powers to continue any business proceedings or other matters within the scope of the powers and duties prescribed by this charter. Any office, department or agency, not provided for in this charter, heretofore existing, shall continue to exercise powers and duties as the same were heretofore exercised and shall have the power to continue any business proceedings or other matters within the scope of its regular powers and duties until such office, department or agency shall be changed or abolished by the council as heretofore provided in this charter. 
    The powers conferred and the duties imposed upon any office, department or agency of the city by the laws of this state shall, if such office, department or agency be abolished by this charter or under its authority, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the office, department or agency designated by the council, unless otherwise provided herein. 
Sec. 4. - Continuance of appointive boards and commissions. 
    All appointive boards and commissions, heretofore existing, shall continue and shall exercise such powers and duties as was granted them until such boards and commissions shall be changed or abolished by the council as heretofore provided in this charter. 
Sec. 5. - Transfer of records and property. 
    All records, property and equipment whatsoever of any office, department or agency or part thereof, all the powers and duties of which are assigned to any other office, department or agency by this charter, or under its authority, shall be transferred and delivered to the office, department or agency to which such powers and duties are so assigned. 
Sec. 6. - Continuance of contracts. 
    All contracts entered into by the city, or for its benefit, prior to the taking effect of this charter, shall continue in full force and effect. 
Sec. 7. - Pending actions and proceedings. 
    The adoption of this charter shall not abate or otherwise affect any action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending when it takes full effect, brought by or against the city or any office, department, agency or officer thereof. 
Sec. 8. - Ordinances to remain in force. 
    All ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city in force at the time this charter takes effect, and not inconsistent with the provisions thereof, are hereby continued in force until the same shall be duly amended or repealed. 
Sec. 9. - Inauguration of government under this charter. 
    If a majority of the qualified electors of the city, voting on the question, vote to ratify this charter, the provisions of this charter shall go into effect for all purposes immediately upon the approval of the governor as provided by the constitution of this state. 
ARTICLE XV. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 1. - Method of amendment. 
    This charter, or any part or article or section thereof, may be amended in the manner provided by the constitution of this state. 
    Dated at Glendale, Maricopa County, Arizona, this 7th day of March, 1957, and respectfully submitted. 
_____
W. C. Jack 
Chairman _____
Donald Van Camp 
Vice-Chairman _____
Vernon E. Solt _____
R. K. Trueblood _____
W. O. Nelson _____
Chester E. Gillett _____
Donald E. Sell _____
Albert L. Carney _____
R. P. Barnard _____
Walt B. Adams, Sr. _____
Edward P. LeGendre _____
Charles Traubel _____
Donald E. Watt _____
Winter D. White  
BOARD OF FREEHOLDERS 
_____
W. A. Gilchrist 
Secretary to the Board of Freeholders 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
The original charter, articles I through XV, is set out as adopted on March 7, 1957. The following table shows the disposition of subsequent amendments. 
Ordinance/Resolution 
Number Approval 
Date     Disposition ArticleSection 5-25-70 II 3-4, 10 VI 5 VII 5-7, 10 VIII 3 IX 5, 8  3-16-76 I 3 II 5, 13, 14, 17 III 3, 5 VI 15 VII 5-7, 13, 14 VIII 1-4, 9 IX 3 Ord. No. 296 II 8  2- 9-88 II 2 IX 2  3-15-88 II 7, 8, 18 III 5 VI 10, 16 VII 1, 5, 6 VIII 2, 6 XIII 4 Res. No. 3107  2-25-97 II 8  5-18-04 II 3, 4, 10 VI 5 IX 5, 8 Res. No. 3824  1-25-05 II 3, 4, 10 IX 5, 8 Res. No. 3948  4-11-06 II 8  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the City of Glendale," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as "Glendale City Code." 
(Code 1963, § 1-1) 
Charter reference- Codification of ordinances, Art. VII, § 16. 
Sec. 1-2. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  The adoption of this Code shall not be construed to repeal or in any way to affect or modify: 
(1)  Any special ordinance or ordinances regarding franchises, annexations, dedications, or zoning. 
(2)  Any ordinance making an appropriation. 
(3)  Any ordinance affecting any bond issue or by which any bond issue may have been authorized. 
(4)  The running of the statutes of limitations in force at the time this Code becomes effective. 
(5)  The continued existence and operation of any department, agency, commission or officer heretofore legally established or held. 
(6)  Any bond of any public officer. 
(7)  Any taxes, fees, assessments or other charges incurred or imposed. 
(8)  Any ordinances authorizing, ratifying, confirming, approving or accepting any compart or contract with any other municipality, the state or any county or subdivision thereof, or with the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof. 
(9)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(10)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes thereof. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(12)  Prescribing the number, classification, duties, benefits or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith. 
(13)  Any ordinance relating to zoning. 
(14)  Any ordinance which is temporary although general in effect. 
(15)  Any ordinance which is special although permanent in effect. 
(16)  Any ordinance the purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)  All ordinances referred to in subsection (a) hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
State Law reference- Savings clauses for state code, A.R.S. § 1-104. 
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as ordinance provisions previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-4. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
    The rules and the definitions set forth in this section shall be observed in the construction of this Code and the ordinances of the city unless such construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest intent of the council, the city charter, the context of this Code or the ordinances of the city. 
    Acts by agents. When an ordinance requires an act to be done which may by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
    Administrative policies. Administrative policies shall be those policies which are established by the mayor and council or the city manager and will be on such items as affect all personnel of the city staff and the city's general functions. 
    Administrative regulations. Administrative regulations shall be written orders which are issued by the city manager and compiled in a manual. 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
    Charter. The words "charter" or "city charter" shall mean the Charter of Glendale. 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Glendale, in the county of Maricopa and State of Arizona, except as otherwise provided. 
    City treasurer. The term "city treasurer" shall mean the person designated as such by the city manager. 
    Code. The words "the code" or "this code" shall mean The Code of the City of Glendale, as designated in section 1-1 above unless the context indicates otherwise. 
    Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided, the time in which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is a holiday, and then it is also excluded. In cases in which notice of a decision by the city must be given to a petitioner and in which the petitioner must file a notice of appeal of such decision within a time certain of less than ten (10) days, such time shall be computed starting with the day after the day during which the notice of decision is received by the petitioner by personal service or registered or certified mail. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 8 1-243. 
    Council. The words "the council" or "city council" shall mean the council of the City of Glendale. 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall refer to Maricopa County, Arizona. 
    Day. A "day" is the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following. 
    Daytime. Daytime is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 8 1-215(6). 
    Departments, boards, officers, etc. Whenever any department, board, commission, office, officer, or employee is referred to, it shall mean a department, board, commission, office, officer, or employee of the city unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    Department head directives. Department head directives shall be written orders which are issued by department heads, approved by the city manager, and compiled in a manual. 
    Finance director. The term "finance director" shall mean the person designated as such by the city manager. 
    Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 1-214. 
    Health officer. The term "health officer" shall mean the director of the county health department or his authorized agent. 
    In the city. The words "in the city" or "within the city" shall mean and include all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers. 
State Law reference- Extraterritorial jurisdiction, A.R.S. §§ 9-240(B)(21), 9-276(A)(18), 9-402; application of municipal ordinances to municipally owned, leased, etc., property, A.R.S. § 9401. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 1-216. 
    May. The word "may" shall be construed as being permissive. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 1-215(19). 
    Must. The word "must" shall be construed as being mandatory. 
    Nighttime. Nighttime is the period of time between sunset and sunrise. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 1-215(21). 
    Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular number. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 1-214. 
    Oath. An oath includes an affirmation or a declaration. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 1-215(22). 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall include the state, the county, a political subdivision, a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
    Personal property. "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, dogs, things in action and evidence of debt. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 1-215(25). 
    Preceding; following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 1-215(28). 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall include but not be limited to any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream. 
    Real property. Real property is coextensive with lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 1-215(28). 
    Reasonable time or notice. In all cases where any section of this Code shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty, or compliance with such notice. 
    Shall. The word "shall" shall be construed as being mandatory. 
    Shall have been. The words "shall have been" include past and future cases. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent properly line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription includes a mark, when a person cannot write, with his name written near it and witnessed by a person who writes his own name as witness. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 1-215(31). 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Arizona. 
    Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, land, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city. 
    Technical and nontechnical words. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 1-213. 
    Tenant or occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant" applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land whether alone or with others. 
    Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 1-214. 
    Week. A "week" consists of seven (7) consecutive days. 
    Writing or written. The words "writing" and "written" shall include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1963, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, and references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, underlined, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be Titles of such sections, nor as any part of such sections, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 1-212. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, or sections are to the chapters, articles, and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1963, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or preceding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1963, § 1-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 1-252. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations-Established. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor and punished as Class 1 misdemeanors under state law. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Unless contrary to or inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context of the specific code or ordinance provision being enforced, a misdemeanor charge under this subsection shall require the unlawful act or failure to act was done in a manner which the evidence shows to have been "intentionally," "knowingly," or "recklessly," as defined in the Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 13, Chapter 1. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the city, abated as provided by law and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(c)  Violations of any provision of the City Charter, this Code or of any proscription, requirement or duty set forth in any ordinance are hereby declared to be civil code infractions which may be adjudicated and enforced by the City Court under Chapter 13, Article II of this Code, as an additional enforcement alternative to other remedies provided in this section or remedies and procedures provided for specifically in this Code or any city ordinance. Use of the civil code infraction alternative is not mandatory and shall be at the discretion of the city official undertaking enforcement action on an alleged violation of this Code or other ordinances. 
(Code 1963, § 1-7; Ord. No. 1817, § 1, 7-26-94) 
Charter reference- Ordinance violations, Art. XIII, § 7. 
Cross reference- City court, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference- Sentence of imprisonment for Class 1 misdemeanor, A.R.S. § 13-707; fines for Class 1 misdemeanor, A.R.S. §§ 13-802, 13-804. 
Sec. 1-8. - Same-Exemption of officials. 
    No provision of this Code designating the duties of an officer or employee of the city shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a violation of this Code, unless the intention of the council to impose such a fine or penalty upon such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in this Code creating or establishing the duties of such officer or employee. 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this Code are severable and if any word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining words, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1963, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code-Generally. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections to " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Same-Exclusion of special or temporary ordinances. 
    Ordinances hereafter adopted which are not of a general or permanent nature shall not be prepared for insertion in this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City Seal. 
    The city seal shall be of circular design. Across the top portion the word "Glendale" is shown. The word "Arizona" is across the bottom portion. Off center to the left on the inside of the seal is an outline map of the state. Across the same portion is a silhouette of a "family" looking over the horizon, the city and its surroundings. The rays emanate from the center of the city upward. Below the family is shown the date of incorporation (1910). 
(Code 1963, § 1-6) 
Sec. 2-2. - Enactment of fees; establishment of amount. 
    All fees for services, permits or other operations of the city shall be authorized and enacted by resolution of the city council. Any provision of the Code requiring a fee to be authorized or established by ordinance is hereby amended to allow said fees to be enacted and established by resolution. The amount of all fees shall be established or amended by resolution of the city council. The fees for community development services shall be amended by resolution or pursuant to section 2-3. 
(Ord. No. 1727, § 1, 6-23-92; Ord. No. 2260, § 1, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 2-3. - Community development and building permit fees; annual review and adjustment; payment; waiver. 
(a)  The community development fee schedule of the City of Glendale shall be set forth in Appendix B of the city code. 
(b)  The City of Glendale Community Development Fee Schedule and the building permit fees shall be reviewed and approved by the city council on an annual basis. The community development fee schedule shall be adjusted annually in accordance with the CPIU (Consumer Price Index Urban Users) inflationary index; and building permit fees shall be adjusted annually in accordance with the International Code Council Building Valuation Data. The adjusted fees shall be posted on the city's website and published in the city's official newspaper as required by state law. 
(c)  Any of the community development fees may be waived or rebated by the city council as an economic development incentive upon a finding that the waiver or rebate is in the best interests of the City of Glendale. The city council delegates its authority to the city manager to waive or rebate, in writing, community development fees up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). Any fee waiver or rebate shall be conditioned upon timely completion of the development or additional improvements which comprise the project. 
(d)  Any of the community development fees may be waived or rebated by the city council as an incentive to attract privately-produced events in the city-council adopted redevelopment area upon a finding that the waiver or rebate is in the best interests of the City of Glendale. The city council delegates its authority to the city manager or designee to make the finding as to whether a waiver or rebate is in the best interests of the city and to waive or rebate, in writing, community development fees up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). Any fee waiver or rebate is conditioned upon adherence to all applicable federal, state, or county laws; city codes and ordinances; and administrative policies or procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2260, § 1, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 2871, § 1, 1-14-14; Ord. No. 2901, § 1, 8-12-14; Ord. No. 3001, § 1, 8-9-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2901, § 1, adopted Aug. 12, 2014, changed the title of § 2-3 from "Community development fees; annual review and adjustment; payment; waiver" to "Community development and building permit fees; annual review and adjustment; payment; waiver," as set out herein. 
Sec. 2-4. - Collection charges. 
    Any person who has a delinquent account maintained by the city will be responsible for all costs incurred by the city in collecting those delinquent funds. This includes any direct costs incurred, including the cost of a third-party collection agency. 
(Ord. No. 2838, § 1, 2-26-13) 
Sec. 2-5. - Abatement of collection suits and actions; release of liens; determination of uncollectibility; authority of Finance Director and City Manager; recovery of collection costs. 
(a)  As used in this section, "finance director" shall mean the director of the Finance Department or any successor City department with responsibility for Finance, or his/her authorized designee. 
(b)  Upon a determination that the estimated costs to collect any amounts owed on a delinquent account for fees and/or taxes imposed under the Glendale City Code would exceed the amount the City could reasonably expect to collect for such unpaid fees and/or taxes, the City Manager or Finance Director or their respective designees, in consultation with the City Attorney, is authorized to negotiate and/or enter into an agreement with any person or entity responsible, in whole or in part, for payment of any such delinquent fees and/or taxes. Such authority may only be exercised in accordance with subsection (d) below and includes the authority to: 
(1)  Release, in whole or in part, any or all liens filed in connection with such delinquent fees and/or taxes; and 
(2)  Dismiss, and/or refrain from initiating, filing, refiling or renewing, in whole or in part, any lawsuit or judgment seeking such delinquent fees and/or taxes; and 
(3)  Abate, terminate or waive all collection efforts seeking to recover any such delinquent fees or taxes, in whole or in part; and 
(4)  Any combination of the actions authorized in subsections (1)-(3) herein. 
(c)  The Finance Director, or his/her designee, in consultation with the City Attorney, shall have the authority and discretion to determine the amount of consideration to be paid to the City pursuant to such agreement. In making such a determination, the Finance Director or his/her designee may consider the reasonable maximum amount that the City could expect to receive as the result of its collection efforts or those of an independent collection agency. 
(d)  Limitations of Authority. 
(1)  The finance director, or his/her designee, in consultation with the city attorney, may exercise his/her authority to resolve any delinquent account as provided in subsections (b) and (c) above where the cumulative amount of delinquent fees and/or taxes, exclusive of interest or penalties, does not exceed nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine dollars and ninety-nine cents ($9,999.99). 
(2)  The City Manager or his/her designee, in consultation with the City Attorney, may exercise his/her authority to resolve any delinquent account as provided in subsections (b) and (c) above where the cumulative amount of delinquent fees and/or taxes, exclusive of interest or penalties, is ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more but is less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(3)  Resolution of any delinquent account as provided in subsections (b) and (c) above where the cumulative amount of delinquent fees and/or taxes, exclusive of interest or penalties, is fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more may only be entered into by the city with the approval of the City Council. 
(e)  Any resolution of a delinquent account for fees and/or taxes as provided in this Section shall be memorialized in a written agreement signed by the City and a party authorized to represent the delinquent account holder. The written signed agreement shall be maintained by the City as a public record. 
(f)  The benefit of any agreement to resolve a delinquent account for fees or taxes according to this Section shall inure only to the specific party or parties who are responsible for the delinquent account and not to any third party beneficiary unless the agreement so states otherwise. 
(g)  No agreement, release, dismissal, or abatement shall be construed as an admission by the City that any such fee, tax, interest or penalty amount or any portion thereof was not lawfully due and owing to the City, and the obligation for such amount may be carried as a separate nonrevenue item in the books and records of the City. 
(Ord. No. 3004, § 1, 9-27-16) 
Secs. 2-6-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- City council generally, Art. II. 
Cross reference- Elections, Ch. 15. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-16. - Regular meeting. 
    The city council shall meet regularly two (2) times each month. 
(Code 1963, § 2-2; Ord. No. 1198, § 1, 4-27-82; Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 4-12-88; Ord. No. 1743, § 1, 11-24-92; Ord. No. 2858, § 1, 8-13-13; Ord. No. O17-65, § 1, 12-12-17, effective 1-12-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-65, § 1, adopted Dec. 12, 2017, amended § 2-16 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Regular meeting, date, time" to "Regular meeting," as set out herein. 
Charter reference- Council meetings generally, Art. II, § 13. 
Sec. 2-17. - Special meetings. 
    The mayor may, or at the request of three (3) members of the council shall, by giving notice thereof to all members of the council then in the city, call a special meeting of the council for a time not earlier than three (3) hours nor later than forty-eight (48) hours after the notice is given. Special meetings of the council may also be held at any time by the common consent of all the members of the council. 
(Code 1963, § 2-3) 
State Law reference- Notice of special meetings, A.R.S. § 38-431.02. 
Sec. 2-18. - Meeting place. 
    The place for all meetings of the council shall be the Glendale Council Chambers. 
(Code 1963, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-19. - Salary. 
(a)  The mayor shall receive an annual salary of forty-eight thousand dollars ($48,000.00) and each councilmember shall receive an annual salary of thirty-four thousand dollars ($34,000.00). 
(b)  All salaries shall be paid in equal biweekly installments, the annual total of which shall not exceed the annual compensation authorized herein. The city treasurer is hereby authorized to pay such installments after the necessary deductions as provided by law for social security, state retirement, state withholding income tax, federal withholding income tax and insurance. 
(Code 1963, § 2-1.4; Ord. No. 1271, § 1, 3-27-84; Ord. No. 1366, § 1, 7-2-85; Res. No. 3209, § 5, 5-26-98; Res. No. 3948, § 3(Exh. A), 4-11-06) 
Charter reference- Salaries of mayor and council members, Art. II, § 8. 
Sec. 2-20. - Council districts. 
    There is hereby established six (6) Council districts for the City described by census tracts and enumeration districts as located within the City of Glendale and set forth by the United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, in the 2010 Decennial Census of the City, as follows: 
Barrel District 
    Composed of the Glendale portions of the following Census Block Groups: 
040130719036 040130923071 040130932001 040130719037 040130923072 040130932003 040130719151 040130923073 040131042211 040130719153 040130923074 040131042213 040130923051 040130923111 040131042221 040130923052 040130923112 040131042222 040130923061 040130923121 040131042223 040130923062 040130923122 040131042224 040130923063 040130923123 040130923064 040130923124 040131042272  
    And including the following Census Blocks from Census Block Group 040131042212: 
040131042212024 
    And including the following Census Blocks from Census Block Group 040131042214: 
040131042214002 040131042214009 040131042214014 040131042214003 040131042214010 040131042214016 040131042214006 040131042214011 040131042214017 040131042214007 040131042214012 040131042214018 040131042214008 040131042214013  
    And including the following Census Blocks from Census Block Group 040131042271: 
040131042271016 040131042271019 040131042271022 040131042271017 040131042271020 040131042271023 040131042271018 040131042271021  
Cactus District 
    Composed of the Glendale portions of the following Census Block Groups: 
040130923081 040130923092 040130924013 040130923082 040130923093 040130924021 040130923083 040130923094 040130924022 040130923084 040130924011 040130924023 040130923091 040130924012 040130925001 040130930011 040130931011 040130931043 040130930012 040130931012 040131094001 040130930013 040130931013 040131094002 040130930021 040130931014 040131094003 040130930022 040130931041 040130930023 040130931042  
    And including the following Census Blocks from Census Block Group 040130925002: 
040130925002000 040130925002005 040130925002019 040130925002001 040130925002006 040130925002020 040130925002002 040130925002007 040130925002021 040130925002003 040130925002008 040130925002023 040130925002004 040130925002009  
    And including the following Census Blocks from Census Block Group 040130931044: 
040130931044000 040130931044021 040130931044028 040130931044002 040130931044022 040130931044029 040130931044003 040130931044023 040130931044030 040130931044004 040130931044024 040130931044031 040130931044005 040130931044025 040130931044032 040130931044019 040130931044026 040130931044034 040130931044020 040130931044027 040130931044035  
Cholla District 
    Composed of the Glendale portions of the following Census Block Groups: 
040130715142 040136142002 040136159001 040136112003 040136142003 040136159002 040136139002 040136143001 040136159003 040136140001 040136143002 040136160001 040136140002 040136143003 040136160002 040136140003 040136156002 040136176004 040136141001 040136157001 040136177001 040136141002 040136157002 040136180001 040136141003 040136158001 040136180002 040136141004 040136158002 040136142001 040136158003  
Ocotillo District 
    Composed of the Glendale portions of the following Census Block Groups: 
040130925003 040130925004 040130926001 040130926002 040130928014 040130931052 040130926003 040130928021 040130931053 040130927052 040130928022 040130931054 040130927171 040130928023 040130931061 040130927182 040130928024 040130931062 040130928011 040130929001 040130931063 040130928012 040130929002 040131095001 040130928013 040130931051 040131095003  
    And including the following Census Blocks from Census Block Group 040130925002: 
040130925002010 040130925002016 040130925002026 040130925002011 040130925002017 040130925002027 040130925002012 040130925002018 040130925002028 040130925002013 040130925002022 040130925002029 040130925002014 040130925002024 040130925002030 040130925002015 040130925002025 040130925002031  
    And including the following Census Blocks from Census Block Group 040130927051: 
040130927051000 040130927051003 040130927051030 040130927051001 040130927051004 040130927051002 040130927051029  
    And including the following Census Blocks from Census Block Group 040130927181: 
040130927181004 040130927181010 040130927181015 040130927181005 040130927181011 040130927181016 040130927181006 040130927181012 040130927181007 040130927181013 040130927181008 040130927181014  
    And including the following Census Blocks from Census Block Group 040130931044: 
040130931044001 040130931044010 040130931044015 040130931044006 040130931044011 040130931044016 040130931044007 040130931044012 040130931044017 040130931044008 040130931044013 040130931044018 040130931044009 040130931044014  
Sahuaro District 
    Composed of the Glendale portions of the following Census Block Groups: 
040130715091 040130715111 040130715132 040130715103 040130715112 040131042141 040131042142 040131042171 040136177002 040131042151 040131042172 040136177003 040131042152 040131042173 040136178001 040131042153 040131042231 040136178002 040131042154 040131042232 040136179001 040131042155 040131042241 040136179002 040131042161 040131042242 040136180003 040131042162 040131042243 040131042163 040131042244  
    And including the following Census Blocks from Census Block Group 040131042212: 
040131042212001 040131042212010 040131042212019 040131042212002 040131042212011 040131042212020 040131042212003 040131042212012 040131042212021 040131042212004 040131042212013 040131042212022 040131042212005 040131042212014 040131042212023 040131042212006 040131042212015 040131042212025 040131042212007 040131042212016 040131042212026 040131042212008 040131042212017 040131042212027 040131042212009 040131042212018 040131042212028  
    And including the following Census Blocks from Census Block Group 040131042214: 
040131042214000 040131042214004 040131042214015 040131042214001 040131042214005 040131042214019  
    And including the following Census Blocks from Census Block Group 040131042271: 
040131042271000 040131042271006 040131042271012 040131042271001 040131042271007 040131042271013 040131042271002 040131042271008 040131042271014 040131042271003 040131042271009 040131042271015 040131042271004 040131042271010 040131042271005 040131042271011  
Yucca District 
    Composed of the Glendale portions of the following Census Block Groups: 
040130610111 040130610452 040130611002 040130610112 040130610453 040130611003 040130610432 040130610461 040130820021 040130610441 040130610462 040130820071 040130610442 040130610471 040130820083 040130610443 040130610472 040130820161 040130610451 040130611001 040130927101 040130927102 040130927153 040130927204 040130927111 040130927161 040130927211 040130927112 040130927162 040130927212 040130927121 040130927163 040131096011 040130927122 040130927172 040131096021 040130927131 040130927191 040131096033 040130927132 040130927201 040131096041 040130927151 040130927202 040131096042 040130927152 040130927203  
    And including the following Census Blocks from Census Block Group 040130927051: 
040130927051005 040130927051014 040130927051022 040130927051006 040130927051016 040130927051023 040130927051009 040130927051017 040130927051024 040130927051010 040130927051018 040130927051025 040130927051011 040130927051019 040130927051026 040130927051012 040130927051020 040130927051027 040130927051013 040130927051021 040130927051028  
    And including the following Census Blocks from Census Block Group 040130927181: 
040130927181000 040130927181001 040130927181002 040130927181003 040130927181009  
(Ord. No. 2784, § 1(Exh. A), 9-13-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2784, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 2011, repealed § 2-20, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, § 2-20 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Secs. 2-21-2-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Financial disclosure, A.R.S. § 38-541 et seq.; city required to adopt financial disclosure standards consistent with law, A.R.S. § 38-545. 

Sec. 2-31. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Business includes any enterprise, organization, trade, occupation or profession, whether or not operated as a legal entity or for profit, including any business trust, corporation, partnership, joint venture or sole proprietorship. 
    Compensation means anything of value of advantage, present or prospective, including the forgiveness of debt. 
    Controlled business means any business in which the local public officer or any member of his household has an ownership or beneficial interest, individually or combined, amounting to more than a fifty (50) percent interest. 
    Dependent business means any business in which the local public officer or any member of his household has an ownership or beneficial interest, individually or combined, amounting to more than a ten (10) percent interest, and during the preceding calendar year the business received from a single source more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and more than fifty (50) percent of its gross income. 
    Gift includes any gratuity, special discount, favor, hospitality, service, economic opportunity, loan or other benefit received without equivalent consideration and not provided to members of the public at large. "Gift" does not include travel-related expenses that are publicly reported as required by law or political campaign contributions that are publicly reported pursuant to Title 16, Chapter 6. 
    Local public officer means a person holding an elective office of the City of Glendale. 
    Member of household means a local public officer's spouse and any minor child of whom the local public officer has legal custody. 
    Travel-related expenses means any costs associated with transportation, food, lodging and registration fees and other expenses directly related to travel to, or from, a meeting, conference or other event where the local public officer is participating in the local public officer's official capacity. 
(Res. No. 2125, § 3, 12-8-83; Ord. No. 3033, § 1, 12-20-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 38-541. 
Sec. 2-32. - Duty to file financial disclosure statement; contents; exceptions. 
(a)  In addition to other statements and reports required by law, every local public officer, as a matter of public record, shall file with the City Clerk on a form prescribed by the City Clerk a verified financial disclosure statement covering the preceding calendar year ending December 31. The statement shall disclose: 
(1)  The name and home or work address of the local public officer, whether the local public officer's spouse is a member of the local public officer's household, the number of minor children who are members of the local public officer's household and all names and addresses under which each does business. If disclosure of the identity of the local public officer's spouse or minor children otherwise be required, a local public officer may comply with the identification requirement by using the term "spouse" or "minor child," as applicable. 
(2)  The name and address of each employer and of each other source of compensation other than gifts amounting to more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) received during the preceding calendar year by the local public officer and members of his household in their own names, or by any other person for the use or benefit of the local public officer or members of his household, a description of the services for which the compensation was received and the nature of the employer's business. This paragraph shall not be construed to require the disclosure of individual items of compensation that constituted a portion of the gross income of the business from which the local public officer or members of his household derived compensation. 
(3)  For a controlled business, a description of the goods or services provided by the business, and if any single source of compensation to the business during the preceding calendar year amounts to more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and is more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross income of the business, the disclosure shall also include a description of the goods or services provided to the source of compensation. For a dependent business the statement shall disclose a description of the goods or services provided by the business and a description of the goods or services provided to the source of compensation from which the dependent business derived the amount of gross income described in paragraph (4) of section 2-31. If the source of compensation for a controlled or dependent business is a business, the statement shall disclose a description of the business activities engaged in by the source of compensation. 
(4)  The names and addresses of all businesses and trusts in which the local public officer of members of his household, or any other person for the use or benefit of the local public officer or members of his household, had an ownership or beneficial interest of over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) at any time during the preceding calendar year, and the name and addresses of all businesses and trusts in which the local public officer or any member of his household held any office or had a fiduciary relationship at any time during the preceding calendar year, together with the amount or value of the interest and a description of the interest, office or relationship. 
(5)  All real property interests and real property improvements, including specific location and approximate size, located in the City of Glendale, in which the local public officer, any member of his household or a controlled or dependent business held legal title or a beneficial interest at any time during the preceding calendar year, and the value of any such interest, except that this paragraph does not apply to a real property interest and improvements thereon used as the primary personal residence or for the personal recreational use of the local public officer. If a local public officer, any member of his household or a controlled or dependent business acquired or divested any such interest during the preceding calendar year, he shall also disclose that the transaction was made and the date it occurred. If the controlled or dependent business is in the business of dealing in real property interests or improvements, disclosure need not include individual parcels or transactions as long as the aggregate value of all parcels of such property is reported. 
(6)  The names and addresses of all creditors to whom the local public officer or members of his household, in their own names or in the name of any other person, owed a debt of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or to whom a controlled business or dependent business owed a debt of more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) which was also more than thirty (30) percent of the total business indebtedness at any time during the preceding calendar year, listing each such creditor. This paragraph shall not be construed to require the disclosure of debts owed by the local public officer or any member of his household resulting from the ordinary conduct of a business other than a controlled or dependent business. Nor shall disclosure be required of credit card transactions, retail installment contracts, debts on residences or recreational property exempt from disclosure under paragraph (5) of this subsection, debts on motor vehicles not used for commercial purposes, debts secured by cash values on life insurance or debts owed to relatives. It is sufficient disclosure of a creditor if the name and address or a person to whom payments are made is disclosed. If the local public officer, and any member of his household or a controlled or dependent business incurred or discharged a debt which is reportable under this subsection during the preceding calendar year, the report shall disclose that the transaction was made and the date it occurred. 
(7)  The identification and amount of each debt exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) owed at any time during the preceding calendar year to the local public officer and member of his household in their own names, or to any other person for the use or benefit of the local public officer or any member of his household. The disclosure shall include the identification and amount of each debt exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to a controlled business or dependent business which was also more than thirty (30) percent of the total indebtedness to the business at any time during the preceding calendar year. This paragraph shall not be construed to require the disclosure of debts from the ordinary conduct of a business other than a controlled or dependent business. If the local public officer, any member of his household or a controlled or dependent business incurred or discharged a debt which is reportable under this subsection during the preceding year, the report shall disclose that the transaction was made and the date it occurred. 
(8)  The name of each source of any gift, or accumulated gifts from a single source, of more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) received by the local public officer and members of his household in their own names during the preceding calendar year, or by any other person for the use or benefit of the local public officer or any member of his household except gifts received by will or by virtue of intestate succession, or received by way of distribution from any intervivos or testamentary trust established by a spouse or by an ancestor, of gifts received from any other member of the household or relatives to the second degree of consanguinity. Travel-related expenses and political campaign contributions shall not be construed as gifts if otherwise publicly reported as required by law. 
(9)  A list of all business licenses issued, by the City of Glendale, or by any other governmental agency which requires for its issuance the consideration of the application for such license by the city council of the City of Glendale, to, held by or in which the local public officer or any member of his household had an interest at any time during the preceding calendar year, including the name in which the license was issued, the type of business and its location. 
(10)  A list of all bonds, together with their value, issued by the City of Glendale, any industrial development authority of the City of Glendale or any nonprofit corporation organized or authorized by the City of Glendale held at any time during the preceding calendar year by the local public officer or any member of his household, which bonds issued by a single entity had a value in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). If the local public officer or any member of his household acquired or divested any bonds during the preceding calendar year which are reportable under this paragraph, the fact that the transaction occurred and the date shall also be shown. 
(11)  The name of each meeting, conference or other event where the local public officer is participating in the public officer's official capacity if travel-related expenses of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more were incurred on behalf of the local public officer and the travel-related expenses are not paid by the local public officer. 
(b)  If an amount or value is required to be reported pursuant to this section, it is sufficient to report whether the amount or value of the equity interest falls within: 
(1)  Category 1, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
(2)  Category 2, more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(3)  Category 3, more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(c)  This section does not require the disclosure of any information that is privileged by law. 
(d)  The statement required to be filed pursuant to subsection A shall be filed by all persons who qualified as local public officers at any time during the preceding calendar year on or before January 31 of each year, with the exceptions that a local public officer appointed to fill a vacancy shall, within sixty (60) days following his taking of such office, file a financial disclosure statement covering as his annual period the (12) twelve-month period ending with the last full month prior to the date of his taking office, and a local public officer whose final term expires less than thirty-one (31) days into the immediately following calendar year may file the local public officer's final financial disclosure at the same time as the disclosure for the last immediately preceding year. 
(e)  The city clerk shall prepare written guidelines, forms and samples for completing the financial disclosure statement required by this section. A copy of the guidelines, forms and samples shall be distributed to each local public officer and shall be made available to each candidate required to file a financial disclosure statement. 
(f)  Any statements that are required to be filed by a local public officer pursuant to this ordinance adopted pursuant to A.R.S. § 38-545 may be filed in an electronic format as prescribed by the secretary of state. 
(Res. No. 2125, § 4, 12-8-83; Ord. No. 2837, § 1, 1-22-13; Ord. No. 3033, § 1, 12-20-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 38-542. 
Sec. 2-33. - Duty to file financial disclosure statement by candidate for local public office. 
    A candidate for local public office, as specified in section 2-31, shall file a financial disclosure statement covering the preceding (12) twelve-month period and containing the information described in section 2-32 on a form prescribed by the City Clerk at the time of filing nomination papers. 
(Res. No. 2125, § 5, 12-8-83; Ord. No. 3033, § 1, 12-20-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 38-543. 
Sec. 2-34. - Violation; classification. 
(a)  Any local public officer or candidate who intentionally or knowingly fails to file a financial disclosure statement required pursuant to section 2-32 or 2-33, who intentionally or knowingly files an incomplete financial disclosure statement or who intentionally or knowingly files a false financial disclosure statement is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  If the city clerk has reasonable cause to believe that a person is violating any provision of section 2-32 or 2-33, the city clerk shall notify the city attorney. 
(c)  Any local public officer or candidate who violates this division 2 is subject to a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day of noncompliance but not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) that may be imposed as follows: 
(1)  The city attorney must serve on the person an order requiring compliance with the provision of this division. The order shall state with reasonable particularity the nature of the violation and shall require compliance within twenty (20) days from the date of issuance of the order. 
(2)  If a person fails to take corrective action within the time specified in the compliance order issued pursuant to subsection (c)(1), the city attorney shall issue an order assessing a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) as set forth in subsection (c) above. The alleged violator has twenty (20) days from the date of issuance of the order to request a hearing pursuant to Chapter 13, Article II of the Glendale City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2399, § 1, 7-27-04) 
Secs. 2-35-2-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LOBBYING 

Sec. 2-40. - Definitions. 
    Lobbyist means any person who is compensated to lobby for a person other than himself. This does not include: 
(1)  A person who is not compensated for lobbying activity other than reimbursement for actual expenses. 
(2)  A person, acting in his own behalf, who appears before the city council, or a City of Glendale Board, Committee, or Commission, or contacts a city official to support or oppose official action. 
(3)  A public official, public employee, or appointed member of a state, County or local board, commission, or council acting in his official capacity on matters pertaining to his office, employment, board, commission, or council. 
(4)  An expert introduced or identified by a registered lobbyist, or a public official who provides technical information, or answers technical questions and makes no expenditure required to be reported by this article. 
(5)  A person who performs professional services in drafting legislation or in advising and rendering opinions to clients as to the construction and effect of proposed or pending legislation. 
(6)  An attorney who represents a client in any quasi-judicial proceeding. 
(7)  A person who contacts a city official solely for the purpose of acquiring information. 
(8)  A person who contacts a city official concerning any contract awarded through competitive bidding. 
(Ord. No. O19-21, § 1, 2-12-19) 
Sec. 2-41. - Registration; reports. 
    Lobbyists must register before lobbying, or within five (5) business days after first lobbying, by filing a statement that discloses the following: 
(1)  If the lobbyist is an individual or organization, the lobbyist must provide a unique e-mail address and agree to accept all notices at that email address. The lobbyist must ensure that the registered e-mail address is current and accurate. 
(2)  If the lobbyist is an individual, the name, business, and e-mail address of the lobbyist and any employee of the lobbyist who also acts as a lobbyist, provided that an individual who is included as a lobbyist on the registration of an entity under paragraph (3) of this subsection need not register separately. 
(3)  If the lobbyist is an organization, the name, business, and e-mail address of the entity, its chief executive officer and all its officers and employees who act as lobbyists (who must be notified by the organization in writing that they have been listed as lobbyists), provided that the entity need not register as a lobbyist if all its officers and employees who act as lobbyists are individually registered as lobbyists under paragraph (2) of this subsection. 
(4)  The name and business address of all persons who compensate the lobbyist to lobby and all persons on whose behalf lobbying is performed. Any change in the information required by this paragraph must be reported to the city clerk within thirty (30) days of the change. 
(Ord. No. O19-21, § 1, 2-12-19) 
Sec. 2-42. - Forms, filing. 
    Registration required by this article must be made under oath, on forms prescribed by the city clerk and filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. O19-21, § 1, 2-12-19) 
Secs. 2-43-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Administrative departments, offices and employees, Art. IV; oath of elected or appointed officers, Art. XIII, § 3. 
State Law reference- Municipal officers, A.R.S. § 9-301 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-51. - Applicants for positions to be fingerprinted. 
(a)  All applicants being considered for selection for positions as city employees and all prospective volunteers under the direction of the city upon application for temporary or permanent employment for an indefinite period of time or upon application to volunteer, shall appear at the offices of the police department and submit to having copies of their fingerprints made by a police officer. The human resources department shall forward the fingerprints of eligible applicants to the Arizona Department of Public Safety for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and P.L. 92-544. The Arizona Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint information with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the term "city employees" shall include all persons who are on the city's payrolls and receive either salary or wages from the city. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, the term "volunteer" shall include any person who performs or gives service to the city on his own free will, without any form of compensation by the city in exchange for services rendered. At the discretion of designated staff, any volunteer involved in community service projects less than eight (8) hours in duration and supervised by city staff, may be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(d)  One (1) copy of the fingerprints shall be maintained by the city in accordance with the Arizona State Library, Archives and Public Records retention schedule. 
(e)  One (1) copy of the fingerprints taken under the provisions of this article shall be transmitted to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, United States Department of Justice, United States of America, for the purpose of securing a report from the records of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
(Code 1963, § 2-9; Ord. No. 2126, § 1, 3-28-00; Ord. No. 017-24, § 1, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 2-52. - Appointment of auxiliary members of police and fire departments. 
    The city may appoint auxiliary members who shall be unpaid, volunteer members of organized adjuncts to the police and fire departments. The auxiliary members shall: 
(1)  Not be paid for their time; and 
(2)  Be covered by Workmen's Compensation Insurance in accordance with A.R.S. section 23-901.06 (in its present form and as it may be hereafter amended); and 
(3)  Have their activities directed and controlled by the city. 
    Members of the police department auxiliary shall not have arrest powers or peace officer authority delegated to them by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 1300, § 1(24-3), 9-25-84) 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 16-1 et seq.; police department, Ch. 29. 
Sec. 2-53. - City manager; delegation of signature authority. 
(a)  Pursuant to article III, section 3 of the Glendale City Charter, the city manager is the chief executive officer of the city and shall have all authority and powers, not inconsistent with the city Charter, to manage and administer the affairs of the city. The city manager, as he or she deems appropriate, may delegate and assign duties and responsibilities to the administrative officials, department heads and employees of the city. 
(b)  The city manager may delegate signature authority on contracts, other documents and instruments to such administrative officials, department heads and employees as the city manager deems appropriate. Such persons are hereby authorized, pursuant to article VIII, section 1 of the city Charter, to execute all such contracts, documents and instruments in the name and on behalf of the city, with the same force and effect as if executed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 2-54. - Office of the city auditor. 
    There shall be an independent office of the city auditor charged with conducting financial, contract compliance, internal control, and performance audits of all city departments, programs, activities, boards, and commissions and report audit findings and recommendations to the directors of the affected departments, the city manager and city council. The office of city auditor shall be under the independent control and supervision of the city auditor. The city auditor shall organize and administer the auditor's office to operate without management interference and shall be provided with free and open access, except where limited by law, to all records, personnel, facilities and information necessary to carry out these duties. The city auditor and staff of the office of city auditor shall be members of the merit system and adhere to the rules and directives applicable to the classified service. 
(Ord. No. 2849, § 1, 6-25-13) 
Secs. 2-55-2-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MERIT SYSTEM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1557, § 1, adopted July 26, 1988, amended this division 2 in its entirety, to read as herein set out. The former provisions derived from Ord. No. 1074, § 2, adopted April 24, 1979. Ord. No. 2138, § 1, adopted May 30, 2000, amended division 2 in its entirety, to read as herein set out. 
Charter reference- Merit system required, Art. IV, § 6. 

Sec. 2-66. - Purpose. 
    The general purpose of this division is to establish fair and uniform policies for dealing with personnel matters. 
(Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 7-26-88; Ord. No. 2138, § 1, 5-30-00) 
Sec. 2-67. - Scope of coverage. 
    Unless otherwise specified, the provisions of this division shall apply to all classified employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 7-26-88; Ord. No. 2138, § 1, 5-30-00) 
Sec. 2-68. - Unclassified and classified service. 
(a)  The unclassified service. The unclassified service consists of the city council appointed officers, including the: 
(1)  City manager 
(2)  City clerk. 
(3)  City attorney. 
(4)  City judge. 
(5)  Assistant city judges. 
(6)  Assistant and deputy city manager level positions; 
(7)  All department director level positions; 
(8)  All classified employees in their introductory or probationary period of employment. 
Unclassified service employees are entitled to all regular benefits and leaves unless otherwise provided in the human resources policies and procedures. 
(b)  The classified service. The objective of this service is to provide public and management services covered by a fair and nonpolitical system of personnel management for the City of Glendale. The classified service consists of all full and part-time positions authorized by the city council that are not placed in the unclassified service by this division. 
(Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 7-26-88; Ord. No. 2138, § 1, 5-30-00; Ord. No. O19-20, § 1, 2-12-19) 
Sec. 2-69. - Appointing authority. 
    The city manager is the appointing authority and head of the merit system, having the power to appoint and remove employees, subject to the provisions of this chapter. The power to appoint and dismiss may be delegated to the assistant city manager, deputy city managers, and department heads. Any person delegated authority to appoint and remove employees shall be known as an appointing officer for the purpose of such appointment and removal. 
(Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 7-26-88; Ord. No. 2138, § 1, 5-30-00) 
Sec. 2-70. - Human resources director. 
    The human resources program established by this division is administered by a human resources director who shall be appointed by the city manager. The duties of the human resources director are the following: 
(1)  Administer the provisions of this division and the human resources policies and procedures under the authority of the city manager. 
(2)  Attend and serve as secretary at meetings of the personnel board. 
(3)  Maintain adequate records of the proceedings of the personnel board, of official acts, the application records of all applicants, and employment record of all employees. 
(4)  Periodically prepare and recommend revisions of and amendments to the human resources policies and procedures to the city manager and the personnel board. 
(Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 7-26-88; Ord. No. 2138, § 1, 5-30-00) 
Sec. 2-71. - Personnel board. 
(a)  The personnel board consists of five (5) members appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. The members of the personnel board shall be residents of the city and persons of the merit principles of public human resources management. 
(b)  No person shall be appointed to the personnel board if he or she is employed by or is an official of the City of Glendale, or is an officer of a political party, above the level of precinct chairperson. 
(c)  The members of the board shall serve terms of two (2) years. 
(d)  Vacancies occurring during a term shall be filled for the balance of the term. 
(e)  Members of the personnel board shall serve without compensation, but funds shall be provided for reasonable and necessary expenses. 
(f)  The chairperson of the board shall be appointed by the city council. 
(g)  The duties of the personnel board are the following: 
(1)  Advise and make recommendations to the city manager and city council on merit system policy and human resources policies and procedures and administration. 
(2)  Serve as an advisory appeal hearing body on employee terminations, suspensions and disciplinary demotions and reductions in pay. 
(3)  Represent the public interest in human resources management in the city service. 
(Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 7-26-88; Ord. No. 1644, §§ 1(1), 2(1), 5-22-90; Ord. No. 2138, § 1, 5-30-00) 
Sec. 2-72. - Personnel board hearings. 
    Procedure. All hearings conducted by the personnel board shall be governed by the city manager's procedures and directives. 
(Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 7-26-88; Ord. No. 2138, § 1, 5-30-00) 
Sec. 2-73. - Merit system regulations. 
(a)  Decisions regarding the selection, discipline and discharge of classified service employees of the city shall be based on qualification and performance. 
(b)  Classified service employees, who have successfully completed probation, shall not be terminated or disciplined except upon a determination of just cause. 
(c)  The city council shall provide policy direction to the city manager regarding the merit system for employees of the city. In accordance with the City Charter, the city council policy direction shall not include direction regarding, or involvement in, the daily operation of personnel management or discipline of employees. 
(Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 7-26-88; Ord. No. 2138, § 1, 5-30-00) 
Sec. 2.74. - Procedures and directives. 
    The city manager shall adopt and issue procedures and directives implementing the merit system regulations set forth in section 2-73 and the city council's policy directions issued pursuant to section 2-73. The city manager shall advise the city council of any substantive changes to the procedures and directives prior to implementation. Substantive changes are those changes that affect the basic or essential provisions of the procedures and directives. 
(Ord. No. 2138, § 1, 5-30-00) 
Sec. 2-75. - Political activities and contributions of employees. 
(a)  No current employee in the classified service shall hold an elected office in the unclassified service. 
(b)  No employee, other than an elected official, shall engage in any political activity in a Glendale municipal election, except to sign a petition for nomination, to cast a vote, or express a private personal opinion. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall affect the right of an employee to hold membership in and support a political party, to vote, to express publicly or privately opinions on all nonmunicipal political subjects and candidates, to maintain political neutrality, and to actively participate or decline to participate in a political meeting. 
(d)  No employee, officer or official of the city shall use any influence or pressure upon any employee to obtain any property or contribution of money or time, either direct or indirect, for any political campaign or personal gain. 
(Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 7-26-88) 
DIVISION 3. - MEET AND CONFER PROCESS 

Sec. 2-76. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to establish a process by which recognized employee organizations can meet and confer with the city manager on behalf of an employee group regarding issues such as wages, hours, non-healthcare related benefits and working conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2433, § 1, 5-10-05) 
Sec. 2-77. - Conflicts. 
(a)  In the event of a conflict between (i) the City of Glendale's Human Resources policies and procedures and/or the city manager's directives and (ii) any memorandum of understanding that results from this meet and confer process, the City of Glendale's Human Resources policies and procedures and the city manager's directives will govern; except that any existing provision of a memorandum of understanding will continue to be applicable if the policies and procedures or directives are promulgated after the effective date of a memorandum of understanding. 
(b)  In the event of a conflict between (i) a City of Glendale Employee Involvement Initiative Meet and Confer Process (as defined below and which shall be promulgated and from time to time modified by the city manager), and (ii) this division, the provisions of this division will prevail. 
(c)  In the event of a conflict between (i) other City of Glendale code provisions and (ii) this division, the provisions of this division will prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2433, § 1, 5-10-05) 
Sec. 2-78. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. All other words shall have the meaning ascribed to them by section 1-4 of this Code. 
    Budget year: Budget year shall mean the period for which the council appropriates city funds during its budget process. 
    Certification: Certification is the designation by the city manager of an employee organization as the exclusive representative of an employee group for the purpose of meeting and conferring with the city manager about the subjects specified in this division. 
    Decertification: Decertification is the removal by the city manager of an employee organization as the exclusive representative of an employee group. 
    Employee involvement initiative meet and confer process: The employee involvement initiative meet and confer process is an initiative of the city manager that establishes the organizational cooperative process and which may be modified by the city manager from time to time as determined to be in the best interests of the city. 
    Employee group: An employee group is a defined set of employees who (1) are regularly assigned to one department or division of the city, and (2) to the extent they are represented, are represented by members who have been recognized by the city manager to have fulfilled organizational cooperative process, and (3) are specifically designated by this division as an employee group. 
    Employee organization: An employee organization is an organization in which city employees within an employee group participate and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of meeting and conferring with the city manager about the subjects specified in this division. 
    Organizational cooperative process: Organizational cooperative process is a process by which departmental issues are addressed in an organized and channeled manner that calls upon employees and management to jointly reach solutions to departmental issues. The organizational cooperative process shall be further defined in the employee involvement initiative meet and confer process. 
(Ord. No. 2433, § 1, 5-10-05) 
Sec. 2-79. - Employee groups. 
(a)  The meet and confer process outlined in this division shall be limited to a total of two (2) employee groups. They shall include: 
(1)  Regular, nonprobationary city firefighters, in all classifications up to and including the rank of Captain. 
(2)  Regular, nonprobationary city police officers, in all classifications up to and including the rank of Sergeant. 
(b)  The following personnel are ineligible for representation under the meet and confer process: 
(1)  Regular, nonprobationary city firefighters above the rank of Captain. 
(2)  Regular, nonprobationary city police officers above the rank of Sergeant. 
(3)  Probationary or temporary city firefighters and police officers. 
(4)  All other city employees. 
(Ord. No. 2433, § 1, 5-10-05) 
Sec. 2-80. - Representation process. 
(a)  Certification an employee group shall be determined by the following process: 
(1)  An employee organization seeking authorized recognition as the exclusive representative of an employee group shall file with the city manager: 
a.  The name and address of the employee organization; 
b.  A copy of its charter, constitution and by-laws, if such documents exist; 
c.  The names, titles, addresses and telephone numbers of all of its duly elected officers; 
d.  In the event not so designated in the charter, constitution, or by-laws of the employee organization, the name, title, address and telephone number of one duly elected officer who shall have full authority to legally bind the employee organization to any agreement, memorandum of understanding, contract, or other such document; and 
e.  Cards signed by at least fifty (50) percent plus one of the employee group that is requesting a representation election. 
(2)  The city manager will verify that the signatures on cards submitted by the employee organization are those of employees in the employee group. If the city manager determines that at least fifty (50) percent plus one of the employees in an employee group have requested a certification election, a secret ballot certification election will be held in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(3)  If at least seventy (70) percent of the employees in the employee group who vote in the certification election vote in favor of representation by the employee organization, then the city manager will designate the employee organization as the official and exclusive employee organization for purposes of the meet and confer process. 
(b)  Members of the employee group who will act as official representatives during the meet and confer process must have served actively for a minimum of one year on behalf of the city department in which the employee group exists, on a committee or on committees designated by the city manager as part of the organizational cooperative process. The minimum of one year of service must have been completed by the time the cards requesting an election are submitted to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2433, § 1, 5-10-05) 
Sec. 2-81. - Decertification process. 
    Once an employee group selects an employee organization to serve as its exclusive and official employee organization for purposes of meeting and conferring, decertification of that employee group may be accomplished by a secret ballot decertification election that will be held if the city manager receives cards signed by at least thirty (30) percent of the employees in the employee group requesting a decertification election. If at least fifty (50) percent of the employees who vote in the decertification election vote in favor of decertification, the city manager will decertify the employee organization and it shall no longer be the official and exclusive employee organization for purposes of meeting and conferring. 
(Ord. No. 2433, § 1, 5-10-05) 
Sec. 2-82. - Certification and decertification elections procedures. 
(a)  Elections will be conducted by secret ballot. 
(b)  Certification elections will only be held between July 15th and September 1st and the city manager must receive the cards in support of an election by July 1st. The cards must be signed and dated not more than ninety (90) days before they are submitted to the city manager. No more than one certification election may be held within any employee group during any twelve-month period. Notwithstanding the above, certification elections may be held at any other time upon mutual agreement of the city manager and the employee organization. 
(c)  Decertification elections may be held at any time upon receipt by the city manager of sufficient cards calling for a decertification election, as provided above. 
(d)  The city manager will oversee the conduct of elections. The procedures for the elections and matters related to the elections will be specified by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2433, § 1, 5-10-05) 
Sec. 2-83. - Rights of employees and employee organizations. 
(a)  Employees have the right to participate on behalf of, or engage in activities on behalf of, an employee organization and have the right to refrain from such activity. Employees will be free from any interference, restraint, or coercion by any employee, supervisor, or manager for or against employee organizations. Violations will necessitate disciplinary action. 
(b)  There can be only one official and exclusive employee organization for each employee group for purposes of meeting and conferring. Nothing in this division will prohibit any employee not within an employee group represented by a designated employee organization from exercising any rights the employee may have to meet with the city manager or other city official consistent with personnel rules and regulations or any city manager directive. 
(c)  Meeting and conferring will be conducted through the defined process with the city manager. Violation of this process may result in Decertification by the city manager. 
(d)  Designated employee organizations will have the right to biweekly dues deductions, if properly authorized by the members of the organization. 
(e)  Dues deductions for a designated employee organization from the paycheck of any participating employee must be authorized by each individual employee on the appropriate form provided by the human resources division. 
(Ord. No. 2433, § 1, 5-10-05) 
Sec. 2-84. - Scope of meet and confer. 
(a)  The meet and confer process may encompass certain wages, hours, benefits (excluding healthcare benefits), and working conditions which may include: salary or wage rates or other forms of direct monetary compensation and direct cost subjects; paid time off and procedures therefor; leaves of absence; non-healthcare related benefits; compensation studies; professional employment growth incentives; total hours of work required of an employee on each workday or workweek, including overtime, compensatory time, rest and meal periods and call-in/call-back; health and safety; training; retirement incentives; distribution of information; meet and confer procedures; procedure for employee grievances; rights of the employee organization and the city; and items mutually agreed upon by an employee organization and the city manager. 
(b)  The following are examples of items that will not be included in the meet and confer process: healthcare related benefits; discipline of employees; hiring; discharging; promotions; demotions; transfers; and suspensions. Thus, any aspect of the hiring, promotion or transfer of employees, the types of discipline, or the grounds for demotion, discharge, suspension or discipline will not be part of the meet and confer process. 
(c)  City will maintain the right of determination as to the purpose of each of its departments, agencies, boards and commissions, and set standards of service to be offered to the public and shall exercise complete control and discretion over its organization and operations. For example, 
(1)  The city will direct its employees, take disciplinary action, relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work or for other legitimate reasons, determine whether goods and services shall be produced or provided by city employees, purchased or contracted for, and determine the methods, means, and personnel by which the city's operations are to be conducted. 
(2)  The city has the right to take all necessary actions to maintain uninterrupted service to the community. 
(3)  The city manager may consult with the city's employees, or their authorized representatives, about the direct consequences that decisions on these matters may have on wages, hours, and working conditions. 
(4)  The enumeration of the above rights is illustrative only and is not to be construed as being all-inclusive. 
(Ord. No. 2433, § 1, 5-10-05) 
Sec. 2-85. - Meet and confer process. 
(a)  The employee organization may submit proposals regarding those items within the scope of the meet and confer process (as defined by this division) that affect the employee group it represents to the city manager. All proposals submitted to the city manager by the employee organization must be in writing and shall specifically delineate the issues that will be discussed in the meet and confer process. Proposals shall be submitted no later than September 15th for the following budget year. 
(b)  Upon receiving a proposal from an employee organization, the city manager will submit a written response to the employee organization, generally within thirty (30) days. 
(c)  Generally within ten (10) days from the receipt of the city manager's response, representatives of the employee organization and the city manager will begin "meeting and conferring" in a private session at mutually agreed upon times and places within the city, for the purpose of entering into a written memorandum of understanding relating to proposals. Only those issues identified in the employee organization's initial proposal and those raised in the city manager's response shall be discussed during the meet and confer process, unless otherwise mutually agreed. Meeting ground rules shall be mutually agreed upon and will be adhered to while meeting and conferring. 
(d)  Unless otherwise provided in this division, during the meet and confer process, all proposals submitted by the employee organization and all counter-proposals submitted by the city manager will remain confidential except that they will be available to the city manager, the employee organization representatives, the employees within the employee group, and others designated by the city manager. 
(e)  Upon agreement by the city manager and employee group as to the issues addressed in the meet and confer process, the city manager will cause to be prepared a memorandum of understanding, which shall be signed by the city manager and the designated representative of the employee group. This memorandum will be presented to mayor and council for their consideration during the budget process for the following budget year. 
(f)  If agreement has not been reached by December 15th, either party may request a neutral mediator. If the other party consents to the involvement of a mediator, arrangements will be made to involve a mediator from the federal mediation and conciliation service or a non-employee of the city that is mutually agreed upon by the city manager and the representative of the designated employee organization. All costs associated with the neutral mediator will be equally shared between the city and the employee organization. 
(g)  If agreement has not been reached by February 1st, the city will present a final offer to the representative of the employee organization. The employee organization may prepare written comments concerning the final offer. If the employee organization prepares written comments, such comments must be submitted to the city manager by February 21st. The final offer and written comments, if any, will be presented by February 28th to the council for consideration. Final action by the council upon the issues raised during the meet and confer process will serve as the memorandum of understanding for the following budget year. 
(Ord. No. 2433, § 1, 5-10-05) 
Sec. 2-86. - Resolution of claims of breach of a memorandum of understanding. 
(a)  In the event that the employee organization claims that there is a breach of a memorandum of understanding, and the employee organization and the city have been unable to informally resolve the matter, the employee organization may use the following exclusive process to resolve the matter: 
(1)  Within forty-five (45) days of the first occurrence of any event which constitutes all or part of the alleged breach, the employee organization shall give written notice to the city manager. The notice shall specify the provision(s) allegedly breached, the facts and evidence demonstrating or supporting the breach, and the date(s) of the alleged breach; 
(2)  A written response to the alleged breach shall be submitted by the city manager to the employee organization within ten (10) days of the written notice; 
(3)  Within fourteen (14) days of the city manager's written response, the employee group and the city manager shall meet and attempt to resolve the matter; and 
(4)  The employee group and the city manager shall sign a written agreement intended to reflect a resolution of the matter, which shall be approved by the city attorney; however, any resolution that requires council action will only be effective after approval by the council is secured. 
(b)  If the employee group and the city manager, are unable to resolve the matter, or approval as required above is not secured, the employee organization may submit the claim of an alleged breach to arbitration. The employee organization must notify the city manager of the submission to arbitration in writing within thirty (30) days of the city manager and employee group meeting to resolve this matter. The city manager and representative of the employee organization shall select an arbitrator to hear and decide the matter. Should the employee organization and the city manager be unable to agree upon an arbitrator, an arbitrator with public sector labor experience will appointed by the federal mediation and conciliation service. 
(c)  The arbitrator shall set a hearing on this matter within sixty (60) days of selection or appointment. The city attorney or legal counsel appointed by the city attorney shall represent the city at the hearing. 
(d)  The city and the employee group shall present to the arbitrator their position on the breach and the requested resolution. The arbitrator shall render a decision only by acceptance of one of the presented positions and resolutions. Should the dispute encompass more than one alleged breach, the city manager and employee group shall agree upon the separate designation of each breach and present its position and resolution of that breach separately, whereupon the arbitrator shall render a separate decision as to each breach only by acceptance of one of the presented positions and resolutions related to each breach. Should the city manager and employee group not agree upon the separate designations, the issues shall be submitted to the arbitrator for separate designation, which decision shall be final for the purposes of the arbitration. 
(e)  The decision of the arbitrator will be final and binding on the parties, so long as the decision does not add to, subtract from, or modify the provisions of the division dealing with this subject or the memorandum of understanding; and so long as the decision does not require the city to commit any resources not specifically budgeted by the council. 
(f)  The city and the employee group shall bear equally the costs associated with the arbitrator. 
(g)  The timeframes in this section can be mutually changed by a written agreement of the parties. The employee organization's failure to allege a breach by the date set forth in this section shall be deemed a waiver of any right to allege the breach thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2433, § 1, 5-10-05) 
Sec. 2-87. - Solicitation and distribution. 
(a)  Solicitation of members, dues and other internal employee organization business shall be conducted only during non-duty hours and shall not interfere with work. 
(b)  Solicitation of members and dues and other internal employee organization business shall take place in non-working areas. Notice of employee organization meetings and agendas may be posted in the city's e-mail meeting folder at the membership's cost. 
(Ord. No. 2433, § 1, 5-10-05) 
Sec. 2-88. - Delegation. 
    The city manager may delegate any of his duties and responsibilities under the meet and confer process and may appoint personnel to assist in the performance of those duties and responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 2433, § 1, 5-10-05) 
Secs. 2-89, 2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-91. - Benefits. 
    The benefits provided for employees of the city shall, unless otherwise provided or restricted/prohibited by law, be available to all classified service employees, unclassified service employees, and city council members. 
(Ord. No. 2138, § 2, 5-30-00) 
Secs. 2-92-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SOCIAL SECURITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Social security, A.R.S. § 38-701 et seq.; authority of coverage of municipal employees, A.R.S. § 38-704. 

Sec. 2-101. - Policy of city. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, effective as of April 1, 1951, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law or by this article, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of old age and survivors' insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, including Public Law 734 of 81st Congress. In pursuance of this policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1963, § 2-10) 
Sec. 2-102. - Mayor and clerk to execute necessary documents. 
    The mayor and clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state agency authorized to act to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided in section 2-101 hereof. 
(Code 1963, § 2-11) 
Sec. 2-103. - Withholdings. 
    Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided in section 2-101 hereof are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state or federal agency designated by laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Code 1963, § 2-12) 
State Law reference- Withholdings from wages authorized, A.R.S. § 38-704(D). 
Sec. 2-104. - Appropriation by city. 
    There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's contributions, which shall be paid over to the state agency designated by such laws or regulations to receive same. 
(Code 1963, § 2-13) 
Sec. 2-105. - Records required. 
    The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1963, § 2-14) 
Sec. 2-106. - Limitation on coverage. 
    There is hereby excluded from this division any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official now covered, or authorized to be covered, by any other ordinance or law creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 2-15) 
Sec. 2-107. - Adoption of title II of the Social Security Act. 
    The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto appertaining, of title II of the Social Security Act as amended by Public Law No. 734, 81st Congress, for and on behalf of all the officers and employees thereof, save and except any of such officers and employees now covered or authorized to be covered by any retirement system provided by law, and further excepting any official or employee who occupies any position, office, or employment not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations; and further excluding emergency and officials or employees whose compensation is on fee basis. 
(Code 1963, § 2-16) 
Secs. 2-108-2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCIAL AFFAIRS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 21. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-121. - Authority of council to contract, etc., for professional and technical advice. 
    The council may, from time to time, by contract or otherwise, procure the services of such accountants, attorneys, engineers and other technical experts and employees as it shall deem necessary or for the best interests of the city; and shall pay for such services out of the funds of the city such reasonable compensation as may be fixed by the contract for such services or otherwise agreed upon or lawfully determined. 
(Code 1963, § 2-1) 
Charter reference- Contracts generally, Art. VIII. 
Sec. 2-122. - Claims and demands against city. 
(a)  All claims or demands against the city shall be presented to the city treasurer, and shall contain the name and address of the claimant as well as the amount of money claimed or demanded and a brief description of the goods or service rendered. 
(b)  Upon submission of any claim or demand, the same shall be audited by the staff of the finance department and submitted to the city treasurer for his approval. 
(c)  No claim or demand shall be paid until approved by the city treasurer, and shall then be paid at the convenience of the city treasurer. 
(d)  No claim or demand shall be submitted to the council, but all such claims shall be available for inspection in the office of the city treasurer for a period of seven (7) years. The city treasurer shall submit, prior to each council meeting, an informative list which shall reflect all claims approved by the city treasurer in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and a total aggregate sum listing for all of the claims approved by the city treasurer since the prior council meeting. 
(Code 1963, § 10-1; Ord. No. 1206, § 1, 7-6-82) 
Charter reference- Authority to so provide, Art. VI, § 13. 
Sec. 2-123. - Charge for dishonored checks or similar instruments. 
(a)  As used in this section, 
(1)  "Check" shall mean any form of negotiable instrument of payment, including but not necessarily limited to checks, warrants, drafts, share drafts and any other form of negotiable instrument within the scope of Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 of the Arizona Uniform Commercial Code, A.R.S. § 47-3101 et seq., or A.R.S. § 12-671, or both. 
(2)  A check is "dishonored" when payment or credit thereon is not timely made by reason of nonsufficient funds, nonexistent or closed account, uncollected funds, or other reason within the scope of either A.R.S. § 47-3507 or A.R.S. § 12-671, or both. 
(b)  In addition to the city's rights under Chapters 3 and 4 of the Arizona Uniform Commercial Code, A.R.S. § 47-3101 et seq., or A.R.S. § 12-671, or both, in the event that any person presents to the city or any of its departments, agencies, boards or commissions a check in payment of any fee, charge or other obligation whatsoever and the check is dishonored, 
(1)  There shall be charged to such person an additional fee in an amount to be established by resolution of the city council and such additional fee shall be due and payable immediately upon written assessment thereof and shall be collectible by any lawful means, including civil lawsuit by the city attorney; 
(2)  The presentment of such dishonored check to the city shall not be deemed to be payment of the fee, charge or other obligation for which it was presented unless and until full payment or credit on such check shall be made to the city or the person presenting such dishonored check shall make full payment to the city in cash. In either event "full payment" shall include the amount of the check, the additional fee charged pursuant to this section, and any interest applicable to the original fee, charge or other obligation for which the check was presented. 
(c)  In addition to the preceding paragraphs, the city may refuse to accept any future payments from a person whose check has been dishonored, by check or any form of payment other than cash. 
(Ord. No. 1589, § 1, 2-28-89) 
Secs. 2-124-2-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING PROCEDURE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01, amended Div. 2 completely; repealed §§ 2-155 and 2-156 derived from Ord. No. 1767, § 1, 5-11-93. 
Charter reference- Purchasing ordinance required, Art. VIII, § 3; other purchasing rules, Art. VIII, § 4 et seq. 

Sec. 2-136. - Short title. 
    This division shall be known and may be cited as the "Purchasing Ordinance of the City of Glendale, Arizona." 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 3.102, 6-7-83; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-137. - Scope. 
    This division shall apply to expenditures of public funds, regardless of source, including state and federal assistance monies, by the city except that nothing in this division shall prevent the city from complying with terms and conditions of any grant, gift, bequest, cooperative agreement, or federal guideline. This division does not apply to contracts solicited or entered into for construction projects. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 3.101, 6-7-83; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-138. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City personal property: Any equipment, supplies or products having been purchased by the city, or obtained by reason of abandonment, confiscation or donation. 
    Construction: The process of building, altering, improving, or demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. It does not include the operation, or preventative maintenance of existing structures, buildings, or real property. 
    Contract: A written agreement of the city, for the city, for the procurement of supplies or services. The term includes but is not limited to contacts of a fixed price, cost, cost plus a fixed fee, or incentive type; contracts providing for the issuance of job or task orders; leases, excluding real estate; rentals; maintenance agreements; letter contracts; and purchase orders. The term also includes supplemental agreements with respect to any of the foregoing. 
    Contract modification: Any written alteration in the terms and conditions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract. 
    Contractor: Any person having a contract with the city. 
    Cooperative purchasing: Procurement conducted by, or on behalf of, more than one (1) public procurement unit. 
    Debarment: The disqualification of a vendor to receive invitations for bids or the award of a contract by the city for a specified period of time, not to exceed three (3) years, commensurate with the seriousness of the offense resulting from conduct or failure or inadequacy of performance. 
    Emergency purchase: Procurement when supplies or services are needed for a situation where the health, safety or welfare of the public is endangered if immediate corrective or preventive action is not taken. 
    Finance director: Shall mean the Director of the Finance Department or any successor City department with responsibility for Finance, or his/her authorized designee. 
    Invitation for bid: All documents including those attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting bids. 
    Local vendor: A vendor having an office within the corporate limits of the city or within the water and sewer service of the city. 
    Materials manager or manager: The person designated by the city manager as the materials manager. 
    Open market procurement: Procedures used for procurement when formal purchase procedure is not required. 
    Procurement: The purchasing, renting, leasing, or otherwise obtaining any supplies, or service. The term includes all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply, or service, including description of requirements, selection and solicitations of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
    Request for proposal: All documents including those attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals. 
    Responsible bidder or proposer: A bidder or proposer who has the capability to perform fully the contract requirements, and the reliability, which will assure good faith performance. 
    Responsive bidder or proposer: A bidder or proposer who has submitted a bid or proposal which conforms in material respects to the solicitation. 
    Service: The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor, not involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are merely incidental to the required performance. This term does not include "professional services" such as architects, lawyers, certified public accountants, consultants, appraisers, and engineers, or employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements. 
    Shall: The words "shall," "will," and "must" all refer to mandatory actions. 
    Specification: Any description of the physical or functional characteristics, or of the nature of, a supply, or service item. The term may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing a supply, or service item for delivery. 
    Supply: All personal property, including equipment. 
    Surplus supplies: Any supplies no longer having any use to the city. This term includes obsolete, scrap, and nonexpendable supplies that have completed their useful life cycle. 
    Using or requesting agency: Any department, agency or commission, board, committee or other unit in the city government using supplies or services. 
    Warehouse manager: The person, regardless of job title or classification, responsible for the supervision of the warehouse, warehouse daily operations, and warehouse personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 3.103, 6-7-83; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 3004, § 1, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 2-139. - Materials manager generally. 
(a)  The materials manager shall be the head of and be responsible for the administration of the purchasing department as described in Article VIII, Section 3, of the City Charter. The materials manager shall have general supervision of the purchasing department. The materials manager shall have the powers and duties prescribed by this division. 
(b)  The materials manager shall have the power and it shall be his duty: 
(1)  To procure and contract for supplies and services including rentals, service agreements, and leases needed by any using agency, in accordance with purchasing procedures as prescribed by this division and such rules and regulations as the materials manager shall adopt for the internal management and operation of the purchasing department and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the city manager. The authority of the materials manager to make procurements and contract for all using agencies shall not be abridged by excepting any particular using agency, except with the authorization of the city manager, when it is determined that such action would be in the best interest of the city. 
(2)  To establish and amend, when necessary, all rules, forms and regulations authorized by this division and any others necessary to its operation. 
(3)  To recommend the debarment of vendors. When debarment is recommended, a statement of the reason for placing the vendor on debarment shall be prepared by the materials manager in writing and transmitted to the city attorney. Upon the city attorney's approval, the materials manager shall notify the vendor by letter containing an option to appeal and appear before a review board committee consisting of materials manager, city manager or designee, and the participating city agency. 
(Ord. No. 1233, §§ 3.103, 3.104, 6-7-83; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-140. - Inspection and testing. 
(a)  The materials manager shall supervise the inspection or testing of deliveries of supplies or performance of services to determine their conformance with specifications. 
(b)  The materials manager shall have authority to authorize using agencies having staff and facilities for adequate inspection to inspect all deliveries made to such using agencies. 
(c)  The materials manager shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted and sample of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the materials manager shall have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any agency of the city or of any outside laboratory. 
(d)  The materials manager shall have authority to monitor and inspect the performance of a contractor at the using agency to determine compliance to service specifications. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 3.107, 6-7-83; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-141. - Requisitions and estimates. 
    A requesting agency shall file with the materials manager, requisitions of the requirements in supplies and services, certified by means of a department signature in accordance with the city's administrative code for signature regulations. The signature shall certify that there is to the credit of the using agency a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance to defray the amount of such order. The materials manager may not issue an order for delivery until the requesting agency has filed the requisition for the requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 3.105, 6-7-83; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-142. - Standards and specifications. 
    The materials manager shall prepare in cooperation with the city departments written standards and specifications for supplies and services. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 3.106, 6-7-83; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-143. - Modification of contracts. 
    The materials manager, after consultation with the city attorney, may modify or delete existing and add new contractual provisions and clauses for all forms of supply and service contracts utilized by the city, provided that such modification, deletions or additions are supported by a written determination. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 3.108, 6-7-83; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-144. - Unauthorized purchases. 
    Except as provided in this division, it shall be unauthorized for any city employee to order the purchase of supplies or services or make contracts within the purview of this division other than through the purchasing department and purchase orders. Purchases or contracts made contrary to the provisions hereof may not be approved, and the city may not be bound thereby. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 3.104(1), 6-7-83; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-145. - Formal purchase procedure. 
    Procurement of supplies and services, when the cost will exceed the formal purchase dollar threshold of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), shall be made using either formal written request for proposal (RFP) or invitation for bid (IFB), except as otherwise provided in this division. 
    The materials manager shall determine which procurement method (RFP or IFB) will be most practicable and advantageous to the city for the procurement of supplies or services. 
(1)  General: 
a.  Public notice of an IFB or RFP shall be in accordance with the City Charter. 
b.  The materials manager shall have authority to require a bid or proposal guarantee be submitted with any and all bids or proposals, and performance bonds be submitted prior to execution of any contract. 
c.  The IFB or RFP may be delayed or canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected, in whole or in part, by the materials manager in the best interest of the city. 
d.  The materials manager shall have the authority to refuse an award to any vendor or contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other monies due the city at the time set for opening the bid or proposal. All vendors and contractors must be in compliance, at the time set for opening the bid or proposal, with all applicable state licensing laws, rules and regulations. 
e.  Budgeted line items specifically identifying products or services, which have been approved by the city council in their review and adoption of the annual budget of the city, and for which an award is within the allocated expenditure, shall be approved for award by the materials manager and deputy city manager. At the discretion of the city manager, the award of an IFB or RFP may be submitted for the approval of the city council. Awards that exceed the allocated expenditure shall require the approval of the city council. 
f.  No contract or procurement shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section. 
g.  With the approval of the city manager, formal purchase procedures of section 2-145, may be waived when there has been a written determination that the formal purchase procedures of section 2-145, would not be likely to result in a lower price to the city or would cause unnecessary expense or delay under the circumstances. 
h.  The amount of any applicable transaction privilege or use tax of this city shall not be a factor in determining the net lowest bidder or the most advantageous proposal. (Source: A.R.S. 41-2533(G) and 41-2534(G)) 
i.  City manager directives prescribe procedures for the procurement of supplies and services, which exceed the formal purchase dollar threshold, and because of specific circumstances competition is not applicable. Awards, pursuant to this provision, shall require either the approval of the city council, or city manager. 
j.  The materials manager shall have authority to receive formal protests lodged in writing, specifically identifying the objection to the award of an IFB or RFP, pursuant to formal purchase procedure. The protest must be submitted to the materials manager no later than seven (7) calendar days after notification of the intent to award. Untimely protests will not be considered. (Source: A.R.S. §§ 41-2533(G) and 41-2534(G)) 
(2)  Sealed bidding (IFB): 
a.  An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include a purchase description and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. 
b.  Bids shall be opened publicly at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid, and such other relevant information as may be specified by the materials manager, together with the name of each bidder shall be recorded as determined by the materials manager. This record shall be open to public inspection after the bid opening in a manner prescribed by the materials manager. Except to the extent the bidder designates, and the city concurs, trade secrets or other proprietary data contained in the bid documents shall remain confidential. 
c.  Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitations for bids. The invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation that are not set forth in the invitation for bids or this subsection (2). 
d.  After bid opening, no corrections in bid prices or other provisions of bids or withdrawal of bids, prejudicial to the interest of this city or fair competition shall be permitted. All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of any bid, or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, after bid opening shall be supported by a written determination made by the materials manager. 
e.  The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid conforms in material respects to the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. In making the determination of the lowest responsible and responsive bidder, the materials manager may consider the following: 
1.  The ability, capacity and experience of the bidder to perform the contract. 
2.  Whether the bidder can perform the contract promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference. 
3.  The quality of performance of previous contracts. 
4.  The sufficiency of the financial resources of the bidder to perform the contract. 
5.  The quality and adaptability of the materials, supplies or services to the particular use required. 
(Source: A.R.S. § 41-2533(G)) 
6.  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bidder's offer. 
f.  If an award is not given to the lowest bidder, a statement of the reason for not awarding to the lowest bidder shall be given in writing and be placed in the contract file. 
(3)  Sealed proposals (RFP): 
a.  Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals. 
b.  Proposals shall be opened publicly at the time and place designated in the request for proposals. The name of each proposer and such other relevant information as the materials manager shall designate shall be publicly read and recorded as required by the materials manager. All other information contained in the proposals shall be confidential so as to avoid disclosure of contents prejudicial to competing proposers during the process of negotiation. The proposals shall not be open for public inspection until after contract award. Except to the extent the proposer designates, and the city concurs, trade secrets or other proprietary data contained in the proposal shall remain confidential. 
c.  As provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be conducted with responsible proposers who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible to being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and responsiveness to, the solicitation requirements. Proposers shall be accorded fair treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and before award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing proposers during the negotiation process. (Source: A.R.S. § 41-2534(F)) 
d.  The award shall be made to the responsible and responsive proposer whose proposal is determined, in writing, to be the most advantageous to the city and best meets the overall needs of the city taking into consideration the evaluation of factors set forth in the request for proposals. The city is not bound to award to the lowest cost (priced) RFP. No other factors or criteria may be used in the evaluation other than as set forth in the request for proposals or in this subsection (3). In addition to the criteria set forth in the request for proposals, the materials manager may also consider the following: 
1.  Price. 
2.  The ability, capacity and experience of the proposer to perform the contract. 
3.  Whether the proposer can perform the contract promptly or within the time specified, without delay or interference. 
4.  The quality of performance of previous contracts. 
5.  The sufficiency of the financial resources of the proposer to perform the contract. 
6.  The quality and adaptability of the materials, supplies or services to the particular use required. 
7.  The number and scope of conditions attached to the proposer's offer, and conformance of proposer's offer to material aspects of the request for proposal. 
(Source: A.R.S. § 41-2534(G)) 
e.  The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 3.109, 6-7-83; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 1710, § 1, 2-4-92; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Charter reference- Bids, Art. VII, § 4. 
Sec. 2-146. - Informal purchase procedures. 
(a)  Procurement of supplies and services, when the total cost will not exceed the formal purchase dollar threshold of section 2-145, shall be made using informal purchase procedures. 
(b)  All informal purchase procurements, wherever practical, are to be based on at least three (3) quotations. City manager directives prescribe procedures for the procurement of supplies and services, which do not exceed the established informal purchase procedure amount, and because of specific circumstances competition is not applicable. 
(c)  Quotations shall be solicited from prospective vendors. 
(d)  The award shall be made to the quotation which best meets the needs of, and is most advantageous to, the city. In addition to the criteria set forth in the quotation, the materials manager may also consider the following: 
1.  Price. 
2.  The ability, capacity and experience of the proposer to perform the contract. 
3.  Whether the proposer can perform the contract promptly or within the time specified, without delay or interference. 
4.  The quality of performance of previous contracts. 
5.  The sufficiency of the financial resources of the proposer to perform the contract. 
6.  The quality and adaptability of the materials, supplies or services to the particular use required. 
7.  The number and scope of conditions attached to the proposer's offer, and conformance of proposer's offer to material aspects of the quotation. 
(e)  The materials manager shall keep a record of all informal purchase awards and the responses submitted in competition thereon, and such records shall be part of the public record. 
(f)  The materials manager shall prescribe an amount which qualifies as a small purchase. The amount determination by the materials manager shall be in writing, part of the public record and shall not exceed the amount specified in subsection (h) of this section. City manager directives prescribe procedures for the procurement of supplies and services which do not exceed the established small purchase amount. Such small purchase procurements, which do not exceed the established amount, are independent of the requirements of this section. 
(g)  Procurement of supplies and services when the cost will not exceed the formal purchase dollar threshold but is greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be made using written quotations. 
(h)  Procurement of supplies and services, when the cost will not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) but is greater than the small purchase amount may be made using verbal or written quotations. 
(i)  The materials manager shall have authority to receive protests lodged in writing, specifically identifying the objection to the award of a quotation, and render a written finding, pursuant to informal purchase procedure. The finding of the materials manager shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 3.110, 6-7-83; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 1710, § 2, 2-4-92; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-147. - Emergency purchases. 
(a)  The materials manager may procure and contract for supplies and services without compliance with the procedures set forth in sections 2-145 and 2-146 of this Code when there has been a determination that an emergency purchase is necessary. 
(b)  The requesting department head shall be responsible for determining the validity of all emergency purchase requests. 
(c)  Emergency purchases shall be confirmed by filing a purchase requisition marked "emergency" to the materials manager no later than noon the next working day. A complete written explanation shall be signed by the department head and transmitted with the requisition. 
(d)  City manager directives for emergency purchases of material and services prescribe procedures for emergency purchases. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 3.111, 6-7-83; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-148. - Sole source procurements. 
(a)  The materials manager may procure and contract for supplies and services without compliance with the procedures set forth in sections 2-145 and 2-146 of this Code when there has been a written determination that competition is not available and there is only one (1) known source for the supply or service. 
(b)  The agency requesting a sole source procurement shall provide a written determination, in such manner and on such form as the materials manager shall prescribe, justifying the basis for the sole source procurement. 
(c)  Award of a sole source procurement which exceeds the formal purchase dollar threshold shall require the approval of the city council. City manager directives for sole source procurements of materials and services prescribes procedures for sole source procurement. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 3.112, 6-7-83; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-149. - Cooperative purchasing. 
(a)  The materials manager shall have the authority to participate with other units of government for the procurement of supplies or services in cooperative purchasing agreements when the best interests of the city would be served thereby. 
(b)  The materials manager shall have the authority to enter into agreements, independent of the requirements of sections 2-145 and 2-146, established with other units of government for the cooperative use of supplies or services provided the actions of the other party comply with the intent of said sections. 
(c)  The materials manager shall have the authority to institute contracts with the approval of the city council for the common use of warehouse facilities, capital equipment and other facilities with other units of government under terms mutually agreed upon. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 3.113, 6-7-83; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-150. - Warehousing stores. 
(a)  There is established in the City's books and records an account known as the warehouse inventory account. 
(b)  Supplies to be added into an inventory administered by the Warehouse Manager shall be charged against the warehouse inventory account. Requisitions for withdrawal of supplies in inventory shall be credited to the warehouse inventory account by a charge against the appropriation of the requesting agency. 
(c)  The Warehouse Manager shall maintain a perpetual inventory record of supplies charged against the revolving fund and be responsible for the receipt, storage, issuance and distribution of supplies contained therein. 
(d)  The Warehouse Manager shall be responsible for ensuring all inventory and supplies added to the inventory account are procured in accordance with this chapter and such policies and procedures as may be set forth by the Materials Manager. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 3.114, 6-7-83; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 3004, § 1, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 2-151. - Pool stock. 
    The materials manager shall have the authority to transfer and administer surplus city personal property into a pool stock to be maintained for use by requesting agencies on a temporary basis. Using such form as shall be established, pool stock will be issued to requesting agency. All pool stock shall be returned at designated time. The materials manager shall maintain pool stock in such condition that it is fit for its intended purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 3.115, 6-7-83; Ord. No. 1605, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Secs. 2-152-2-154. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-155. - Bidding. 
    All construction contracts shall be awarded only after a public competitive bid in compliance with title 34, Arizona Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2211, § 1, 9-25-01) 
Sec. 2-156 - Approval of change orders. 
(a)  Change orders, which do not increase the contract amount of construction contracts, shall be approved and executed by the city manager. 
(b)  Change orders, which increase the contract amount of construction contracts, may be approved and executed by the city manager if the total of all change orders for the contract does not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 2211, § 2, 9-25-01) 
Secs. 2-157-2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SALE, LEASE, ETC., OF CITY PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-166. - Authorized. 
    The city shall have the right to sell, lease, exchange or otherwise dispose of city property for the best interests of the city. Except as provided in the charter, the council shall determine the best interests of the city and such determination shall be final. 
(Code 1963, §§ 2-39, 2-40) 
Sec. 2-167. - Notice. 
    No sale of property shall be made until a notice of such sale has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for two (2) consecutive weeks and a notice of such sale has been posted at the city hall for twelve (12) consecutive days. 
(Code 1963, § 2-41) 
Sec. 2-168. - Bids. 
    The council shall receive all bids for the sale of city property; provided, however, that the council shall have the right to reject any and all bids. 
(Code 1963, § 2-42) 
Sec. 2-169. - Exchanges of property. 
    No exchange of property shall be made until a notice of such exchange has been posted at the city hall for twelve (12) consecutive days. 
(Code 1963, § 2-43) 
Sec. 2-170. - Execution of documents. 
    The council shall have the power to authorize the execution of any and all instruments pertaining to the sale, lease, exchange or disposal of city property. 
(Code 1963, § 2-44) 
DIVISION 3.1. - DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS OR OBSOLETE CITY PERSONAL PROPERTY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2184, § 2, 2-13-01, amended Div. 3.1 completely; repealed § 2-174 derived from Ord. No. 1605, § 2, 6-13-89; renumbered § 2-175 as 2-174. 

Sec. 2-171. - Disposal. 
    The city shall have the right to sell, lease, exchange, trade or otherwise dispose of surplus or obsolete city personal property for the best interest of the city. Except as provided in the Charter, the city manager shall determine the best interests of the city and such determination shall be final. The conversion of surplus and obsolete city property for personal use is prohibited. Firearms and other specialty items used by the police department may be disposed of in any manner deemed to be in the city's best interest by the city manager. At the discretion of the city manager, the city may elect to donate any surplus or obsolete city personal property to a governmental, nonprofit or charitable organization, without public notice. 
(Ord. No. 1605, § 2, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Charter reference- Sale or transfer of obsolete supplies, material and equipment, Art. VIII, § 5. 
Sec. 2-172. - Notice. 
    No sale, lease, exchange, trade or other disposal action of surplus or obsolete city personal property shall be made until a public notice in the official newspaper is provided. 
(Ord. No. 1605, § 2, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-173. - Offers. 
    The materials manager shall receive all offers to purchase surplus or obsolete city personal property; provided, however, that the materials manager shall have the right to reject any and all offers. Items for which no offers are received may be deemed to be of no intrinsic or monetary value and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the materials manager. 
(Ord. No. 1605, § 2, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-174. - Execution of documents. 
    The materials manager shall have the power to execute any and all instruments pertaining to the sale, lease, exchange, trade or other disposal action of surplus or obsolete city personal property. 
(Ord. No. 1605, § 2, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Secs. 2-175-2-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INVESTMENT OF FUNDS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Optional provisions for investment of funds, A.R.S., § 35-321 et seq. 

Sec. 2-186. - Investment policies; responsibilities. 
(a)  The "Investment Policy for the City of Glendale" is hereby adopted by this reference and shall apply to all investments of funds by the City of Glendale. The "Investment Policy for the City of Glendale" may be amended only by resolution of the council of the City of Glendale. 
(b)  The finance director for the city shall be responsible for the daily management of the investment of city funds. All investments shall be in accordance with the "Investment Policy for the City of Glendale." 
(c)  Investments shall not exceed the maximum maturity as provided by Arizona Revised Statute Title 35 (Public Finances), Chapter 2 (Handling of Public Funds), Article 2.1 (Money Management), Section 35-323 (Investing Public Monies; Bidding; Security and Other Requirements). 
(d)  The finance director shall make reports to the city council, as requested by the city council, of the results and status of the investment of city funds. 
(Ord. No. 1878, § 2, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 2972, § 1, 1-12-16, effective 2-15-16) 
Secs. 2-187-2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RISK MANAGEMENT TRUST FUND[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2892, § 1, adopted May 27, 2014, repealed the former Div. 5, §§ 2-201-2-209, and enacted a new Div. 5, §§ 2-201-2-213, as set out herein. The former division pertained to Risk Management Trust Fund and Workers' Compensation Trust Fund and derived from Ord. No. 1254, §§ 1-11, adopted Oct. 4, 1983 and Ord. No. 1826, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 1994. Provisions pertaining to Workers' Compensation Trust Fund are now set forth in Division 6 of this article. 

Sec. 2-201. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions, words, terms and phrases, when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City: The City of Glendale, Arizona, including elected officials, members of boards and commissions, employees and supervised volunteers while performing duties for the city within the scope of employment. 
    City attorney: City attorney or designee. 
    City manager: City manager or designee. 
    City risk manager: City risk manager or designee. 
    Claim: Any insured claim, liability claim, personal injury claim or property claim as defined herein. 
    Claim costs: Any internal or external cost or expense, property damage costs incurred by the city for any claim against the city, covered corporation, city, a covered corporation, a covered city entity or a covered individual including claim adjustment costs, appraisals, contractual services costs, legal defense costs, attorneys' fees and costs, and judgments awarded against the city. 
    Covered city entity: Any board, commission, committee, subcommittee, agency, trust, authority or joint powers authority created by city charter provision, city ordinance, resolution, or other formal action of the city council for the exclusive benefit of the city as a public municipality. 
    Covered corporation: Any corporation, partnership, or limited liability company created for the purpose of assisting the city in capital acquisitions and other exclusively municipal purposes. 
    Covered individual: Any individual falling within the following classes on the date of loss or the date a claim against the city arises: 
(1)  Any elected official of the city; 
(2)  Any individual appointed to any city entity or any member of a board of a covered corporation; 
(3)  Any employee of the city, including any officer of the city, carried on the city payroll and subject to city personnel rules, whether full-time, part-time, permanent or short-term; 
(4)  Any individual contracting to perform services for and on behalf of the city and regularly performing such services on city property or city controlled sites and performing such services under the continuing, actual direction and control of an individual described in subsection (1), (2) or (3) of this definition; or 
(5)  Any individual who, at the time and place of the occurrence, event, act or omission alleged to have formed the basis of any claim, was acting as a volunteer for or on behalf of the city, with the knowledge and approval of the city, and further who was at such time and place acting under the actual direction and control of an individual described in subsection (1), (2) or (3) of this definition. 
    Deductibles: Any claim covered by insurance, but subject to a deductible will be covered by the risk management trust funds. 
    Employment practice liability: Any claim or lawsuit by a past or present employee of the city, or an applicant for employment with the city, arising out of wrongful employment or hiring practices. Employment practices liability shall include legal actions, brought under state, local or federal law, whether common or statutory, and complaints to the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and the Arizona Attorney General, and may include, but shall not be limited to, allegations of violations of the following federal laws, as amended, including but not limited to, regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(1)  Americans with Disabilities Act of 1992 (ADA); 
(2)  Civil Rights Act of 1991; 
(3)  Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), including the Older Workers Benefit Protection Act of 1990; 
(4)  Title VII of the Civil Rights Law of 1964; as amended (1983), including Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978; 
(5)  Civil Rights Act of 1866; Section 1981; and 
(6)  Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments of the U.S. Constitution. 
    Finance department director: Finance department director or designee. 
    Insured claim: Any claim that falls within the coverage provisions of any insurance policy that indemnifies the city, covered corporation, covered city entity, a covered corporation, a covered city entity, or covered individual; or a claim for damage to city-owned property that falls within the coverage of a first-party commercial property insurance policy. 
    Liability claim: Any claim or demand, including any legal action and counter demand or counter claim in the nature of a tort or employment law claim, made by any person or entity for the payment of money damages for which the city self-insures through the risk management trust fund. The following types of claims are excluded from the definition of liability claim and are not to be paid out of the risk management trust fund: 
(1)  Claims or punitive damages arising out of the willful violation of a penal statute or ordinance; 
(2)  Claims arising out of acts of bad faith and/or fraud committed by or at the direction of an individual with affirmative dishonesty or actual intent to deceive or defraud; 
(3)  Claims which are covered by a valid insurance policy or which shall be deemed uninsurable under law; 
(4)  Any claim based upon an individual gaining in fact any personal profit or advantage to which they were not legally entitled; 
(5)  Inventory shrinkage and damages to city property that has customarily been repaired by city employees; 
(6)  Lost wages not covered under the workers compensation laws of the state or any other state; 
(7)  Any demand based solely on the assertion of a claim with the jurisdiction of the city's personnel board; 
(8)  Any demand based solely on contract rights or issues; 
(9)  Any demand based on taxes; 
(10)  Any solely nonmonetary demand; except declaratory judgments that may be related to claims for injury or damages; 
(11)  Damages as a result of loss of any property, business advantage or economic interest caused by inverse condemnation, relocation, eminent domain or by governmental action. 
    Personal injury claim: Injury, including consequential bodily injury or property damage arising out of: false arrest, detention or imprisonment or malicious prosecution; publication or utterance of libel or slander, including disparaging statements concerning the condition, value, quality or use of real or personal property, or publication or utterance in violation of rights of privacy; wrongful entry or eviction, or other invasion of the right of private occupancy; assault and battery committed or directed for the purpose of protecting persons or property from injury or death; or discrimination on any basis, including but not limited to: race, religion, nationality, national origin, color, creed, sex, sexual orientation, age, nature of employment, or disability. 
    Property: Property of every description both real and personal (including improvements, fixtures and remodeling or increasing the property value of others in the care, custody or control of the city) for which the city is liable or under the obligation to insure. 
    Property claim: Any claim or demand, including any legal action and counter demand or counter claim in the nature of a tort, made by any person or entity for the payment of money damages for which the city self-insures through the risk management trust fund. 
    Property damage costs: Any cost associated with or arising out of a physical injury to, or the complete or partial destruction of, tangible property, including the loss of use of tangible property which has not been physically injured or destroyed, provided such loss of use is caused by an occurrence for which the city is liable. 
    Risk management expenses: Insurance premiums, brokerage fees and costs, adjusting, appraisal, city risk manager salary and benefits, city deductibles or self-insured retentions, legal fees and costs, and defense fees and costs. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 1, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-202. - Established; size. 
(a)  A trust fund to be known as the "risk management trust fund" shall be established and used for the purpose of providing the city risk manager with funds to pay the city's claims, claim costs, and risk management expenses. Such trust fund shall not be used for any other purpose. 
(b)  All monies received by the city for the purpose of funding the risk management trust fund shall be deposited into the trust fund. The monies placed in the risk management trust fund shall be derived from departmental contributions, refunds, interest, investment income and amounts recovered for the benefit of the trust fund. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 1, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-203. - Self-insurance; funding, allocation and use. 
(a)  When using the risk management trust fund, the city shall act as a self-insurer for all claims, other than those falling within the coverage provisions of an insurance policy or surety bond. The liability of the city for such costs shall be established by law. The city risk manager shall cause the city to comply with all requirements for self-insurers as may be contained in applicable law, to obtain for the city, all benefits of self-insurance status, and to maintain such status for as long as it is in the city's interests to do so. 
(b)  The risk management trust fund shall be funded as part of the annual budgetary and appropriation process of the city in such amounts as to provide sufficient monies to pay all reasonably anticipated claim costs, property damage costs and risk management expenses against the city for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(c)  The city council shall determine the funding level of the risk management trust fund based on the amounts expended for self-insurance purposes, if any, and on the recommendations of the city manager, the city risk manager and the finance director. The cost of funding and administering the risk management trust fund set forth in the annual budget shall be allocated among departments of the city by the city risk manager and the finance director based on: 
(1)  Prior loss experience of the risk management trust fund; 
(2)  Projected exposure of risk based upon actuarial analysis; 
(3)  Insurance premium costs, if any; and 
(4)  Risk management expenses. 
(d)  The risk management trust fund shall be used to pay all claims, legal defenses, payment of claim costs, property claim costs, risk management expenses, and costs as described in section 2-202 above subject to the exceptions as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 1, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-204. - Trustees. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint five (5) trustees to administer the risk management trust fund and a risk management trust fund board of trustees. No more than one (1) trustee shall simultaneously be a member of the city council and no more than one (1) trustee shall be a city employee. The city risk manager shall be the technical advisor of the risk management trust fund. The trustees shall be responsible for recommendations to the city council regarding the administration of the risk management trust fund. The trustees shall meet at least twice a year. Annually, the trustees shall submit a report to the city council as to the status of the risk management trust fund. Such report shall include a summary of all monies collected and all payments made from the risk management trust fund since the last report and any recommendations the trustees deem necessary to meet their joint fiduciary obligations for administering the risk management trust fund. The trustees shall be bonded in an amount satisfactory to the city risk manager, but not less than the minimum amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Costs for bonding will be paid from the risk management trust fund. The trustees shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years and a chairman shall be designated by the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
(b)  The term of any trustee automatically ends: 
(1)  On death of the trustee; 
(2)  On submittal of a written resignation to the risk management trust fund board chair or the mayor; 
(3)  On failure to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the risk management trust fund board; or 
(4)  On termination of city employment. 
(c)  Three (3) trustees shall constitute a quorum for the exercise of the powers and duties conferred upon the risk management trust fund board. 
(d)  Conflict of interest laws shall apply to each of the trustees. 
(e)  Trustees shall serve on the risk management trust fund board without salary or compensation. 
(f)  The trustees shall: 
(1)  Provide financial oversight of the risk management trust fund and make recommendations to improve fund management and returns; 
(2)  Review the risk management trust fund balance and make recommendations to ensure adequate funds exist to pay outstanding and future claims, claim costs, property damage costs and risk management expenses; 
(3)  Meet at least twice per year, or more frequently as the chair of the board deems necessary or upon request of the city risk manager. 
(g)  The trustees may: 
(1)  Adopt rules or policies for the operation of the risk management trust fund board, which are not inconsistent with this chapter, federal laws, Arizona laws, the city charter or any city code or administrative regulations; 
(2)  Appoint committees; 
(3)  Recommend city staff hire independent consultants to perform assignments necessary for the administration of the risk management trust fund. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 1, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-205. - Claims, litigation management, claim committee. 
(a)  The city shall designate a city risk manager who shall be licensed pursuant to A.R.S. § 20-201 et seq. The city risk manager's decision to settle claims and lawsuits or to try lawsuits rests with the city risk manager subject to the approval of the city attorney. 
(b)  The city attorney is responsible for the conduct of all legal actions resulting from claims, and in consultation with the city risk manager, for assessing the legal liability of the city with respect to any claim, including any decision to file suit, defend a suit or prosecute an appeal. The city attorney may choose to provide defense for lawsuits against the city based upon available specific expertise and available resources or may contract for outside counsel to provide such defense. 
(c)  The city risk manager, in matters of claims and litigation, will maintain a client/attorney relationship with the city attorney and any attorneys representing the city. Claims management and lawsuit fiscal responsibility rest with the city risk manager. Tactical decisions during litigation shall be the responsibility of the city attorney. The city attorney shall consult with the city risk manager regarding litigation expenses. 
(d)  The city risk manager, with the approval of the city manager, shall have the authority to settle claims against the city in an amount to be determined by the city manager. The city risk manager, acting within the parameters set by the city attorney for determining that the city has exposure to legal liability, may authorize and pay claims whether or not in litigation for any single demand for any single claim. The city risk manager shall consult with the city attorney prior to any determination to pay any claim for which the exposure to legal liability is unclear. No claim in litigation can be settled or paid without prior approval by the city risk manager. 
(e)  The city attorney and the city risk manager shall create and staff a claims committee to evaluate legal actions resulting from claims and lawsuits and assignment of outside legal counsel. The city risk manager and city attorney shall each be fully participating members of such committee. 
(f)  The city risk manager may authorize such emergency remediation and response as made necessary by water main breaks, sewer backups, or other risk to public health or safety without a prior determination of liability by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 1, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-206. - Referral of claims to private law firms. 
    Claims referred to outside law firms for defense shall be managed and supervised by the city attorney in consultation with the city risk manager. Referral to particular outside firms shall be based upon their expertise and experience in the particular type of litigation and past performance. Costs and expenses for such defense must be reviewed by the city attorney on a regular basis and shall be charged to the risk management trust fund or to such city department or fund as may be appropriate in the case of matters not covered by the risk management trust fund. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 1, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-207. - Insurance. 
    The city risk manager, acting for the city manager, is authorized to enter into, on behalf of the city, any appropriate commercial insurance, alternative risk financing and surety bonding contracts to provide such risk insurance as determined to be in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 1, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-208. - Exemption of expenditures and audit. 
    The expenditures during the fiscal year from the risk management trust fund and monies remaining in the trust fund at the close of the fiscal year shall not be subject to the provisions of A.R.S. § 42-301 et seq. An internal financial audit shall be performed annually which can be satisfied by a comprehensive audit and financial report. A performance audit shall be performed every five (5) years, or more often as requested by trustees or city risk manager, by an external, independent auditor. The report shall be kept on file for a minimum of five (5) years. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 1, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-209. - Agent for service of claims and process. 
    The city clerk is hereby designated as the proper and appropriate party upon whom claims against the city shall be served under the provisions of A.R.S. § 12-821.01. The city clerk is also designated as the agent upon whom service of process in claims and litigation shall be served to comply with the provisions of state and federal rules of civil procedure, as such statutes and rules now exist or as they may be hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 1, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-210. - Contract provisions, indemnification prohibition. 
    Unless expressly authorized by law, no city contract or agreement shall contain any provision, and the city shall not be bound by any provision of any such agreement, whereby the city, its agents, officer or employees agree to provide any indemnity or assume any liability for any omission, act or activity of the city, its agents, servants or employees, beyond such liability as may be imposed as a matter of law upon the city by reason of such omission, act or activity existing in the absence of any contractual provision relating thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 1, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-211. - Risk management loss control. 
    The city risk manager shall provide direction of the risk management loss control function of the city to all of its departments, divisions and functions. 
    The city risk manager shall have responsibility for coordination and control of all efforts of the city to protect against liability and loss or damage to city-owned property. The division may establish regulations and requirements designed to protect the city from claims, and damage to city property. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 1, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-212. - Limitation of provisions. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to have any effect or impact on, or derogate any other power, authority or duty provided elsewhere in the city charter or this Code city with respect to any health, disability, life, workers' compensation, or unemployment insurance or coverage. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to have any effect upon any bonds provided in connection with public works contracts, any fidelity bonding contracts, provisions or requirements or any performance or delivery agreements which include performance or delivery bond or insurance provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 1, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-213. - Termination. 
    The city council may determine that it will no longer maintain self-insurance, and will otherwise manage its risk of liability, at which time the risk management trust fund shall be dissolved after payment of outstanding claims. Any trust funds remaining in the risk management trust fund at such dissolution shall become part of the city's general fund unless otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 1, 5-27-14) 
DIVISION 6. - WORKERS' COMPENSATION TRUST FUND 

Sec. 2-214. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
    City: The City of Glendale, Arizona. 
    City attorney: City attorney or designee. 
    City manager: City manager or designee. 
    City risk manager: City risk manager or designee. 
    Finance director: Finance director or designee. 
    Workers' compensation expenses: Any and all costs and expenses for city's workers' compensation program, including but not limited to workers' compensation analyst, claim adjustment expenses, self-insured premiums, excess insurance or reinsurance, broker fees, actuarial fees, third party administration fees and legal fees and expenses. 
    Workers' compensation loss: Workers' compensation losses, damages, defense and awards by the Industrial Commission of Arizona for injuries incurred by an employee or volunteer as covered by the Arizona workers' compensation laws and statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 2, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-215. - Established; size. 
(a)  A trust fund to be known as the "workers' compensation trust fund" shall be established and used for the purpose of providing the city with funds used to pay the city's workers' compensation loss and workers' compensation expenses, taxes, administrative tax and special fund tax as required by the Industrial Commission of Arizona; 
(b)  All monies received by the city for the purpose of funding the workers compensation trust fund shall be deposited into the trust fund. The monies placed in the workers compensation trust fund shall be derived from departmental contributions, refunds, interest, investment income and amounts recovered for the benefit of the trust fund. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 2, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-216. - Self-insurance: funding, allocation and use. 
(a)  When using the workers' compensation trust fund the city shall act as a self-insurer for all workers' compensation loss and claims. The liability of the city for such costs shall be established by law. The city risk manager shall cause the city to comply with all requirements for self-insurers as may be contained in applicable law, to obtain for the city, all benefits of self-insurance status, and to maintain such status for as long as it is in the city's interests to do so. 
(b)  The workers' compensation trust fund shall be funded as part of the annual budgetary and appropriation process of the city in such amounts as to provide sufficient monies to pay all reasonably anticipated workers' compensation loss and risk management expenses for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(c)  The city council shall determine the funding level of the workers compensation trust fund based on the amounts expended for workers' compensation purposes, if any, and on the recommendations of the city manager, the city risk manager and the finance director. The cost of funding and administering the workers compensation trust fund set forth in the annual budget shall be allocated among departments of the city by the city risk manager and the finance director based on: 
(1)  Prior loss experience of the fund; 
(2)  Projected exposure of risk based upon actuarial analysis; 
(3)  Workers compensation loss; and 
(4)  Risk management expenses. 
(d)  The workers' compensation trust fund shall provide for all claims, and payment of workers' compensation losses, risk management expenses, legal fees and expenses, and insurance premiums, if any, subject to the exceptions as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 2, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-217. - Trustees. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint five (5) joint trustees to administer the workers' compensation trust fund to the workers' compensation trust fund board of trustees. No more than one (1) trustee shall simultaneously be a member of the city council and no more than one (1) trustee shall be a city employee. The city risk manager shall be technical advisor to the workers' compensation trust fund board of trustees. The trustees shall be responsible for recommendations to the city council regarding the administration of the workers' compensation trust fund. The trustees shall meet at least twice a year and submit a report to the city council as to the status of the trust fund. Such report shall include recommendations the trustees deem necessary to meet their joint fiduciary obligations for administering the workers' compensation trust fund. The trustees shall be bonded in an amount satisfactory to the city risk manager but not less than the minimum amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Costs for bonding will be paid by the workers' compensation trust fund. The trustees shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years and a chairman shall be designated by the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
(b)  The term of any trustee automatically ends: 
(1)  On death of the trustee; 
(2)  On submittal of a written resignation to the workers' compensation trust fund board of trustee chair or the mayor; 
(3)  On failure to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the workers' compensation trust fund board of trustees; or 
(4)  On termination of city employment. 
(c)  Three (3) trustees shall constitute a quorum for the exercise of the powers and duties conferred upon the workers' compensation trust fund board of trustees. 
(d)  Conflict of interest laws shall apply to each of the worker's compensation trust fund board of trustees. 
(e)  Trustees shall serve on the workers' compensation trust fund board of trustees without salary or compensation. 
(f)  The trustees shall: 
(1)  Administer the worker's compensation trust fund pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  Provide financial oversight of the workers' compensation trust fund by evaluating liabilities, other expenses and reserve amounts; 
(3)  Review the trust fund to ensure adequate funds exist to pay outstanding and future workers' compensation losses and risk management expenses; and 
(4)  Meet at least twice per year, or more frequently as the chair of the workers' compensation trust fund board of trustees deems necessary or upon request of the city risk manager. 
(g)  The trustees may: 
(1)  Adopt rules or policies for the operation of the workers' compensation trust fund board of trustees, which are not inconsistent with this chapter, federal laws, Arizona laws, the city charter or any city code or administrative regulations; 
(2)  Appoint committees; 
(3)  Recommend city staff hire independent consultants to perform assignments necessary for the administration of the trust fund. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 2, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-218. - City risk manager. 
(a)  The city shall designate a city risk manager who shall be licensed pursuant to A.R.S. § 20-201 et seq. 
(b)  Claims management and lawsuit fiscal responsibility rests with the city risk manager. 
(c)  The city risk manager shall be responsible for administering the city's self-funded workers' compensation program. The decision whether or not to settle claims and lawsuits relating to workers' compensation claims rest with the city risk manager. 
(d)  The city may contract with a third-party administrator to administer the investigation and payment of workers' compensation claims. The third-party administrator shall report to and be directed by the city risk manager. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 2, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-219. - Insurance. 
    The city risk manager, acting for the city manager, is authorized to enter into, on behalf of the city, any appropriate commercial insurance, or alternative risk financing as determined to be in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 2, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-220. - Exemption of expenditures and audit. 
    The expenditures during the fiscal year from the workers' compensation trust fund and monies in the trust fund at the close of the fiscal year shall not be subject to the provisions of A.R.S. Sec. 42-301 et seq. An internal financial audit shall be performed annually which can be satisfied by a comprehensive audit and financial report. A performance audit shall be performed every five (5) years or more often as requested by the workers' compensation trust fund trustees or city risk manager by an external auditor. The report shall be kept on file for a minimum of five (5) years. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 2, 5-27-14) 
Sec. 2-221. - Termination. 
    The city may determine that it will no longer maintain self-insurance, at which time the worker's compensation trust fund shall be dissolved after payment of outstanding claims. Any trust funds remaining in the worker's compensation trust fund upon dissolution shall become part of the city's general fund unless otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2892, § 2, 5-27-14) 
DIVISION 7. - VEHICLE REPLACEMENT FUND[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2892, § 3, adopted May 27, 2014, renumbered Division 6 as Division 7, as set out herein. The subsequent section numbers have also been renumbered from §§ 2-216-2-219 to §§ 2-222-2-225. 

Sec. 2-222. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Rental revenues: Funds transferred to the vehicle replacement program from city department budgets, in the annual city budget process, for the use of vehicles, assigned to the vehicle replacement program by the city departments. 
    Surplus sale revenues: Revenue derived from the sale at auction or by other means of city vehicles which are not otherwise included in an enterprise fund replacement program. 
(Ord. No. 1452, § 1, 9-23-86) 
Sec. 2-223 - Created. 
    A capital fund is hereby established for the funding and payment, as hereinafter provided, of expenses associated with city vehicle replacement. The capital fund shall be known as the "vehicle replacement fund." 
(Ord. No. 1452, § 1, 9-23-86) 
Sec. 2-224. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the vehicle replacement fund is to accumulate all rental and surplus sales revenues, and interest earnings thereon, received by, or transferred to, the vehicle replacement program in reserve accounts for future scheduled and unscheduled vehicle replacement. The vehicle replacement fund shall be a separate and protected fund and shall be used for no purpose other than capital expenditures necessary for the replacement of city vehicles designated for replacement by the vehicle replacement program. 
(Ord. No. 1452, § 1, 9-23-86) 
Sec. 2-225. - Procedure. 
    Commencing on the effective date of this section, all rental and auction revenues received by, or transferred to, the vehicle replacement program shall be deposited within the vehicle replacement fund. The reserve accounts within the vehicle replacement fund shall maintain all such revenues, including interest earnings thereon, for such purposes as stated in section 2-218. 
(Ord. No. 1452, § 1, 9-23-86) 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC ART AND PERFORMING ARTS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2474, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2005, amended art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VI, §§ 2-226-2-33, pertained to public art and artistic performances, and derived from Ord. No. 1226, §§ 1-7, adopted April 12, 1983; Ord. No. 1251, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 1983; Ord. No. 1629, § 1, adopted June 25, 1991; Ord. No. 1644, §§ 1(2), 2(2), adopted May 22, 1990; Ord. No. 1693, § 1, adopted June 25, 1991; Ord. No. 1998, § 1, adopted March 24, 1998. 

Sec. 2-226. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Annual art projects plan: The plan required by section 2-228 of this Code. 
    Construction project: Any capital project paid for wholly or in part by the city to construct or remodel any building, structure, park, utility, street, sidewalk, or parking facility, or any portion thereof, within the limits of the city. 
    Performing arts: Disciplines include, but are not limited to, dance, theater and music performances held within the limits of the city. 
    Municipal arts fund: The fund required by section 2-229 of this Code. 
    Public art: Works of art placed in publicly accessible locations within the city. Examples of public art include, but are not limited to, sculpture and paintings. 
Sec. 2-227. - General policy. 
    The city accepts a responsibility for expanding experience through public art and the performing arts. Such art has enabled people in all societies to better understand their communities and individual lives. The creation of works of art for public places should be encouraged. A policy is therefore established to direct the inclusion of works of art in city facilities and to encourage the performing arts within the city. 
Sec. 2-228. - Glendale Arts Commission. 
(a)  To carry out the responsibilities set forth herein, there is hereby created a Glendale Arts Commission to consist of seven (7) members who shall be selected and appointed by the city council. The chairperson and vice chairperson of the commission shall be appointed by the city council. 
(b)  Members may serve a maximum of two (2) consecutive terms of two (2) years. 
(c)  The commission shall: 
Develop an annual art projects plan with the appropriate city staff for the purpose of making recommendations to the city council; 
Assist with the selection and commissioning of artists with respect to the design, execution and placement of works of art for which appropriation have been made; 
Review grant applications and recommend funding for grants awarded to non-profit organizations and/or government agencies for supporting performing arts projects and programs held within the Glendale City limits. 
Sec. 2-229. - Municipal Arts Fund. 
(a)  There is established in the city treasury a special fund designated "municipal arts fund" into which funds appropriated as contemplated by this article shall be deposited. One percent (1%) of construction projects in the capital improvement program shall be deposited quarterly in the municipal arts fund. 
(b)  This fund shall be used to administer the city's public art and performing arts program. 
(c)  Expenditures from the municipal arts fund shall be recommended by the Glendale Arts Commission through its annual art projects plan and shall be subject to approval by the city council. Expenditures must conform to the city's purchasing regulations, as may be amended from time to time. Any unexpended funds shall be carried over to the following fiscal year. 
Sec. 2-230. - Expenditures for performing arts. 
    Appropriations for performing arts from the municipal arts fund shall be recommended by the Glendale Arts Commission and shall be subject to approval by the city council. Each disbursement from appropriations for the performing arts pursuant to this article shall be recommended by the arts commission and authorized by the city council. 
Secs. 2-231-2-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2184, § 3, 2-13-01, amended Art. VII completely; repealed § 2-252 derived from Code 1963, § 24A-9 as amended by Ord. No. 1605, § 3, 6-13-89. 

Sec. 2-246. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned: Personal property shall be deemed "abandoned" if the owner thereof fails to make satisfactory claim and proof of ownership within thirty (30) days after the giving of notice as provided in section 2-247. 
    Exempted items: (1) Any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer of a type subject to registration under Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes; (2) livestock; (3) intangible personal property. 
    Officer: Any officer, agent or employee of the city acting within the scope of his/her employment. 
    Personal property: All personal property of whatever nature where the owner thereof or his/her whereabouts is unknown, or which is unclaimed for more than seven (7) days, but the term shall be interpreted to mean and shall specifically exclude exempted items. 
(Code 1963, § 24A-1; Ord. No. 1605, § 3, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 3, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-247. - Notice of official possession. 
(a)  Any officer having in his/her possession personal property shall at least once prepare public notice in the official newspaper containing the following information: 
(1)  The name, designation and address of the officer giving the notice. 
(2)  The description of the personal property that has come into the possession of the officer since the giving of the last periodic notice. 
(3)  A demand that all owners of the property described in the notice make claim and proof of ownership satisfactory to the officer named in the notice within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice. 
(4)  A statement that any of the described personal property not so claimed within such thirty (30) day period shall be deemed to be abandoned, and that the same may be disposed of by the city. 
(5)  The date of the notice. 
(b)  A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the owner, if known, at his/her last known place of abode. 
(Code 1963, §§ 24A-2, 24A-3; Ord. No. 1042, § 2, 9-26-78; Ord. No. 1605, § 3, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 3, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-248. - Claim and proof of ownership. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, if the personal property described in the notice required by section 2-247 remains in the possession of the officer without any person making satisfactory claim and proof of ownership therefore for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of the notice describing it, the personal property shall be deemed to be abandoned, and title thereof shall be deemed to be in the city and become "city personal property" by reason of abandonment by the owner and possession by the city. 
(b)  The conversion of unclaimed personal property for personal use is prohibited. 
(c)  When dealing with property which is lost, found by a person not the owner (hereinafter referred to as the "finder") and then turned over to an officer, the finder shall be deemed to have made satisfactory claim and proof of ownership to be entitled to possession of the personal property at the end of thirty (30) days from the date of the notice. However, the finder's claim and proof of ownership under this section shall be inferior to and subject to a satisfactory claim and proof of ownership by any owner of the personal property. Upon delivery of the property to the finder as provided in this section, the city shall have no further interest in or obligations with respect to the property. The city shall, however, provide the name and address of the finder and the location of the property, if known, to any person making a satisfactory claim and proof of ownership subsequent to the delivery of the property to the finder. 
(Code 1963, § 24A-4; Ord. No. 1042, § 3, 9-26-78; Ord. No. 1345, § 1, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 1605, § 3, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 3, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-249. - Disposal. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to sell, lease, exchange, trade or otherwise dispose of abandoned personal property for the best interest of the city. No disposal of property shall be made until thirty (30) days after the public notice required by section 2-247 has been given. 
(b)  The officer conducting the sale shall maintain a complete and accurate record of the sale, which shall include the description of the personal property sold, the name and address of the purchasers, the sale price of each item sold and the cost of the sale. 
(c)  Fair market value of materials to be disposed of by exchange or trade shall be determined by an appraisal. The appraisal shall be contained in the records in the materials management office and shall be solicited from an expert in the commodity field who is not a city employee or agent of a responding enterprise. 
(Code 1963, §§ 24A-5-24A-8; Ord. No. 1605, § 3, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 3, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-250. - Disposition of proceeds. 
(a)  All monies received from disposal of abandoned personal property, or an amount equal to the fair market value of the property if disposed by exchange or trade, as provided for in this article, less the cost of advertising and selling, shall be immediately paid over to the city treasurer and retained in a separate fund for at least six (6) months. 
(b)  Should any person within six (6) months from the date of disposal of any item of abandoned personal property make claim thereto and establish ownership, the sum of money paid over to the city treasurer as provided herein shall be paid over to such person. In no event shall any claim be considered unless it shall be presented to the city treasurer in writing under oath and before the expiration of six (6) months from the date of the disposal of the item claim. 
(Code 1963, §§ 24A-10, 24A-11; Ord. No. 1605, § 3, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 3, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-251. - Exemptions from provisions. 
    The provisions contained in this article shall not apply to the following categories of abandoned personal property: 
(1)  Firearms, weapons and other devices or instruments designed for inflicting bodily injury. The city may elect to dispose of or retain the same. 
(2)  Items for which no bids are received or bids received are less than the cost of advertising or selling. Such items may be deemed to be of no intrinsic or monetary value and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the city. 
(3)  Items useful or necessary to the city. Such items may be retained by the city for its use. 
(4)  At the discretion of the city manager or his designee, the city may elect to donate any abandoned personal property or exempted item in its custody for at least ninety (90) days to a governmental or nonprofit or charitable organization. 
(Code 1963, § 24A-12; Ord. No. 1487, § 1, 3-24-87; Ord. No. 1605, § 3, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 2184, § 3, 2-13-01) 
Secs. 2-252-2-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, ETC.[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Charter reference- Appointive boards and commissions, Art. V. 
Cross reference- Personnel board, § 2-72; trustees of risk management fund, § 2-204, Glendale Arts Commission, § 2-228; transportation advisory commission, § 7-16, et seq.; cable television advisory commission, § 10-111; floodplain management appeals board, § 17-29; library advisory board, § 20-16 et seq.; parks and recreation commission, § 27-16 et seq.; planning and zoning commission, § 28-16 et seq.; community development advisory committee, § 28-41 et seq.; zoning board of adjustment, App. A, Art. XXVI. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-266. - Rules of procedure. 
    Each board, commission or advisory body whose members are appointed by the city council may adopt such rules of procedure as it deems necessary for the conduct of its business, procedure and the faithful performance of its duties. Such rules shall not be inconsistent with any provision contained in the Code of the City of Glendale or any procedural rule of the city council as set forth in the Charter of the City of Glendale. 
(Ord. No. 1480, § 1, 2-10-87) 
Sec. 2-267. - Removal of members. 
(a)  The provisions contained in this section shall apply to all of the city's boards, commissions, committees and advisory bodies whose members are appointed by the city council, except for the city's fire board, industrial development authority, planning commission and police board. 
(b)  The city council may, for any reasonable cause, remove any member of any board, commission, committee or advisory body. The absence of a member, except for ex-officio, non-voting members, from two (2) consecutive regular meetings or from three (3) regular meetings within a twelve-month period shall automatically constitute reasonable cause for the removal of such absent member from the board, commission, committee or advisory board. 
(c)  If a member of any board, commission, committee or advisory board is removed pursuant to this section, the city council shall, within a reasonable time, appoint a new member to fill the unexpired term of the former member. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 1, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 2-268. - Appointment and term of vice-chairperson. 
    Notwithstanding any provision in the Glendale City Code which specifically provides otherwise, every board, commission, committee or advisory body of the city shall have a vice-chairperson who shall be appointed by the city council. The term of appointment for the vice-chairperson shall be one year, subject to reappointment. 
(Ord. No. 2185, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 2-269. - Length of term. 
(a)  The provisions contained in this section shall apply to all of the city's boards, commissions, committees and advisory bodies whose members are appointed by the city council, unless otherwise specifically excepted in this section. 
(b)  The term of service ends January 31 for all board, commission, committee or advisory board members in the final year of that board, commission, committee or advisory board member's term of service, except for members of the community development advisory committee, whose terms of service end June 30. 
(c)  When a board, commission, committee or advisory board member is appointed to complete the unexpired term of a previous member, that partial term does not count toward any applicable term limit. 
(Ord. No. O17-49, § 1, 9-26-17; Ord. No. 018-55, § 1, 8-14-18) 
Secs. 2-270-2-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOUSING ADVISORY COMMISSION[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1423, § 1, adopted May 27, 1986, repealed Div. 2, §§ 2-281 and 2-282, concerning the housing authority, as derived from the 1963 Code §§ 16-1-16-4; and Ord. No. 1172, § 1, adopted July 14, 1981. Section 2 of Ord. No. 1423 added provisions set out in the current Div. 2, §§ 2-281-2-285 herein. 
State Law reference- Municipal housing generally, A.R.S. § 36-1401 et seq.; general authority of city relative to housing, A.R.S. § 36-1403. 

Sec. 2-281. - Created. 
    The city council hereby creates a municipal housing advisory commission. 
(Ord. No. 1423, § 2, 5-27-86) 
Sec. 2-282. - Members. 
    The municipal housing advisory commission shall be composed of five (5) members, all of whom shall be residents of the city, who shall be appointed by the city council. The chairperson of the commission shall be appointed by the city council. The term of service shall be for a period of two (2) years; however, the original appointees shall serve terms as follows: 
(1)  Three (3) of the original members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years; 
(2)  Two (2) of the original members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 1423, § 2, 5-27-86; Ord. No. 1644, §§ 1(3), 2(3), 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 2-283. - Meetings, rules, bylaws, etc. 
    The municipal housing advisory commission shall have the power to: 
(1)  Establish such rules, regulations or bylaws as it deems necessary for its government and for the faithful performance of its duties; 
(2)  Set a time for regular meetings, which shall be at least once each month if there is business to transact; 
(3)  Establish a manner in which special meetings may be held and the notice to be given thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1423, § 2, 5-27-86) 
Sec. 2-284. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of three (3) of the members shall be required to take action. 
(Ord. No. 1423, § 2, 5-27-86) 
Sec. 2-285. - Powers and duties. 
    The commission shall, through the community housing service director, advise the mayor and council or appropriate city staff regarding rules, regulations and policies governing the maintenance and operation of housing programs; proposals for development of additional housing; and any other such matters as directed by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 1423, § 2, 5-27-86) 
Secs. 2-286-2-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMUNITY HOUSING SERVICES DEPARTMENT[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1423, § 3, adopted May 27, 1986, added provisions designated as Ch. 2, Art. IX, §§ 2-291-2-293. For purposes of classification and to facilitate indexing, these provisions have been included as Ch. 2, Art. VIII, Div. 3 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-291. - Established. 
    There is hereby established within the city a community housing services department which shall direct and supervise the administration of the municipal housing powers vested in the city by Arizona Revised Statute, Title 26, Chapter 12, Section 36-1401 et seq. The Community Housing Services Director shall be the head of the Community Housing Services Department. 
(Ord. No. 1423, § 3, 5-27-86) 
Sec. 2-292. - Powers and duties. 
    The city hereby recognizes, confirms and continues as its own, those powers, obligations, liabilities, duties and responsibilities previously conferred upon, delegated to or otherwise validly exercised by the Glendale housing authority and hereby declares its intention to exercise all powers relating to housing that are now or may be hereafter granted by any federal, state or local law and to discharge and carry out all existing and future obligations, liabilities, duties and responsibilities in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 1423, § 3, 5-27-86) 
Sec. 2-293. - Continuance of contracts. 
    All contracts validly existing immediately prior to the effective date of this division which were entered into by the housing authority commission of the City of Glendale are hereby recognized, confirmed and continued in full force and effect as contracts of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1423, § 3, 5-27-86) 
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Ord. No. 2881, § 1, adopted Feb. 25, 2014, repealed Ch. 2, Art. VIII, Div. 4, §§ 2-300-2-303, in its entirety. Former Div. 4 pertained to "Citizens Advisory Commission on Neighborhoods." See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

Secs. 2-300-2-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 017-21, § 1, adopted May 23, 2017, repealed Ch. 2, Art. VIII, Div. 5, §§ 2-311-2-314 and reenacted said division as set out herein. Former Div. 5 pertained to the commission on persons with disabilities and derived from Ord. No. 1862, § 1, adopted Jan. 9, 2017. 

Sec. 2-311. - Established. 
    There is hereby established within the city a human relations commission whose members shall be appointed by the city council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 017-21, § 1, 5-23-17) 
Sec. 2-312. - Members. 
(a)  The Glendale Human Relations Commission shall consist of fourteen (14) members, who shall be appointed by the city council, (two (2) members appointed from each district, and two (2) members at large appointed by the mayor) to be broadly representative of the members of the community. Members of the commission shall be residents of Glendale. The term of appointment shall be for a period of two (2) years; however, the term of five (5) original members shall be for a three-year term as determined by the city council. The chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be nominated by the government services committee for final approval by the city council. The term of appointment for the chair and vice-chair shall be for a period of one (1) year. 
(b)  All vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the remainder of the term of the member causing the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 017-21, § 1, 5-23-17) 
Sec. 2-313. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Glendale Human Relations Commission will act as an advisory body to the mayor and city council by making recommendations on ways to encourage mutual respect and understanding among all people, to discourage prejudice and discrimination, and to support cultural awareness and unity of the community in all its diverse forms. The commission may also make recommendations for special events. 
(b)  The commission may establish such rules of procedure as it deems necessary for the conduct of its business and the faithful performance of its duties. Such rules shall not be inconsistent with any provision contained in the City Code or any procedural rule adopted by the city council or set forth in the City Charter. 
(c)  The commission may establish such sub-committees as it deems necessary to assist the commission in fulfilling its powers and duties. The members of the sub-committees shall be Glendale Human Relations Commission members and shall be appointed by the commission. Each sub-committee shall be chaired by a member of the commission who shall be appointed by the chairperson of the commission. The sub-committee shall have no authority to act independent of the commission. 
(d)  A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum and the affirmative vote of a majority of the commission members present and voting at a meeting shall be required to take action. 
(e)  The commission may only forward findings and recommendations to the city council that have received an affirmative vote of the majority of its members present at a properly called commission meeting. 
(Ord. No. 017-21, § 1, 5-23-17) 
Sec. 2-314, 2-315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CITIZENS' TRANSPORTATION OVERSIGHT COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-316. - Established. 
    There is hereby established within the City of Glendale a citizens' oversight commission whose members shall be appointed by the council of the City of Glendale. 
(Ord. No. 2241, § 1, 2-12-02) 
Sec. 2-317. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the citizens' transportation oversight commission is to ensure public input and government accountability. The CTOC shall monitor the transportation fund expenditures to ensure that the voter-approved projects in accordance with Proposition 402 are completed in a timely and cost effective manner. The commission may recommend adjustments to projects when warranted to serve the best interests of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2241, § 1, 2-12-02) 
Sec. 2-318. - Members. 
(a)  The commission shall be composed of eleven (11) members, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Glendale, and who shall be appointed by the mayor and city council as follows: 
(1)  One (1) appointed by the mayor; 
(2)  One (1) appointed from each council district; 
(3)  Four (4) from the city at-large. 
    The chairperson and vice-chairperson of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor and city council from among the commission members. 
(b)  The members of the commission shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years; except that members of the first commission shall be designated by the city council for the following terms: 
    two (2) members for two (2) year terms; 
    two (2) members for two (2) year, four (4) month terms; 
    two (2) members for two (2) year, eight (8) months terms; 
    two (2) members for three (3) year terms; 
    two (2) members for three (3) years, four (4) month terms; and 
    one (1) member for three (3) year, eight (8) month term. 
    Commission members can be reappointed for two (2) years, but can only serve for two (2) consecutive terms. 
(c)  The members of the commission shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, knowledge and dedication to transportation issues and programs. The commission members should include representatives from neighborhoods, education, business, transportation, finance, and other interests. 
(d)  The Director of Transportation or his/her designee shall act as secretary and staff liaison to the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2241, § 1, 2-12-02) 
Sec. 2-319. - Meetings and rules. 
(a)  The commission shall establish and adopt such rules, regulations or bylaws as it deems necessary for the conduct of its business and performance of its duties. 
(b)  The commission shall establish a set time for regular meetings, which shall be at least once each month if there is business to conduct. 
(c)  A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum and the affirmative vote of a majority of the commission members present and voting shall be required to take action. 
(Ord. No. 2241, § 1, 2-12-02) 
Sec. 2-320. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the commission shall be advisory in nature and all acts and actions thereof shall be subject to review by the city council. The commission's duties and responsibilities include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(a)  The principal responsibility of the commission will be to ensure that transportation projects and programs approved by the voters are implemented in a fair, cost effective, and timely manner in accord with the voters. 
(b)  Advise the city council on the following matters: 
(1)  Regional transportation issues, including freeways, regional transit and transportation systems management; 
(2)  Public transit, including the need for new, expanded or modified transit services within Glendale and as a part of a regional system; appropriateness and performance of existing transit services; capital improvement programs; review of regional transit plans, planning processes and initiatives with regard to their appropriateness for Glendale; and ownership and operation of transit systems and capital equipment, i.e., public, private or joint venture; 
(3)  Issues relating to bicycle routes, bikeways and bicycle programs; 
(4)  Issues relating to alternative modes of transportation, including trip reduction programs, ridesharing, parking, pedestrian ways and air quality efforts. 
(c)  Projects and services targeted for transportation sales tax funding will be included in a financially balanced long range transportation program that is updated every year. The program will list projects, completion dates, and funding sources for all projects that include transportation sales tax funding. The commission will review and recommend this program to the city council for action. 
(d)  An annual report will be issued that documents that status of the transportation sales tax program, including cost and revenues as well as any significant changes in the scope or completion dates of projects. The report will be reviewed by the commission and forwarded to the city council for consideration. 
(e)  The new transportation sales tax program will be audited as part of the city's independent audit every three (3) years for performance, fiscal accountability within the program, and consistency with voter actions. The commission will review these audits and forward them to the city council. 
(f)  The commission will be authorized to recommend to the city council any changes in the transportation sales tax program based on documented new information and changing needs. 
(g)  The commission will have staff support to address planning, programming, financial, and design concept issues. 
(h)  The commission may hold public hearings as it deems appropriate, solicit public comment and opinion, determine which comments warrant further review, and submit recommendations to the city council regarding the comments. 
(i)  Perform all other duties, tasks, and responsibilities as delegated to the commission by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2241, § 1, 2-12-02) 
DIVISION 7. - RESERVED[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2907, § 1, adopted Oct. 14, 2014, repealed Ch. 2, Art. VIII, Div. 7, §§ 2-321-2-325, in its entirety. Former Div. 7 pertained to the "Audit Committee," and derived from Ord. No. 2819, § 1, adopted Oct. 9, 2012. 

Secs. 2-321-2-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - CITIZENS UTILITY ADVISORY COMMISSION[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-06, § 1, adopted January 24, 2017, effective February 24, 2017, repealed the former division 8, §§ 2-326-2-330, and enacted a new division 8 as set out herein. The former division pertained to similar water services advisory commission. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 2-326. - Established. 
    There is hereby established within the City of Glendale a Citizens Utility Advisory Commission whose members shall be appointed by the council of the City of Glendale. 
(Ord. No. O17-06, § 1, 1-24-17, eff. 2-24-17) 
Sec. 2-327. - Purpose. 
(a)  The commission will provide Council with recommendations related to the impact of the City's water and solid waste management services, operations, policies, rates, fees and budgets on the well-being and quality of life of Glendale residents and businesses. 
(b)  The commission may hold public meetings and hearings to obtain the input of Glendale citizens or any other interested person on any issue related to its purpose and within its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. O17-06, § 1, 1-24-17, eff. 2-24-17) 
Sec. 2-328. - Members. 
(a)  The commission shall be composed of seven (7) members who shall serve without compensation. The members shall be residents of the City of Glendale. 
(b)  The members of the commission shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. 
(c)  The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor and city council from among the commission members. The term of appointment for the chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be for a period of one (1) year. 
(d)  The Water Services Director shall serve as secretary and staff liaison to the commission. 
(Ord. No. O17-06, § 1, 1-24-17, eff. 2-24-17) 
Sec. 2-329. - Meetings and rules. 
(a)  The commission shall establish and adopt such rules, regulations or bylaws as it deems necessary for the conduct of its business and performance of its duties. 
(b)  The commission shall establish a set time for regular meetings, which shall be at least quarterly if there is business to conduct. 
(c)  The commission will be provided with information necessary to perform its duties. Such information may include information related to the city's provision of water and solid waste management to its users and related to the City's policies, operations, budgets, fees and rates charged for such services. 
(d)  A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum and the affirmative vote of a majority of the commission members present and voting shall be required to take action. 
(Ord. No. O17-06, § 1, 1-24-17, eff. 2-24-17) 
Sec. 2-330. - Recommendation to council. 
    All recommendations forwarded by the commission to the city council and other actions of the commission must receive an affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the members present at the meeting at which an item is voted upon by the commission. 
(Ord. No. O17-06, § 1, 1-24-17, eff. 2-24-17) 
Chapter 3 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2993, § 1, adopted June 14, 2016, amended Ch. 3, §§ 3-1-3-64, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter as set out herein. Former Ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2732, § 1, adopted June 22, 2010 and Ord. No. 2902, §§ 1-3, adopted Aug. 12, 2014. 
Cross reference- Licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 21. 

Sec. 3-1. - Applicability. 
    This chapter is intended to regulate the activities and responsibilities of those persons who purchase, lease or rent monitoring alarm systems, devices or services. It is further intended to encourage the improvement in reliability of these systems, devices and services to insure that Police Department personnel will not be unduly diverted from responding to actual criminal activity as a result of responding to false alarms. This chapter specifically encompasses burglary, robbery and commercial panic alarms, both audible and inaudible (silent). The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles, audible fire alarms, medical alert devices, residential panic alarms and alarm systems that are operated by the City, County, State or Federal Government and installed on premises which such entity occupies or uses for governmental purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2993, § 1, 6-14-16) 
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act of God: An unusual, extraordinary, sudden and unexpected manifestation of the forces of nature, which cannot be prevented by reasonable human care, skill or foresight. 
    Alarm or alarm system: A mechanical or electrical device that is used to detect smoke, fire, hazardous materials or an unauthorized entry into a building or other facility, or to alert other persons of the occurrence the commission of an unlawful act against a person or within a building or other facility, and that may be designed to emit an audible alarm or transmit a signal or message when activated. Alarm or alarm system includes, but is not limited to: silent, panic, holdup, robbery, duress, burglary, check welfare, and proprietor alarms. Alarm or alarm system shall not include telephone call diverters and systems that are designed to report environmental and other occurrences and that are not designed to alert, or cause other persons to alert, public safety personnel. 
    Alarm business: Any owner or operator of a business which sells, rents, installs, maintains or monitors alarm systems, devices, leases or services. 
    Alarm subscriber: Any person who leases, rents or purchases any monitored alarm system, device or service from an alarm business or who leases or rents an audible alarm system or device or who contracts with an alarm business for alarm monitoring, repair or maintenance services. 
    Audible alarm: A device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on premises and which when activated generates an audible sound on the premises. 
    Automatic dialer: Any electrical, electronic, mechanical or other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message, when activated or if self-activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system, to the Police Department. 
    Common cause: A common technical difficulty or malfunction which causes an alarm system to generate a series of false alarms. The series of false alarms shall be counted as one (1) false alarm only if: 
The false alarms have occurred within a seventy-two (72) hour period; and 
The responsible alarm subscriber or proprietor alarm owner has documents to the Police [Chief] the action taken to rectify the cause; and 
A thirty-day (30) period expires with the alarm system generating no additional false alarms from the documented cause. 
    False alarms: Any activation of an alarm not caused by or as a result of a criminal act or unauthorized entry, except for activation for testing purposes when the Police Department has been given advance notice of such testing or activation caused by the Police Department. 
    Medical alert device: A device designed to help a patient obtain adequate help of the right type during a medical emergency. 
    Monitored alarm: A device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry in premises and which when activated generates an inaudible signal to a monitoring station. A monitored alarm may also generate an audible sound on the premises. 
    Panic alarm: A silent or audible alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring law enforcement response. 
    Person: A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
    Proprietor alarm: Any alarm or alarm system which is not leased or rented from, or owned or maintained under contract by an alarm business. 
(Ord. No. 2993, § 1, 6-14-16) 
Sec. 3-3. - Administration. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered in a manner prescribed by the police chief. 
(Ord. No. 2993, § 1, 6-14-16) 
Sec. 3-4. - Alarm subscriber's and proprietor alarm owner's duties. 
    The duties of an alarm subscriber or alarm proprietor owner shall be as follows: 
(1)  To be familiar with the provisions of this chapter; and 
(2)  To instruct all personnel, who are authorized to place the system or device into operation, in the appropriate method of operation; and 
(3)  To inform personnel, who are authorized to place the alarm system into operation, of the provisions of this chapter, emphasizing the importance of avoiding false alarms; and 
(4)  To respond or to make arrangements for an alarm business or other responsible person to respond to the scene of an activated alarm within sixty (60) minutes of the alarm activation; and 
(5)  To maintain the alarm or alarm system in good working order and take reasonable measures to prevent the occurrence of false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 2993, § 1, 6-14-16) 
Sec. 3-5. - Activation for unauthorized purposes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally activate any robbery alarm for any reason other than to warn of an actual robbery or to intentionally activate any burglar alarm for any reason other than to warn of an unauthorized entry into an alarm protected premises or to intentionally activate any commercial panic alarm for any reason other than to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring law enforcement response. 
(Ord. No. 2993, § 1, 6-14-16) 
Sec. 3-6. - Automatic or prerecorded messages or signals connected directly to city. 
    No person shall use or cause to be used any telephone device or telephone attachment that automatically selects a public primary telephone trunk line of the city and then reproduces any prerecorded message or signal. 
(Ord. No. 2993, § 1, 6-14-16) 
Sec. 3-7. - Confidentiality. 
    The information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential and shall not be subject to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2993, § 1, 6-14-16) 
ARTICLE II. - FALSE ALARMS 

Sec. 3-8. - Grace period. 
(a)  Newly installed and reinstalled alarm systems shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter relating to the counting and assessment of false alarms for a period of thirty (30) days from the date the alarm system becomes operational. 
(b)  The grace period provided in subsection (a) of this section shall apply only if the alarm subscriber, or proprietor alarm owner notifies the police chief or his designee in writing within ten (10) days of the completion of installation or reinstallation. The written notice shall specify the date the system was installed or reinstalled. For reinstalled alarm systems, the notice shall also describe the nature and extent of the reinstallation. 
(Ord. No. 2993, § 1, 6-14-16) 
Sec. 3-9. - Warning notice. 
    When any alarm system generates a false alarm, the police department shall send a warning notice to the alarm subscriber or the proprietor alarm owner that one (1) subsequent false alarm within a three hundred sixty-five (365) day period will subject the notified parties to the sanctions as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2993, § 1, 6-14-16) 
Sec. 3-10. - Police review and penalties. 
(a)  If the police department records two (2) or more false alarms within a consecutive three hundred sixty-five (365) day period: 
(1)  The police department shall notify both the alarm subscriber or the proprietor alarm owner by electronic mail or postal mail of the police department's initial notice of assessment of false alarm service fees and of the amount of the assessed service fees. The alarm subscriber or the proprietor alarm owner, within 30 calendar days of the date on the notice, shall pay the assessed fee or may appeal to the police chief by filing a petition with the police chief or his designee. The petition shall contain and explain specific defenses to the assessment. Affirmative defenses to a false alarm service fee assessment alarm may include evidence that a false alarm was caused by an act of God, common cause, action of the telephone company, telephone line outage, power outage lasting longer than the life of a fully charged battery, or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm business, alarm subscriber or proprietary alarm owner. 
(2)  The petition submitted pursuant to subsection (1) of this section shall be received by the police chief or his designee within the time specified. If the petition is not timely submitted, any notified party shall be deemed to have waived his right to any further review or hearing as provided herein and the alarm business and alarm subscriber or the proprietor alarm owner operating the alarm system generating the false alarms will be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) of this subsection. 
(3)  If the petition pursuant to subsection (1) of this section is submitted, the police chief or his designee shall review the specific defenses, if any, set forth in the petition to the initial determination of false alarms. If it is determined that a valid defense to the initial determination of false alarm has been accepted, a notice will be sent by electronic mail or postal mail to all notified parties that no assessment will be made for that particular alarm. The notice shall specifically set forth the findings and conclusions of the police chief or his designee with respect to the review of the petition submitted. 
(4)  If the police chief or his designee determines that a defense to the initial determination of false alarms has not been alleged or accepted, a notice shall be sent by electronic mail or postal mail to the alarm subscriber or the proprietor alarm owner that they will be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) of this subsection. The notice of decision shall contain the specific findings and conclusions of the police chief or his designee with respect to the review of the report submitted. 
(5)  Assessments imposed pursuant to subsections (1) and (4) of this section shall be in an amount established by resolution. The alarm subscriber or proprietor alarm owner shall, be responsible for the payment of assessments imposed upon their alarm system. 
(b)  Upon final determination of assessment pursuant to this chapter for the second (2) and any subsequent false alarm within a consecutive three hundred sixty-five (365) day period, the responsible party shall tender the fee assessed within thirty (30) days of the date ordered or discontinue operation of the alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 2993, § 1, 6-14-16) 
Sec. 3-11. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any party aggrieved by a decision of the police chief or his or her designee made pursuant to section 3-10, may, within thirty (30) days of the date of notice of the decision, appeal to a hearing officer designated by the city manager. A copy of the appeal request shall be filed with the Glendale City Clerk and a copy sent via certified mail to the police chief. 
(b)  The request for an appeal shall set forth the specific objections to the decision of the police chief or their designee which form the basis of the appeal. 
(c)  The hearing officer shall set a time and place for the hearing as soon as practicable. 
(d)  The hearing proceeding shall be conducted as an informal process. The hearing officer shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence in the conduct of such hearings. All parties to the hearing shall have the right to present evidence in support of or in opposition to the decision of the police chief. 
(e)  The decision of the hearing officer shall be based upon the evidence presented and it shall: 
(1)  Affirm the decision of the police chief or their designee in which case any assessment imposed shall be sustained; or 
(2)  Reverse the decision of the police chief or their designee, in whole or in part, in which case, the hearing officer shall, in his or her discretion, determine the amount of the assessment. 
(f)  The decision of the hearing officer is final. 
(Ord. No. 2993, § 1, 6-14-16) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 21; intoxicating beverage in parks, § 27-42. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Beer: Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation, infusion, or decoction of barley malt, hops, or other such ingredients not drinkable, or any combination of them. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 4-101(3). 
    City liquor license: Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, as amended. 
    Department of liquor licenses and control: The department defined in section 4-111, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended. 
    Off-sale retailer: Any person operating a bona fide, regularly established retail liquor store selling spirituous liquors, wines, and beer and any established retail store selling commodities other than spirituous liquors and engaged in the sale of spirituous liquors only in the original unbroken package, to be taken away from the premises of the retailer and to be consumed off the premises. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 4-101(21). 
    On-sale retailer: Any person operating an establishment where spirituous liquors are sold in the original container for consumption on or off the premises or in individual portions for consumption on the premises. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 4-101(22). 
    Sell: The term "sell" shall include soliciting or receiving an order for, keeping or exposing for sale, directly or indirectly delivering for value, peddling, keeping with the intent to sell and trafficking in. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 4-101(28). 
    Special event license: A license as defined by section 4-203.02, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended. 
    Spirituous liquor: The term "spirituous liquor" shall include alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, tequila, mescal, gin, wine, porter, ale, beer, any malt liquor, malt beverage, absinthe, or compound or mixture of any of them or of any of them with any vegetable or other substances, alcohol bitters, bitters containing alcohol, and any liquid mixture or preparation, whether patented or otherwise, which produces intoxication, fruits preserved in ardent spirits, and beverages containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.S.R. § 4-101(29). 
    State liquor license: Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of Title 4, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended. 
    Tax and license manager: The person designated by the city to act as tax and license manager, regardless of such person's official title with the city. 
    Wine: The product obtained by the fermentation of grapes or other agricultural products containing natural or added sugar or any such alcoholic beverage fortified with grape brandy and containing not more than twenty-four (24) percent of alcohol by volume. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 4-101(34). 
    Wine festival license: A license as defined by section 4-203.03, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended. 
(Code 1963, § 3-1; Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2183, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 4-2. - Classification of licenses. 
    The city shall use the same classification system in issuing city liquor licenses as the department of liquor licenses and control uses in issuing state liquor licenses, except that the city shall not require or issue a city liquor license for special events or wine festivals, as defined in Arizona Revised Statutes, sections 4-203.02 and 4-203.03, as amended. 
(Code 1963, § 3-2; Ord. No. 2183, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 4-3. - Licensed pharmacists exempted. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit licensed pharmacists from selling spirituous liquors when such spirituous liquors are sold upon prescription duly issued by a licensed physician for medical purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2183, § 1, 2-13-01) 
State Law reference- Exemptions, A.R.S. § 4-226. 
Sec. 4-4. - Hours of sale: on-sale and off-sale retailers. 
    No on-sale or off-sale retail licensee or an employee of such licensee shall sell, provide, deliver or give spirituous liquor to a person between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day and between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sundays. 
(Code 1963, § 3-5; Ord. No. 1722, § 2, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 2183, § 1, 2-13-01) 
State Law reference- Unlawful acts, A.R.S. § 4-244(15). 
Sec. 4-5. - Sales to persons under 21 or to intoxicated persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to sell or in any manner provide any spirituous liquors to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age, or to any person who is in an intoxicated condition. 
(Code 1963, § 3-8; Ord. No. 2183, § 1, 2-13-01) 
State Law reference- Unlawful acts, A.R.S. § 4-244(9). 
Sec. 4-6. - Compliance with administrative regulations. 
    The chief of police and the tax and license manager may adopt such rules and regulations as they deem necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter; provided, that such rules and regulations are consistent with this chapter. All such administrative rules and regulations are subject to the approval of the city manager. All persons who are required to be licensed under this chapter shall comply with all rules and regulations so adopted. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2183, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 4-7. - Compliance with other laws. 
    The issuance of a city liquor license shall not be construed as authority to engage in any business activity which is in violation of any other law or regulation to which such activity is subject, or to conduct activities on any property in violation of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2077, § 1, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2183, § 1, 2-13-01) 
Secs. 4-8-4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2183, § 2, 2-13-01, amended Art. II completely; repealed § 4-23 derived from Code 1963, § 3-14 as amended by Ord. No. 1722, § 4, 6-2-92 and Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 12-10-96 and § 4-24 derived from Code 1963, § 3-15; renumbered §§ 4-25-4-28 to be 4-23-4-26. 

Sec. 4-21. - License required. 
(a)  Subject to subsections (b) and (c) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to buy for resale, sell or deal in spirituous liquors or alcoholic beverages within the city without having first obtained a city liquor license. 
(b)  A person who has been granted a state liquor license for a special event or a wine festival may sell spirituous liquors within the city in accordance with the provisions of state law and the state license, without obtaining a separate city liquor license. 
(c)  A person who has been granted an interim permit in conjunction with filing an application for a state liquor license may sell spirituous liquors within the city in accordance with the provisions of state law and such interim permit, without first obtaining a city liquor license. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain an inactive state liquor license at a location within the city without also maintaining an inactive city liquor license at such location. 
(Code 1963, § 3-12; Ord. No. 2183, § 2, 2-13-01) 
State Law reference- Licensing; application procedure in city, town or county; burden of proof, A.R.S. § 4-201. 
Sec. 4-22. - Application. 
    Application for a city liquor license or for a transfer of such license, shall be made on forms furnished by the city. An applicant shall file an application for a city liquor license or for a transfer of a city liquor license no later than ten (10) days from the date that the applicant files an application for a state liquor license or for a transfer of a state liquor license with the department of liquor licenses and control. An applicant's failure to timely file an application pursuant to this section may constitute grounds for the city to recommend disapproval of the application for a state liquor license to the department of liquor licenses and control. Every application shall be accompanied by the required application fee. 
(Ord. No. 1722, § 3, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 2183, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 4-23. - Fees. 
(a)  The application and license fees for city liquor licenses shall be established by resolution. The city may set different fees for active and inactive licenses of the same classification. 
(b)  Any fees for inactive city liquor licenses shall apply only to licensees whose state liquor licenses remain inactive for the entire time during a calendar year in which such license is located in the city. If a licensee pays a license fee for an inactive city liquor license and then re-activates his or her state liquor license while such license is located in the city, the licensee shall pay, upon re-activation of the state liquor license, the same license fee that the licensee would have been required to pay for the full calendar year for an active city liquor license. 
(c)  No application fee paid pursuant to this article shall be returned to the applicant if his or her application is withdrawn or denied. No license fee paid pursuant to this article shall be returned to a licensee if his or her city liquor license is canceled, suspended, revoked or transferred to another person, regardless of whether such transfer results in the payment of multiple city liquor license fees for the same location for the same year. 
(Code 1963, § 3-16(a)-(c); Ord. No. 1430, § 1, 6-10-86; Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2183, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 4-24. - Issuance; expiration; renewal. 
(a)  Any city liquor license shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued. Each city liquor license expires on December 31 of each year and must be renewed on or before January 31 of the following year by filing an application for renewal and paying the applicable renewal fee. The application and payment for renewal must be received by the tax and license manager by January 31 to be deemed timely filed. 
(b)  Persons whose initial city liquor licenses are issued after March 31 of any year shall be subject to an initial license fee on a prorated basis as follows: 
Business Start Date Proration of 
License Fee April 1-June 30 75% July 1-September 30 50% October 1-December 31 25%  
    The applicable proration percentage shall be applied to the annual license fee set by resolution to determine the initial license fee. 
(c)  Any person who fails to renew an active city liquor license by January 31 of any year and who conducts any activities covered by such license after such date shall be deemed to be operating without a license, shall be subject to all penalties imposed under this chapter against persons unlawfully operating without a license, and shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual license fee that would have been imposed on the date on which the license expired in addition to payment of the applicable license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a new city liquor license is issued to such person or such license is transferred to another person. 
(d)  Any person who fails to renew an inactive city liquor license by January 31 of any year and who maintains an inactive state liquor license in the city shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual inactive license fee that would have been imposed on the date on which the city liquor license expired in addition to payment of the applicable inactive license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a new city liquor license is issued to such person or such license is transferred to another person. 
(e)  Any person who is required to obtain a city liquor license and fails to do so prior to conducting any activity covered by such license shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual license fee that would have been imposed on the date on which such activities commenced in addition to payment of the applicable license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a city liquor license is issued to such person. 
(f)  No city liquor license shall be renewed unless the licensee is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter at the time of renewal. 
(Ord. No. 1722, § 5, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2183, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 4-25. - Change in ownership of business; license fees. 
(a)  City liquor licenses shall be transferable pursuant to the provisions of this article and Title 4, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended. 
(b)  If an application for a person-to-person transfer of a transferable liquor license is pending as of December 31 of any year and the applicant has been issued an interim permit by the department of liquor licenses and control, the transferee may continue to operate under the permit and no annual city liquor license fee shall be due from the transferor of the license or the transferee until such time as the application is withdrawn or the transfer is approved or disapproved by the department of liquor licenses and control. At such time as the application is so approved, the transferee shall pay the annual city liquor license fee. At such time as an application is withdrawn or disapproved, the transferor to whom the state liquor license reverts shall pay the annual city liquor license fee. The city shall make no proration of the annual city liquor license fee between the transferor of a license and the transferee. 
(c)  If an application for a new liquor license is pending as of December 31 of any year, if such license will replace an existing, nontransferable liquor license of the same classification at the same location, and if the applicant has been issued an interim permit by the department of liquor licenses and control, the applicant may continue to operate under the interim permit and no annual city liquor license fee shall be due from the prior licensee or the applicant until such time as the application is withdrawn or the replacement license is approved or disapproved by the department of liquor licenses and control. At such time as the application is so approved, the applicant shall pay the annual city liquor license fee that would have been due on January 1. If the application is withdrawn or disapproved, the prior licensee shall not be required to pay any city liquor license fees unless the department of liquor licenses and control allows the licensee to re-activate the license that was surrendered or canceled in conjunction with the filing of the application for a new license. 
(Ord. No. 1722, § 5, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 2183, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 4-26. - Display. 
    A city liquor license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
(Code 1963, § 3-12; Ord. No. 2183, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Secs. 4-27-4-28. - Reserved. 
Chapter 5 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 21; parks and recreation, Ch. 27; special events, § 30-81 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1918, § 1, 12-10-96, amended Art. I completely, repealed §§ 5-8, 5-12-5-14, and renumbered §§ 5-9 as 5-8, 5-10 as 5-9, 5-11 as 5-10, 5-15 as 5-11 and 5-16 as 5-12. 

Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement device: Any coin-operated, token-operated or rented kiddie rides, music machines, skill games or non-skill games, including pool tables, billiard tables, pinball machines, shuffle boards, shuffle bowls, ski ball, rotary merchandisers, dart boards, target games, basket loops and other similar devices. Each coin box, token box or player position on a machine or device with more than one such box or position shall be deemed to be a separate device. 
    Amusement device tag: An identification sticker required for the operation of an amusement device pursuant to this chapter. Amusement device tags shall not be deemed to be amusement licenses requiring personal background checks under this code. 
    Amusement license: Any license required to operate an amusement pursuant to articles I and II of this chapter. 
    Arcade: Any establishment in which is operated more than five (5) amusement devices. 
    Arcade operator: Any person who is the owner of the business premises on which an arcade is operated, or who leases, subleases, rents or licenses for use such premises to owners or distributors of amusement devices. 
    Arterial street: Any portion of the following streets within the corporate limits of the city: 43rd Avenue, 51st Avenue, 59th Avenue, 67th Avenue, 75th Avenue, 83rd Avenue, 91st Avenue, 99th Avenue, 107th Avenue, 115th Avenue, Dysart Road, Litchfield Road, Camelback Road, Bethany Home Road, Glendale Avenue, Northern Avenue, Olive Avenue, Peoria Avenue, Cactus Road, Thunderbird Road, Greenway Road, Bell Road, Union Hills Drive, Beardsley Road, Deer Valley Road, Pinnacle Peak Road and Grand Avenue. 
    Carnival (large or small): Any establishment at which a combination of attractions or exhibitions, such as rides, illusions, freak shows, eating concessions and gaming booths, are available for the purpose of amusement and entertainment and where the public pays either an admission or participation fee. A carnival with more than three (3) attractions and exhibitions shall be deemed to be a large carnival; a carnival with no more than three (3) attractions and exhibitions shall be deemed to be a small carnival. A carnival shall be inclusive of an exhibition as defined in this section. 
    Carriage for hire: Any non-motorized device in, upon or by which any person is or may be transported or drawn upon a public roadway for a fee. 
    Circus (large or small): Any establishment at which a combination of attractions or exhibitions, such as rides, illusions, freak shows, eating concessions and gaming booths, with a main attraction and/or sideshows, are available for the purpose of amusement and entertainment and at which the public pays either an admission or participation fee. A circus with more than one (1) main attraction shall be deemed to be a large circus; a circus with no more than one (1) main attraction (a European circus) shall be deemed to be a small circus. A circus shall be inclusive of a carnival or exhibition as defined in this section. 
    Distributor: Any person who leases, subleases, rents, licenses for use or otherwise furnishes any amusement device to an arcade operator. 
    Entertainment facility (large or small): Any establishment which, for purposes of entertainment or amusement of its patrons, has more than one musician at any one time and facilities intended to be used for social dancing. An entertainment facility with a dance floor less than one-eighth (1/8) of the total floor area shall be deemed to be a small entertainment facility; an entertainment facility with a dance floor at least one-eighth (1/8) of the total floor area shall be deemed to be a large entertainment facility. 
    Exhibition: Any establishment at which an exhibit of animals, human beings or objects is featured for the purpose of amusement and entertainment, and at which the public pays an admission fee. 
    Fee (admission, admittance or participation): Any fee charged by the operator of an amusement for the right to enter, use, view or be entertained by such amusement, including any voluntary payment made by the public if such payment is directly or indirectly encouraged or solicited by the operator as a part of operating the amusement. 
    Haunted house: Any establishment which is represented or advertised to the public as a haunted house or establishment or in which the public, for a fee, is directed through walkways, corridors or other paths in a building, tent or other structure and which contains a combination of displays, acts, exhibits or other attractions intended to entertain or amuse patrons through the use of scary, spooky or Halloween images. 
    Kiddie rides: Any coin-operated, token-operated or rented small ride that is so designated to accommodate children under approximately twelve (12) years of age, including pony rides, stagecoach rides, individual ferris wheels with a total machine height of less than six (6) feet on a stationary base and other similar devices. 
    Music machine: Any juke box or other reproducing device whereby the public hears music upon the insertion of a coin or token in a slot or other receptacle. The term shall include outlets of music played in a central location and transmitted to a given establishment and upon the payment of coin or token into a receiving device. Each separate location outlet shall be deemed to be one (1) music machine. 
    Nonprofit organization: Any person(s), partnership, association, corporation or other group whose activities are conducted for unselfish, civic or humanitarian motives, or for the benefit of others, and not for the gain of any private individual or group and may include, but shall not be limited to, patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, fraternal, cultural, charitable, scientific, historical, athletic or medical activities. 
    Persons financially interested: For a corporation, any person who is the beneficial owner of at least fifty percent (50%) of the shares of such corporation; for a noncorporate business, any person who shares in, directly or indirectly, at least fifty percent (50%) of any financial gain attributable to such business as an owner, proprietor or otherwise. 
    Race tracks: Any establishment at which the racing of horses or dogs is conducted and parimutuel betting is permitted and which is open to the public. 
    Rides: Any device for which a charge is made to the public for the privilege of riding in or on any animal or mechanical device, where the primary purpose of the ride is to amuse and entertain. The term shall include such things as pony rides, merry-go-rounds, whips, ferris wheels and roller coasters but shall not include animal-drawn carriages. 
    Security guard: Any person hold a security guard registration certificate as issued by the department of public safety and any off-duty Arizona peace officer. 
    Shooting gallery: Any establishment which is open to the public and at which firearms are rented for firing upon the immediate premises for the purpose of amusement. 
    Tax and license manager: The person designated by the city to act as tax and license manager, regardless of such person's official Title with the city. 
    Wagering establishment: Any establishment at which bets or wagers are made or taken on the results of any race, contest, sports event, game, or any other event or occurrence; provided that this definition does not include lawful betting or wagering that is not regulated under state gaming laws and regulations and does not include race tracks as defined in this article. 
(Code 1963, § 4-1; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 5-22-79; Ord. No. 1180, § 1, 9-8-81; Ord. No. 1504, § 1, 7-28-87; Ord. No. 1690, § 1, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 1723, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 1, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2077, § 2, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2603, § 1, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 5-2. - Compliance with administrative regulations. 
    The chief of police or tax and license manager may adopt such rules and regulations as they deem necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of articles I and II of this chapter; provided, that such rules and regulations are consistent with articles I and II. All such administrative rules and regulations are subject to the approval of the city manager. All persons who are required to be licensed under article II or who are required to obtain amusement device tags under article II shall comply with all rules and regulations so adopted. 
(Code 1963, § 4-2; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1723, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 1, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2603, § 1, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 5-3. - Amusement devices prohibited near schools. 
    No person shall operate any amusement device in any building or on any premises open to the public within three hundred (300) feet of any elementary, junior high or high school, either public or private, within the city. 
(Code 1963, § 4-3; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 2-26-78; Ord. No. 1208, § 1, 7-13-82; Ord. No. 1723, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 1, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 5-4. - Carnivals, circuses, haunted houses and exhibitions. 
(a)  Persons operating carnivals, circuses, haunted houses or exhibitions shall provide fireproof tents and safe structures in accordance with the rules and regulations of the city fire department and division of building inspection. 
(b)  All circuses, carnivals, haunted houses and exhibitions must provide such special security guards as may be required and approved by the chief of police to insure the protection of the public. 
(c)  Every licensee authorized to operate a circus, carnival, haunted house or exhibition shall post with the tax and license division one hundred dollars ($100.00) in advance to insure the payment of the city privilege license tax, which shall be returned to the licensee upon satisfactory payment of the privilege license tax. 
(d)  No person shall be issued a license to operate a circus, carnival or exhibition at which rides are used or undomesticated animals are exhibited until such person has filed with the city's risk management division an approved certificate of insurance certifying that the applicant carries public liability and property damage insurance, issued by an insurance carrier acceptable to the city, insuring the applicant against claims arising out of the operation of such circus, carnival or exhibition in amounts not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) per person and one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence for personal injuries or death and not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for property damage. Each licensee shall maintain such liability insurance at all times during which he or she operates such circus, carnival or exhibition within the city. 
(Code 1963, §§ 4-4-4-6; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1723, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 1, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 5-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2077, § 2, adopted May 11, 1999, deleted former § 5-5, relative to adult-film viewing devices, which derived from Code 1963, §§ 4-7, 4-8; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; and Ord. No. 1918, § 1, 12-10-96. 
Sec. 5-6. - Amusement devices operated on another person's premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation of any amusement device on such person's premises if such amusement device does not have a current amusement device tag. 
(b)  The owner or distributor of any amusement device which is operated on another person's premises shall not be required to obtain an amusement license for the operation of such device, but such owner or distributor shall obtain a separate amusement device tag for each of his or her amusement devices operated within the city, regardless of whether such devices are operated in an arcade or on whose premises such devices are operated. 
(Ord. No. 1723, § 2, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 1, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 5-7. - Entertainment facilities. 
    All entertainment facilities shall provide such security guards as may be required and approved by the chief of police to insure the protection of the public. 
(Code 1963, § 4-43; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1918, § 1, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 5-8. - Race tracks. 
(a)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be allowed to be present on the premises of any race track, unless in the presence of his or her parent or guardian. The owner or operator of the race track shall take all reasonable measures, including but not necessarily limited to requiring identification from persons entering or present on the premises of a race track, to prevent unlawful gambling by minors. 
(b)  Where alcoholic beverages are served or permitted to be consumed anywhere on the premises of any race track, the owner or operator of the race track shall take all reasonable measures, including but not necessarily limited to requiring identification from persons entering or present on the premises of a race track, to prevent purchase or consumption of alcoholic beverages by those persons under the lawful drinking age. 
(c)  All race tracks must provide and maintain security in accordance with a security plan approved during the licensing of the race track by the city, and shall update such security plan as necessary at the time of annual license renewal, as may be required by the chief of police. The security plan may require security guards and other security measures as determined by the chief of police to be reasonably necessary. 
(d)  Wagering pay-offs in a single amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more shall be made by check or similar instrument instead of cash and a notice to this effect shall be conspicuously posted near the betting windows. 
(e)  The licensee shall comply, and shall be responsible for the licensee's owners, managers and employees, and in the case of a corporate licensee, its principal officers, directors, and principal shareholders complying, with all laws and regulations related to racing, wagering or gaming; and, if alcoholic beverages are served or permitted to be consumed anywhere on the premises of the race track, with all laws and regulations relating to alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  All race tracks shall be provided with adequate toilet facilities in accordance with the Uniform Construction Codes as adopted and amended by the city and health department regulations. 
(Code 1963, §§ 4-12, 4-13; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1690, § 2, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 1918, § 1, 12-10-96) 
State Law reference- Horse and dog racing, A.R.S. § 5-101 et seq. 
Sec. 5-9. - Rides. 
    No ride shall be operated between 1:00 a.m. and 7:30 a.m. 
(Code 1963, § 4-14; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1723, § 3, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 1, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 5-10. - Shooting galleries. 
    No person operating a shooting gallery shall have on the premises any rifle, pistol, or other firearm of a higher caliber than .22. The shooting range shall be constructed so as to provide adequate protection from ricocheting, penetration or any escape of bullets, pellets or projectiles from within the shooting range. 
(Code 1963, § 4-15; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1918, § 1, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 5-11. - Wagering establishments. 
(a)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be allowed to be present in any wagering establishment, or with respect to multiple use facilities, in the portion of the facility that is used as a wagering establishment, unless in the presence of his or her parent or guardian. The owner or operator of the wagering establishment shall take all reasonable measures, including but not necessarily limited to requiring identification from persons entering or present in a wagering establishment, to prevent unlawful gambling by minors. 
(b)  Where alcoholic beverages are served or permitted to be consumed in any wagering establishment, or with respect to multiple use facilities where alcoholic beverages are served or permitted to be consumed anywhere on the premises of the multiple use facility, the owner or operator of the wagering establishment shall take all reasonable measures, including but not necessarily limited to requiring identification from persons entering or present in a wagering establishment, to prevent purchase or consumption of alcoholic beverages by those persons under the lawful drinking age. 
(c)  All wagering establishments must provide and maintain security in accordance with a security plan approved during the licensing of the wagering establishment by the city, and shall update such security plan as necessary at the time of annual license renewal, as may be required by the chief of police. The security plan may require security guards and other security measures as determined by the chief of police to be reasonably necessary. In making the determination as to reasonably necessary security measures for a wagering establishment, the chief of police shall consider, among all other relevant factors, the square footage and physical layout of the wagering establishment and the rest of the multiple use facility, if any, and the anticipated number of patrons of the wagering establishment and of the multiple use facility, if any. 
(d)  Wagering pay-offs in a single amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more shall be made by check or similar instrument instead of cash and a notice to this effect shall be conspicuously posted near the betting windows. 
(e)  The licensee shall comply, and shall be responsible for the licensee's owners, managers and employees, and in the case of a corporate licensee, its principal officers, directors, and principal shareholders complying, with all laws and regulations related to racing, wagering or gaming; and, if alcoholic beverages are served or permitted to be consumed in the wagering establishment, or with respect to multiple use facilities, anywhere on the premises of the multiple use facility, with all laws and regulations relating to alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 1690, § 3, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 1918, § 1, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 5-12. - Carriage for hire. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the license requirements set forth elsewhere in this chapter, each application for a license to operate a carriage for hire shall include: (1) the name, address and telephone number of the owner and operator of the carriage for hire; and (2) a written description and diagram of all public roadways, rights-of-way and property within the city on which the carriage for hire will be operated. 
(b)  No person shall be issued a license to operate a carriage for hire until such person has filed with the city's risk management division an approved certificate of insurance properly endorsed certifying that the applicant carries or is a named additional insured on a policy for public liability and property damage insurance, issued by an insurance carrier acceptable to the city, insuring the applicant against claims arising out of the operation of the carriage for hire in amounts not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for personal injuries or death and not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage. Each licensee shall maintain such liability insurance or proof of the licensee's insured status at all times during which he or she operates a carriage for hire within the city. Prior to the expiration date of any insurance policy required by this subsection, the licensee shall file with the city's risk management division a new certificate of insurance certifying that the licensee has renewed his or her liability insurance coverage or that the licensee has obtained comparable insurance coverage with a different insurance carrier acceptable to the city. 
(c)  No carriage for hire shall be operated between 1:00 a.m. and 7:30 a.m. No carriage for hire shall be operated on any street within the city which has a posted speed limit of more than thirty-five (35) miles per hour, except for the purpose of crossing such street. No carriage for hire, except as expressly provided in writing by the city, shall stop on any street which has a posted speed limit of more than thirty-five (35) miles per hour at any time to pick up or drop off passengers. Carriages for hire shall be subject to all applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to signals for the stopping and turning of vehicles under Arizona Revised Statutes § 28-755 and for the operation of bicycles under Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 28, Chapter 3, Article 11. 
(d)  Every carriage for hire shall have the following safety features: (1) a reflective "slow-moving vehicle" sign attached and clearly visible from the back of the carriage in the configuration as shown and in letters of at least four (4) inches in height; (2) battery or generator operated lights on the front and rear of the carriage and visible from at least one hundred (100) feet after sunset; (3) spoke reflectors placed on each wheel; (4) reflectors on both the right and left sides, front and back, showing the width of the carriage for hire; and (5) equipment, parts or components in a safe mechanical and structural condition that do not endanger the operator, passengers or any persons or property in the immediate vicinity of the carriage. 
(e)  At all times during which an animal is used to draw a carriage for hire on any public property, the operator shall equip the carriage or animal in such a manner as to prevent fecal matter from being deposited on such property. If fecal matter is inadvertently deposited on any public property, the operator shall clean up and remove the fecal matter from such property within two (2) hours from the time the fecal matter was deposited on the property. 
(f)  Pursuant to Section 5-2 of this same article, the city may designate or limit public areas or streets available for carriages for hire as well as the number of carriages that may safely operate in such areas, all in accordance with city traffic or safety plans issued in connection with special events. All licensees under this article shall be required to operate in accordance with such plans. 
(g)  Any violation of subsections (b) through (f) shall be a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1723, § 4, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 1, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2603, § 1, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 5-13. - Exempt facilities and activities. 
    Facilities and activities exempt under chapter 21, section 21-28 that would normally be licensed under this chapter are exempt from the requirements of this chapter except for those set forth in chapter 5, article I, sections 5-8, 5-10 and 5-11; article II, division 3 and article III. Activities under article I, section 5-12 are exempt only as to fees. 
(Ord. No. 2354, § 1, 11-25-03; Ord. No. 2603, § 1, 11-27-07) 
Secs. 5-14-5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-26. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: a) operate any carriage for hire, arcade, carnival, circus, entertainment facility, exhibition, haunted house, kiddie ride, race track, ride, shooting gallery or wagering establishment within the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a license pursuant to this article; or b) operate a carriage for hire on any public roadway, right-of-way or property which is not expressly described in such person's application and which has not been approved by the city. 
(Code 1963, § 4-20; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1723, § 5, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 2, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2077, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2603, § 2, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 5-27. - Issuance standards. 
(a)  No natural person shall be licensed under this article if such person: 
(1)  Lacks good moral character as set forth in section 21-4; 
(2)  Knowingly makes any false or misleading statement in the course of applying for or renewing a license; 
(3)  Has been convicted of a felony involving dishonesty, deceit, theft, assaultive conduct or sexual misconduct within five (5) years from the date that the application is submitted; 
(4)  Is under the age of eighteen (18) years; or 
(5)  Has been denied a license required by this article, or had such a license revoked, for a period of six (6) months following the final denial or revocation decision. 
(b)  No applicant which is not a natural person shall be licensed under this article if any of the following persons would be disqualified from being licensed under subsection (a): 
(1)  The president of an applicant which is a corporation, if he or she is an Arizona resident; 
(2)  Each general partner of an applicant which is a partnership; 
(3)  The managing officer or agent for the in-state operations of the applicant; 
(4)  Any person financially interested in the applicant; 
(5)  Each managing member of a limited liability company, or if there are no designated managing members, all of the members; 
(6)  Each trustee of an applicant which is a trust. 
(c)  No amusement license shall be issued to an applicant if the chief of police determines that, due to the nature and location of the applicant's proposed business, the operation of such business is likely to create unreasonably unsafe conditions or to unreasonably increase existing, unsafe conditions in the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Code 1963, § 4-21; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1723, § 5, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 2, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2077, § 3, 5-11-99) 
State Law reference- Age of majority, A.R.S. § 1-215(16). 
Sec. 5-28. - Applications. 
    An application for a license required by this article shall be made on forms furnished by the city. Every application shall be accompanied by the required application fee. 
(Code 1963, §§ 4-22, 4-24; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1689, § 1, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 1723, § 5, 6-2-92) 
Sec. 5-29. - Inspection of premises. 
    Except for applications for carriages for hire, the application for an amusement license shall contain a statement by the applicant of at least three (3) different times during each business day when the applicant will be available at the premises for which an application is made. Such statement shall be for the purpose of allowing such premises to be inspected and to provide for the applicant to meet with the proper city officials making such inspection. Failure of an applicant to be at such premises at the times stated in the application may be considered by the city in determining whether the applicant has met the qualifications for an amusement license. 
(Code 1963, § 4-23; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1723, § 5, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 2, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2603, § 2, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 5-30. - Fees. 
(a)  Application and license fees for amusement licenses and device tags shall be established by resolution. The city may set different application and license fees for an applicant who has not previously been issued an amusement license for the calendar year in which he or she submits an application and an applicant who has been issued an amusement license for the calendar year in which he or she submits an application and who is required to obtain a new amusement license due to a change in the location of the business. 
(b)  The application and license fees required by this section for any event or activity may be waived in whole or in part by the city manager or his or her designee if at least ten percent (10%) of the gross revenues from such event or activity will be received by a nonprofit entity with tax-exempt status under Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(3) and if such entity is located within the city or has some other affiliation within the city. A request for a waiver shall be made on forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied by a copy of the nonprofit entity's tax-exempt certification from the Internal Revenue Service and a written verification from such entity of the portion of the gross revenues from the event or activity to be received by it. If the nonprofit entity receives from ten to fifty percent (10%-50%) of the gross revenues from the event or activity, the city may waive up to fifty percent (50%) of all application and license fees required by this section. If the nonprofit entity receives more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross revenues from the event or activity, the city may waive all of the application and license fees required by this section. 
(c)  Each applicant for an amusement license shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the City of Glendale for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law (PL) 92-544. The Department of Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. In addition to any other fees imposed by this article, an applicant for an amusement license shall pay an amount necessary to cover the costs of federal fingerprint processing or federal criminal history record information checks. The specific amount of such additional fee shall be set by administrative order based upon information received from the department of public safety as to the costs of such fingerprint processing and record information checks. The additional fees collected pursuant to this subsection shall be transmitted to the Department of Public Safety as required by Arizona Revised Statutes section 41-1750, as amended. 
(d)  No application fee or fingerprinting fee paid pursuant to this article shall be returned to an applicant if his or her application is withdrawn or denied. No license fee paid pursuant to this article shall be returned to a licensee if his or her license is suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1963, §§ 4-25-4-27, 4-32, 4-42; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1080, § 3, 5-22-74; Ord. No. 1213, § 1, 8-24-82; Ord. No. 1504, § 2, 7-28-87; Ord. No. 1723, § 5, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 2, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2273, § 2, 7-23-02) 
Sec. 5-31. - Issuance; expiration; renewal. 
(a)  Except for licenses which expressly expire on specified dates other than December 31, any license issued under this article shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued. Each such license expires on December 31 of each year and must be renewed on or before January 31 of the following year by filing an application for renewal, paying the applicable renewal fee and submitting any additional documentation required by this article. The application, payment for renewal and additional required documentation must be received by the tax and license manager by January 31 to be deemed timely filed. 
(b)  Persons whose initial applications for annual licenses issued under this article are received by the city after March 31 of any year shall be subject to an initial license fee on a prorated basis as follows: 
Business 
Start Date Proration of 
License Fee April 1-June 30 75% July 1-September 30 50% October 1-December 31 25%  
The applicable proration percentage shall be applied to the annual license fee set by resolution to determine the initial license fee. 
(c)  Any person who fails to renew a license issued under this article by January 31 of any year and who conducts any activity covered by such license after such date shall be deemed to be operating without a license, shall be subject to all penalties imposed under this article against persons unlawfully operating without a license and shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual license fee which would have been imposed on the date on which the license expired in addition to payment of the applicable license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a new license is issued to such person under this article. 
(d)  Any person who is required to obtain a license under this article and fails to do so prior to conducting any activity covered by such license shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual license fee which would have been imposed on the date on which such activities commenced in addition to payment of the applicable license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a new license is issued to such person under this article. 
(e)  No license issued under this article shall be renewed unless the licensee is in compliance with all provisions of articles I and II this chapter at the time of renewal. 
(Code 1963, § 4-28; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1723, § 5, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 2, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 5-32. - Display of licenses and device tags. 
    Every amusement license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises or be readily visible at all times upon the carriage or the person of the operator of a carriage for hire. Every amusement device tag shall at all times be affixed to and displayed in a conspicuous place on the amusement device for which such tag is issued. 
(Code 1963, §§ 4-29, 4-43; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1918, § 2, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2603, § 2, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 5-33. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the revocation or suspension of race track or wagering establishment licenses. 
(b)  Subject to subsection (a), the tax and license manager may suspend any license issued under this article for a specified period not to exceed sixty (60) days, or revoke such license, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to maintain good moral character; 
(2)  Conviction of any felony involving dishonesty, deceit, theft, assaultive conduct or sexual misconduct; 
(3)  Any other violation of articles I and II of this chapter. 
(c)  The city shall give written notice of the revocation or suspension to the licensee which notice shall contain the reasons for the revocation or suspension and, if applicable, the length of the suspension. Such notice shall either be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
(d)  The licensee may request an informal hearing on such revocation or suspension by submitting a written request to the tax and license manager within ten (10) days after the notice of revocation or suspension is given. An informal hearing before the tax and license manager shall be held within fifteen (15) days after the request for the same is received by the city. If the licensee does not request a hearing within said ten (10) day period, the revocation or suspension shall take effect on the eleventh day after service of the notice of revocation or suspension. If a hearing is requested, the revocation or suspension shall not take effect until after the informal hearing and the service of a new notice from the tax and license manager on the licensee setting forth the tax and license manager's final decision. Such notice shall be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
(Code 1963, § 4-41; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1723, § 5, 6-2-92) 
Sec. 5-34. - Appeal from denial, revocation or suspension. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to race track or wagering establishment licenses. 
(b)  Subject to subsection (a), a person who has been denied an amusement license or whose amusement license or amusement device tag has been revoked or suspended after an informal hearing with the tax and license manager may appeal such decision to a hearing officer. The appeal shall be requested within ten (10) days from the date on which such person is given notice of the determination from which the appeal is taken. The request shall be in writing, shall be filed with the city manager and shall set forth specifically the grounds for the appeal. 
(c)  The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct a hearing in accordance with this section. The hearing officer shall not be a member of the tax and license division. The hearing officer may, in his or her discretion, stay any revocation or suspension pending final determination of the appeal. 
(d)  The burden of proof at the hearing shall be on the applicant, licensee or owner or distributor of the amusement device to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he or she meets all of the requirements for holding an amusement license or an amusement device tag. The hearing officer shall hear such testimony and consider such evidence as is relevant to the determination of such issues. The hearing officer shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence or procedure in conducting the hearing. 
(e)  The hearing officer shall render a written decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing is concluded based on the evidence presented by the city and the applicant, licensee or owner or distributor of the amusement device. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1723, § 6, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 2, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 5-35. - Nontransferability. 
    No amusement license shall be transferable between persons or locations. 
(Ord. No. 1723, § 6, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 2, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 5-36. - Compliance with other laws. 
    The issuance of an amusement license or an amusement device tag by the city shall not be construed as authority to engage in any activity which is in violation of any other law or regulation to which such activity is subject, or to conduct activities on any property in violation of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1723, § 6, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 2, 12-10-96) 
Secs. 5-37-5-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR AMUSEMENT DEVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1918, § 3, 12-10-96, added new § 5-47; renumbered §§ 5-47 as 5-48 and 5-48 as 5-49; and repealed § 5-49. 

Sec. 5-46. - Amusement device tags required; applications. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or distributor of an amusement device to operate or permit the operation of such device within the city without first having obtained an amusement device tag for such device pursuant to this article. 
(b)  An application for an amusement device tag shall be made on forms furnished by the city. Each application shall be accompanied by the required application fee to be established by resolution. Each application shall include all of the following information which is applicable to the particular device: 
(1)  The manufacturer's name of the device; 
(2)  Serial number of the device; 
(3)  A description of the manner of operation; 
(4)  The name, address and telephone number of the operator of the arcade or other premises in which the device will be operated; 
(5)  The address of the proposed business premises in which the device will be operated; 
(6)  Any other information which may be required by the tax and license manager. 
(c)  The distributor or owner of each amusement device shall prepare and file the required application with the tax and license manager. No amusement device which has not been described on the application, as provided in this section, shall be issued an amusement device tag. 
(Code 1963, § 4-34; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1723, § 7, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 3, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 5-47. - Issuance; expiration; renewal. 
(a)  Any amusement device tag shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued. Each such device tag expires on December 31 of each year and must be renewed on or before January 31 of the following year by filing an application for renewal and paying the applicable renewal fee. The application and payment for renewal must be received by the tax and license division by January 31 to be deemed timely filed. 
(b)  Any owner or distributor of an amusement device who fails to renew an amusement device tag on or before January 31 of any year and operates or permits the operation of such device after such date, shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual amusement device tag fee which would have been imposed on the date on which the device tag expired in addition to payment of the applicable device tag fee. All device tag fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a new device tag is issued for such device. 
(c)  Any owner or distributor of an amusement device who is required to obtain an amusement device tag and fails to do so prior to operating or permitting the operation of such device shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual amusement device tag fee which would have been imposed on the date such operation commenced in addition to payment of the applicable device tag fees. All device tag fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a device tag is issued for such device. 
(Ord. No. 1918, § 3, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 5-48. - Gambling devices; revocation; appeals. 
(a)  No amusement device tag shall be issued for any amusement device which, in the opinion of the tax and license manager, is operated as a gambling device. If any amusement device for which a device tag has been issued appears to be easily converted to gambling and becomes a nuisance or a menace to the public morals, the tax and license manager may revoke the device tag for such device by giving written notice of such revocation to the owner or distributor of the device. Such notice shall contain the reasons for the revocation and shall be personally served on the owner or distributor or mailed to the owner's or distributor's last known address. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
(b)  The owner or distributor of an amusement device for which a notice of revocation of the amusement device tag is served may appeal such revocation pursuant to sections 5-33 (d) and 5-34. If the owner or distributor does not request an informal hearing before the tax and license manager on the revocation within ten (10) days after notice of revocation is given, the revocation shall take effect on the eleventh day after service of the notice of revocation. If a hearing is requested, the revocation shall not take effect until after the informal hearing and the service of a new notice from the tax and license manager on the licensee setting forth the tax and license manager's final decision. 
(c)  No amusement device tag shall be issued for any amusement device for which a device tag has previously been issued and revoked pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1963, § 4-35; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1723, § 7, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 3, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 5-49. - Transfer of location. 
    In the event that any amusement device is transferred from the location specified in the application form to any other location in the city, the owner or distributor of such device shall, within fourteen (14) days of such transfer, notify the tax and license division of the new location of such device. 
(Code 1963, § 4-38; Ord. No. 1060, § 2, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 1723, § 7, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 3, 12-10-96) 
Secs. 5-50-5-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR RACE TRACKS AND WAGERING ESTABLISHMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Race tracks generally, § 5-8; wagering establishments generally, § 5-11. 

Sec. 5-56. - Applications. 
(a)  In addition to the application information required by section 5-28, applicants for licenses required by this article for race tracks or for wagering establishments shall also provide the following information: 
(1)  The identity of all owners, managers and employees of the applicant's business, who will have any part in the operation, control, policy or decision-making and/or management of the race track or wagering establishment to be located within the city. In the case of a corporation, the foregoing shall, at a minimum, identify the corporation's principal officers, directors, and principal shareholders. The applicant shall furnish complete and accurate information, and certify the same, on whether any of the identified owners, managers, employees, and the corporation's principal officers, directors or principal shareholders, have in the previous ten (10) years been convicted of any felony or have ever been convicted of or been found in any civil action or administrative proceeding to have been responsible for any violation of law or regulation relating to racing, wagering or gaming, in any jurisdiction; and shall furnish such information on any such offenses or violations as the chief of police may reasonably require. All such identified owners, managers, employees, and the corporation's principal officers, directors or principal shareholders shall be subject to criminal history information checks and fingerprinting, unless waived by the chief of police under the circumstances of a particular application in view of the present or anticipated degree or type of control exercised by such person or such person's present or anticipated participation in the operation, policy or decision-making and/or management of the race track or wagering establishment. In situations where the applicant has supplied the background information required in this paragraph (1) to the Arizona Racing Commission or to the Arizona Department of Racing and/or the identified individuals have been subject to criminal history information check and fingerprinting by the Arizona Department of Public Safety, in connection with a racing, gaming or wagering license which pertains to the race track or wagering establishment, such information and/or criminal history information check and fingerprinting need not be duplicated in the application for city license under this section if all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(i)  The background information required by this paragraph (1) has been thoroughly and accurately supplied by the applicant to the Arizona Racing Commission or to the Arizona Department of Racing within the twelve (12) months prior to filing of the application for a city race track or wagering establishment license, of if supplied prior to such twelve-month period, the applicant has updated such information within the twelve (12) months prior to filing of the application for a city race track or wagering establishment license as to any material changes. 
(ii)  Utilization by the applicant in support of its application for a city race track or wagering establishment license, of information previously supplied to the Arizona Racing Commission or to the Arizona Department of Racing, as permitted herein, shall constitute a representation by the applicant that such information is complete and accurate and that no material changes have occurred as to the matters reported therein since the information was supplied or last updated. 
(iii)  The procedure permitted under this paragraph (1) of the applicant utilizing information supplied to the Arizona Racing Commission or to the Arizona Department of Racing and/or criminal history information checks and fingerprinting by the Arizona Department of Public Safety may only be used by the applicant if the information supplied and/or information obtained through the criminal history information checks and fingerprinting are accessible by the chief of police. 
(2)  Information on the status of any license required by the state for the race track or wagering establishment. 
(3)  Whether the applicant or any of its owners, managers, or employees, and in the case of a corporation, its principal officers, directors or principal shareholders, identified as required in this section, have ever held or had an interest in any license or permit, in any jurisdiction, for racing, wagering or gaming which was revoked or suspended by the issuing jurisdiction. If so, information shall be provided on the license or permit and jurisdiction involved and on the grounds for revocation or suspension. 
(4)  Whether the applicant or any of its owners, managers or employees, and in the case of a corporation, its principal officers, directors or principal shareholders, identified as required in this section, have ever applied for or had an interest in an application for any license or permit, in any jurisdiction, for racing, wagering or gaming, which was denied by the jurisdiction to which application was made if the grounds for the denial included any of the following, or if allegations were made by the jurisdiction during the license application process of any of the following: Lack of good character or unsatisfactory criminal background of any person involved with the license or applicant, misconduct, violation of regulations, or any similar grounds or allegations. If so, information shall be provided on the license or permit application and jurisdiction involved and on the grounds for denial. Additional information on license denials shall be provided by the applicant upon specific request by the city manager or his designee. 
(5)  Whether the applicant or any of its owners, managers or employees, and in the case of a corporation, its principal officers, directors or principal shareholders, identified as required in this section, have been charged within the previous ten (10) years with any felony, been charged with any violation of law or regulation related to racing, wagering or gaming, or been the subject of or party to any civil action or administrative proceeding alleging any violation of law or regulation related to racing, wagering or gaming, in any jurisdiction. If so, information shall be provided on the charge, civil action or administrative proceeding and on the violation(s) alleged. 
(6)  A detailed floor plan of the wagering establishment or the portion of the race track at which wagering will take place. 
(7)  Information demonstrating that the proposed race track or wagering establishment use complies with all applicable zoning, building and land-use codes and regulations. 
(8)  A security plan for the race track or wagering establishment. 
(9)  Information on the city privilege tax license held or concurrently applied for by the applicant. 
(10)  Plan of operation. 
(11)  Approved parking plan with contingent overflow plan. 
(Ord. No. 1690, § 4, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 1918, § 4, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 5-57. - Transfer of ownership or location; provisional permits. 
(a)  Except as otherwise permitted in this section, licenses issued to race tracks and wagering establishments under this article shall not be transferable upon change in ownership of the race track or wagering establishment and shall not be transferable to any location other than the location for which the license was issued. Any change in ownership or control of the business of a licensee, either directly or indirectly, and whatever the form of any such transportation, including a lease of the business, facilities or any city license or permit for the race track or wagering establishment, shall be deemed a transfer and is prohibited if not expressly permitted herein. The fees for the application and license for the new location or new person, and for provisional permits, shall be as set by resolution. 
(b)  A person who is qualified to be a licensee of a race track or wagering establishment under this article, who is or expects to be the transferee of a licensee for a race track or wagering establishment licensed under this article, shall file an application for reissuance of the license in the new applicant's name. Except in the case of transfers pursuant to judicial decree or nonjudicial foreclosure of a legal or equitable lien, the current license holder shall endorse his approval on the application, which endorsement shall constitute a voluntary surrender of the current license, effective as of issuance of a license under this article to the new applicant and conditionally effective upon issuance of a provisional permit to the new applicant as provided herein, and assent to issuance of a provisional permit to the new applicant. Unless and until a license is issued to the new applicant, the current licensee shall remain responsible to the city for the lawful and proper operation of the race track or wagering establishment in accordance with the requirements of this article, regardless of whether a provisional permit has been issued to the new applicant. The new applicant's application shall meet the requirements of this article for an original license, but may rely on and incorporate by reference pertinent information on file with the city for the current licensee and the licensed location. Such reliance on information on file with the city shall constitute a representation by the applicant that such information is complete and accurate and that no material changes have occurred which would necessitate updating such information. Any changes in the information required by sections 5-28 or 5-56, necessitated by the change in ownership or control, shall be fully documented by the new applicant as part of the application. The city will expedite action on such an application by a new applicant for a currently-licensed location to the extent practicable to do so. 
(c)  A transferee under subsection (b) above may file, with his application for reissuance of the license, an application for a provisional permit to operate the race track or wagering establishment on a conditional basis pending final action on the application for reissuance of the license. Upon proof of issuance to the transferee of a state temporary permit or temporary license, the city manager or his designee may issue a provisional permit to the new applicant. The term of the provisional permit shall not exceed ninety (90) days. The provisional permit may be cancelled or suspended summarily at any time, if the city manager or his designee determines that good cause exists for such cancellation or suspension, including but not limited to any grounds specified in this article which would support suspension or revocation of a race track or wagering establishment license. During the term of a provisional permit, both the permit holder and the current licensee shall be responsible to the city for the lawful and proper operation of the race track or wagering establishment in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(d)  A licensee who intends to discontinue racing or wagering activity at the licensed location within the city and to establish similar racing or wagering activity at a different location within the city, shall file a license application for the new location which meets the requirements of this article for an original license. Such an application, filed by an applicant whose current license is not suspended and has not been revoked and as to which no proceedings are underway for suspension or revocation of the license, may rely on and incorporate by reference pertinent information on file with the city for the current license. Such reliance on information on file with the city shall constitute a representation by the applicant that such information is complete and accurate and that no material changes have occurred which would necessitate updating such information. Any changes in the information required by sections 5-28 or 5-56, including but not limited to the floor plan, security plan, and demonstrated compliance with zoning, building and land-use codes and regulations, necessitated by the proposed establishment of the race track or wagering establishment at the new location, shall be fully documented by the applicant as part of the application. The city will expedite action on such an application by an applicant in good standing to the extent practicable to do so. 
(Ord. No. 1690, § 4, 5-28-91) 
Sec. 5-58. - Suspension. 
(a)  Any race track or wagering establishment license issued under the provisions of this article may be suspended as provided in this section. Except for suspensions under subsections (b) or (c) of this section, suspensions under this section shall be for a prescribed period of time, not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(b)  Upon any suspension or revocation of any state racing, wagering or gaming license which is required for the race track or wagering establishment licensed under this article, the city license for the race track or wagering establishment shall be deemed automatically to be suspended without further action by the city until the state license is reinstated or reissued or until such suspension or revocation of the state license is finally overturned by a court of competent jurisdiction. Upon such automatic suspension of the city race track or wagering establishment license as provided in this subsection, the holder of the city license shall immediately cease all racing or wagering activity and shall promptly notify the city manager or his designee of the suspension or revocation of the state license. 
(c)  The licensee shall promptly notify the city manager or his designee if the licensee or any of its owners, managers or employees, and in the case of a corporation, its principal officers, directors and principal shareholders, since the license application or last previous license renewal, have been charged with any felony, been charged with any violation of law or regulation related to racing, wagering or gaming, or been made the subject of or party to any civil action or administrative proceeding alleging any violation of law or regulation related to racing, wagering or gaming, in any jurisdiction; together with information on the charge, civil action or administrative proceeding and on the violation(s) alleged. If the city manager or his designee determines that reasonable cause exists that the licensee or any of its owners, managers or employees, and in the case of a corporation, its principal officers, directors and principal shareholders have violated any law or regulation related to racing, wagering or gaming, in any jurisdiction, the city manager or his designee may suspend the license for the race track or wagering establishment pending the final determination of the charge, civil action or administrative proceeding or pending action on any proposed revocation of the city license. 
(d)  The race track or wagering establishment license may be suspended by the city manager or his designee upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Reasonable cause exists to believe the licensee has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  The licensee is convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of a felony or a violation of any racing, wagering or gaming law or regulation, in any jurisdiction. 
(3)  The licensee is found responsible in any civil action or administrative proceeding for a violation of any racing, wagering or gaming law or regulation, in any jurisdiction. 
(4)  Reasonable cause exists to believe the licensee has committed a felony or a violation of any racing, wagering or gaming law or regulation, in any jurisdiction. 
(5)  Any owner, manager or employee of the licensee, and in the case of a corporate licensee, any of its principal officers, directors or principal shareholders, are convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of a felony or a violation of any racing, wagering or gaming law or regulation, in any jurisdiction. 
(6)  Any owner, manager or employee of the licensee, and in the case of a corporate licensee, any of its principal officers, directors or principal shareholders, are found responsible in any civil action or administrative proceeding of a violation of any racing, wagering or gaming law or regulation, in any jurisdiction. 
(7)  Reasonable cause exists to believe that any owner, manager or employee of the licensee, and in the case of a corporate licensee, any of its principal officers, directors or principal shareholders, has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or has committed a felony or a violation of any racing, wagering or gaming law or regulation, in any jurisdiction. 
(8)  The licensee is delinquent in payment of any privilege license taxes or use taxes owed to the city. 
(9)  Reasonable cause exists to believe that the security plan for the race track or wagering establishment is inadequate or needs to be updated or modified; that unlawful gambling by a minor or minors has occurred at the race track or wagering establishment; or that alcoholic beverages have been purchased or consumed by a person or persons under the lawful drinking age on the premises of the race track, or in the wagering establishment or, with respect to multiple use facilities, anywhere on the premises of the multiple use facility. 
(10)  Reasonable cause exists to believe that the licensee has made a false statement on or in connection with its license application or application for last previous license renewal or that any false, incomplete or misleading information has been provided by the licensee on or in connection with such license or renewal application. 
(Ord. No. 1690, § 4, 5-28-91) 
Sec. 5-59. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any race track or wagering establishment license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked as provided in this section. 
(b)  Any of the following shall constitute grounds for revocation of a race track or wagering establishment license, if the city manager or his designee determines such revocation to be in the best interests of the city, its residents and businesses. 
(1)  Revocation of any state racing, wagering or gaming license which is required for the race track or wagering establishment. 
(2)  Failure of the licensee to immediately cease all racing or wagering activity and/or failure of the licensee to promptly notify the city manager or his designee, upon suspension or revocation of any state racing, wagering or gaming license for the race track or wagering establishment, as required by section 5-58(b) of this division. 
(3)  Conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of the licensee or any of its owners, managers or employees, and in the case of a corporation, its principal officers, directors and principal shareholders, of any felony or any violation of law or regulation related to racing, wagering or gaming, in any jurisdiction. 
(4)  Adjudication, in any civil action or administrative proceeding in any jurisdiction, that the licensee or any of its owners, managers or employees, and in the case of a corporation, its principal officers, directors and principal shareholders, are responsible for violation of any law or regulation related to racing, wagering or gaming. 
(5)  The city manager or his designee finds that the licensee has committed a felony or a violation of any racing, wagering or gaming law or regulation, in any jurisdiction. 
(6)  The city manager or his designee finds that any owner, manager or employee of the licensee, and in the case of a corporate licensee, any of its principal officers, directors or principal shareholders, has committed a felony or a violation of any racing, wagering or gaming law or regulation, in any jurisdiction. 
(7)  Failure of the licensee to promptly notify the city manager or his designee and to provide the information required by section 5-58(c) of this division. 
(8)  The licensee is delinquent in payment of any privilege license taxes or use taxes owed to the city and has not, upon reasonable notice, made such payment together with any applicable interest and penalties. 
(9)  The city manager or his designee finds that the security plan for the race track or wagering establishment is inadequate or needs to be updated or modified and that the licensee has not, upon reasonable notice, made satisfactory improvements or modifications to the security plan. 
(10)  The city manager or his designee finds that unlawful gambling by a minor or minors has occurred at the race track or wagering establishment and that the security measures of the licensee remain inadequate to prevent unlawful gambling by minors. 
(11)  The city manager or his designee finds that alcoholic beverages have been purchased or consumed by a person or persons under the lawful drinking age on the premises of the race track, or in the wagering establishment or, with respect to multiple use facilities, anywhere on the premises of the multiple use facility and that the security measures of the licensee remain inadequate to prevent purchase or consumption of alcoholic beverages by those persons under the lawful drinking age. 
(12)  The city manager or his designee finds that the licensee has made a false statement on or in connection with its license application or application for last previous license renewal or that any false, incomplete or misleading information has been provided by the licensee on or in connection with such license or renewal application. 
(13)  The city manager or his designee finds that the licensee has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Upon revocation of the race track or wager establishment license, as provided in this section: 
(1)  No application for reinstatement of the license or for a new race track or wagering establishment license at the same location shall be considered for a period of one year from the date of revocation, unless the applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence to the city manager or his designee that extraordinary circumstances exist such that the interests of the city and its residents and businesses would best be served by consideration of the application prior to expiration of such one (1) year period. 
(2)  Any application for reinstatement of the license shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter for an application for a new license. 
(Ord. No. 1690, § 4, 5-28-91) 
Secs. 5-60-5-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BINGO 

Sec. 5-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant: A person, group of persons or organization that submits an application to the licensing authority for a bingo license. 
    Bingo license: Any license required by title 5, chapter 4, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended. 
    Licensing authority: The state agency or department defined as the licensing authority over bingo games under title 5, chapter 4, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended. 
    Licensee: Any person or organization to which a bingo license is issued by the licensing authority. 
    Manager: A person who has overall responsibility for conducting bingo games by a licensee and is designated as a manager in the application for a bingo license. 
    Person: A natural person, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 1723, § 8, 6-2-92) 
Sec. 5-67. - Article subject to state law. 
    This article shall be subject to the provisions of title 5, chapter 4, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1723, § 8, 6-2-92) 
Sec. 5-68. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activities for which a bingo license is required within the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a bingo license from the licensing authority. 
(Ord. No. 1723, § 8, 6-2-92) 
Sec. 5-69. - Application; fees. 
(a)  An application for any bingo license or for a location transfer of a bingo license shall be made on forms furnished by the city. Each application shall be accompanied by the required application and license fees set forth in title 5, chapter 4, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended. 
(b)  An applicant shall file an application for a bingo license or for a location transfer of a bingo license with the city no later than ten (10) days from the date that the applicant files an application for such license or transfer with the licensing authority. An applicant's failure to timely file an application pursuant to this section shall constitute grounds for the city to recommend disapproval of the application to the licensing authority. 
(c)  Each applicant for a bingo license shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the City of Glendale for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law (PL) 92-544. The Department of Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. In addition to any other fees imposed under this article, an applicant for a bingo license shall pay an amount necessary to cover the costs of federal fingerprint processing or federal criminal history record information checks. The specific amount of such additional fee shall be set by administrative order based upon information received from the department of public safety as to the costs of such fingerprint processing and record information checks. The additional fees collected pursuant to this subsection shall be transmitted to the Department of Public Safety as required by Arizona Revised Statutes section 41-1750, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1723, § 8, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1918, § 5, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2273, § 3, 7-23-02) 
Sec. 5-70. - Public hearing; background check. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a bingo license, the city shall set a public hearing on such application within the time limits set forth in Arizona Revised Statutes section 5-404(I), as amended. Prior to the hearing, the chief of police or his or her designee shall conduct a background check of the applicant and the applicant's manager. Such background check shall include fingerprinting and photographing the applicant's manager and a criminal history check of the applicant's manager. After the public hearing, the city shall recommend approval or disapproval of the application and forward the original or certified copy of the application endorsed with the city's approval or disapproval thereof to the licensing authority. If the application is disapproved, the endorsement shall contain the specific reasons for disapproval. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for a location transfer for a bingo license, the city shall set a public hearing on such application. After the public hearing, the city shall recommend approval or disapproval of the application. If the application is approved, the city shall furnish the licensee with a written recommendation of approval for the licensee to submit to the licensing authority. 
(Ord. No. 1723, § 8, 6-2-92) 
Sec. 5-71. - Compliance with other laws. 
    The issuance of a bingo license shall not be construed as authority to engage in any activity which is in violation of any other law or regulation to which such activity is subject, or to conduct activities on any property in violation of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1918, § 5, 12-10-96) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 25; interfering with police dogs, § 26-23; horses in parks, § 27-71; livestock in Thunderbird Park, § 27-90. 
State Law reference- Livestock and animals generally, A.R.S. § 24-101 et seq.; dog control, A.R.S. § 24-36C.01 et seq.; local dog ordinances, A.R.S. § 24-376. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal: Any animal of a species that is susceptible to rabies, except man. 
    At large: Off premises of owner or custodian and not under leash restraining control of owner or persons acting for the owner. Any animal in a suitable enclosure or confined shall not be considered to be running at large. 
    Attack: A violent or aggressive physical contact or violent or aggressive behavior that confines the movement of a person. 
    Custodian: Any person keeping, possessing, harboring or maintaining any animal. 
    Enforcement Agent: That person who is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter and the regulations promulgated thereunder. 
    Pound: Any establishment authorized for the confinement, maintenance, safekeeping and control of dogs and other animals that come into the custody of the enforcement agent in the performance of his official duties. 
    Department: The state department of health services. 
    Impound: The act of taking or receiving into custody by the enforcement agent any dog or other animal for the purpose of confinement in an authorized pound in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Kennel: An enclosed, controlled area, inaccessible to other animals, in which a person keeps, harbors or maintains five (5) or more dogs under controlled conditions. 
    Livestock: Neat animals, horses, sheep, goats, swine, mules and asses. 
    Owner: Any person keeping an animal other than livestock for more than six (6) consecutive days. 
    Rabies quarantine area: Any area in which a state of emergency has been declared to exist due to the occurrence of rabies in animals in or adjacent to this area. 
    Rabies vaccination certificate: A method of recording and duplicating vaccination information that is in compliance with the county enforcement agency licensing system and uses county enforcement agency prescribed forms. 
    Stray dog: Any dog four (4) months of age or older running at large that is not wearing a valid license tag. 
    Vaccination: The administration of an anti-rabies vaccine to animals by a veterinarian, or in any authorized pound by employees trained by a veterinarian. 
    Veterinarian: Any veterinarian licensed to practice in Arizona or any veterinarian employed in Arizona by a governmental agency. 
    Veterinary hospital: Any establishment operated by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the state that provides clinical facilities and houses animals or birds for dental, medical or surgical treatment. A veterinary hospital may have adjacent to it or in conjunction with it or as an integral part of it, pens, stalls, cages or kennels for quarantine, observation or boarding. 
    Vicious animal: A vicious animal is: 
(1)  Any animal that has attacked without reasonable provocation, caused injury or otherwise endangered the safety of human beings or other domestic animals; or 
(2)  Any animal that approaches people in a "vicious or terrorizing manner"; or 
(3)  Any animal in the care of a custodian or owned primarily or in part for the purpose of animal fighting or any animal trained for fighting. 
    Vicious or terrorizing manner: A vicious or terrorizing manner is displayed by an animal when it exhibits conduct which includes, but is not limited to, growling, showing teeth, snapping, biting, charging, circling, cornering a person or creating a reasonable fear of imminent attack. 
(Code 1963, § 5-1; Ord. No. 1045, § 2, 10-10-78; Ord. No. 1453, § 1, 10-14-86; Ord. No. 1541, § 2, 4-24-88; Ord. No. 2454, § 1, 7-26-05) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 24-361. 
Sec. 6-2. - Statutes incorporation by reference. 
    Sections 24-362, Powers and duties of the state veterinarian and the livestock sanitary board; 24-363, Powers and duties of department of health services; 24-368, Anti-rabies vaccination-Vaccination and license stations; 24-374, Removing impounded animals; 24-375, Unlawful keeping of dogs; and 24-378, Dogs-Liability; Arizona Revised Statutes are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter as if such sections were fully set forth herein. 
(Code 1963, § 5-10; Ord. No. 1045, § 2, 10-10-78) 
Sec. 6-3. - Powers and duties of enforcement agent. 
(a)  The enforcement agent shall: 
(1)  Enforce the provisions of this article and any regulations promulgated hereunder. 
(2)  Issue citations for the violation of the provisions of this article, and any regulations promulgated hereunder. The procedure for the issuance of notices to appear shall be as provided for peace officers in Arizona Revised Statutes section 13-3903, except that the enforcement agent shall not make an arrest before issuing the notice. 
(3)  Be responsible for declaring a rabies quarantine area within his area of jurisdiction. When a quarantine area has been declared the enforcement agent shall meet with the state veterinarian and representatives from the department of health services and the game and fish department to implement an emergency program for the control of rabies within area. Any regulations restricting or involving movements of livestock within area shall be subject to approval by the state veterinarian. 
(b)  The issuance of citations pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of Arizona Revised Statutes section 13-3899. 
(c)  The enforcement agent may designate deputies. 
(Code 1963, § 5-2; Ord. No. 1045, § 2, 10-10-78; Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 10-24-78; Ord. No. 1453, § 3, 10-14-86; Ord. No. 1541, § 3, 5-24-88) 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of county enforcement agent, A.R.S. § 24-366. 
Sec. 6-4. - Dog licenses and tags. 
(a)  A license fee in the amount established by resolution shall be paid for each dog four (4) months of age or over that is kept, harbored or maintained within the boundaries of the city for at least thirty (30) consecutive days of each calendar year. License fees shall become payable at the discretion of city council. The license shall be valid for a period which shall not exceed the period of time for revaccination as designated by the state veterinarian. License fees shall be paid within ninety (90) days. A penalty in the amount established by resolution shall be added to the license fee in the event that application is made subsequent to the date on which the dog is required to be licensed under the provisions of this chapter. This penalty shall not be assessed against applicants who furnish adequate proof that the dog to be licensed has been in their possession less than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(b)  Durable dog tags shall be provided. Each dog licensed under the terms of this chapter shall receive, at the time of licensing, such a tag on which shall be inscribed the name of the county, the number of the license, and the date on which it expires. The tag shall be attached to a collar or harness which shall be worn by the dog at all times while running at large, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Whenever a dog tag is lost, a duplicate tag shall be issued upon application by the owner and payment of a fee to the enforcement agent. 
(c)  License fees may be lower for dogs permanently incapable of procreation. An applicant for a license for a dog claimed to be incapable of procreation shall furnish adequate proof satisfactory to the enforcement agent that such dog has been surgically altered to be permanently incapable of procreation. 
(d)  Any person who fails within fifteen (15) days after written notification from the enforcement agent to obtain a license for a dog required to be licensed, or counterfeits or attempts to counterfeit an official dog tag, or remove such tag from any dog for the purpose of willful and malicious mischief or places a dog tag upon a dog unless the tag was issued for that particular dog is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1963, § 5-3; Ord. No. 1045, § 2, 10-10-78; Ord. No. 1051, § 2, 10-24-78; Ord. No. 1178, § 1, 8-25-81; Ord. No. 1453, § 3, 10-14-86) 
State Law reference- Dog licenses, A.R.S. § 24-367. 
Sec. 6-4.1. - Kennel permit; fee; violation; classification. 
(a)  A person operating a kennel shall obtain a permit issued by the board of supervisors of the county where the kennel is located except if each individual dog is licensed. 
(b)  The annual fee for the kennel permit is seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(c)  A dog remaining within the kennel is not required to be licensed individually under Arizona Revised Statutes section 24-367. A dog leaving the controlled kennel conditions shall be licensed under Arizona Revised Statutes section 24-367 except if the dog is only being transported to another kennel which has a permit issued under this section. 
(d)  A person who fails to obtain a kennel permit under this section is subject to a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in addition to the annual fee. 
(e)  A person who knowingly fails within thirty (30) days after written notification from the county enforcement agent to obtain a kennel permit is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1453, § 2, 10-14-86) 
Sec. 6-5. - Rabies control fund. 
(a)  The enforcement agent or his authorized representative shall place the monies collected by him under the provisions of this chapter in a special fund to be known as the rabies control fund to be used for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the regulations promulgated hereunder. 
(b)  Any unencumbered balance remaining in the rabies control fund at the end of a fiscal year shall be carried over into the following fiscal year. 
(Code 1963, § 5-4; Ord. No. 1045, § 2, 10-10-78) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 24-369. 
Sec. 6-5.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2186, § 1, 2-27-01, repealed § 6-5.1, concerning animal noise and sanitation, derived from Code 1963, § 5-11, as amended by Ord. No. 1302, § 2, 9-25-84. 
Sec. 6-6. - Dogs not permitted at large; wearing licenses. 
(a)  In a rabies quarantine area, no dogs shall be permitted at large. Each dog shall be confined within an enclosure on the owner's property, or secured so that the dog is confined entirely to the owner's property, or on a leash not to exceed six (6) feet in length and directly under the owner's control when not on the owner's property. 
(b)  Any dog over the age of four (4) months running at large shall wear a collar or harness to which is attached a valid license tag. Dogs used for control of livestock or while being used or trained for hunting or dogs while being exhibited or trained at a kennel club event or dogs while engaged in races approved by the state racing commission, and such dogs while being transported to and from such events, need not wear a collar or harness with a valid license attached provided that they are properly vaccinated, licensed and controlled. 
(c)  If any dog is at large on the public streets, public parks or other public property, said dog's owner or custodian is in violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Any person whose dog is at large is in violation of this chapter. A dog is not considered at large: 
(1)  If it is restrained by a leash, chain, rope, or cord of not more than six (6) feet in length and of sufficient strength to control action of said dog. 
(2)  If it is used for control of livestock or while being used or trained for hunting or being exhibited or trained at a kennel club event or while engaged in races approved by the state racing commission. 
(3)  While it is actively engaged in dog obedience training, training for hunting or training at kennel club events and accompanied by and under the control of its owner or a trainer, provided that the person training the dog has in his possession a dog leash of not more than six (6) feet in length and of sufficient strength to control the dog. 
(4)  If it is within an enclosure which actually confines the dog. 
(e)  Dogs at large shall be apprehended and impounded by an enforcement agent. The agent shall have the right to enter upon private property when it be necessary to do so in order to apprehend any dog that has been running at large. Such entrance upon private property shall be in reasonable pursuit of such dog, and shall not include entry into a domicile or enclosure which confines a dog unless it be at the invitation of the occupant. The agent may issue a citation to the dog owner or person acting for the dog owner when the dog is at large. The procedure of the issuance of notice to appear shall be as provided for peace officers in Arizona Revised Statutes section 13-3903, except the enforcement agent shall not make an arrest before issuing the notice. The issuance of citations pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to provisions of Arizona Revised Statutes section 13-3899. In the judgment of the enforcement agent, if any dog at large or other animal that is dangerous, vicious, or fierce and a threat to human safety cannot be safely impounded, such animal may be immediately slain. 
(Code 1963, § 5-5; Ord. No. 1045, § 2, 10-10-78; Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 10-24-78; Ord. No. 1453, § 3, 10-14-86; Ord. No. 1541, § 4, 5-24-88) 
State Law reference- Dogs at large, A.R.S. § 24-370. 
Sec. 6-7. - Impoundment of dogs and cats. 
(a)  Any stray dog shall be impounded. All dogs and cats impounded shall be given proper care and maintenance. 
(b)  Each stray dog or any cat impounded shall be kept and maintained at the pound for a minimum of seventy-two (72) hours unless claimed by its owner. Any person may purchase such a dog or cat upon expiration of the impoundment period, provided such person pays all pound fees and complies with the licensing and vaccinating provisions of this chapter. If the dog or cat is not claimed within the impoundment period, the enforcement agent shall take possession and may place the dog or cat for sale or may dispose of the dog or cat in a humane manner. If such dog or cat is to be used for medical research, no license or vaccination shall be required. The enforcement agent may destroy impounded sick or injured dogs or cats whenever such destruction is necessary to prevent such dog or cat from suffering or to prevent the spread of disease. 
(c)  Any impounded licensed dog or any cat may be reclaimed by its owner or such owner's agent provided that the person reclaiming the dog or cat furnishes proof of right to do so and pays all pound fees. If the dog or cat is not reclaimed within the impoundment period, the enforcement agent shall take possession and may place the dog or cat for sale or may dispose of the dog or cat in a humane manner. Any person purchasing such a dog or cat shall pay all pound fees. 
(Code 1963, § 5-6; Ord. No. 1045, § 2, 10-10-78; Ord. No. 1541, § 5, 5-24-88) 
State Law reference- County dog pounds, etc., A.R.S. § 24-371. 
Sec. 6-8. - Handling of biting animals; responsibility for reporting animal bites. 
(a)  An unlicensed dog or unvaccinated dog or any vaccinated or unvaccinated cat that bites any person shall be confined and quarantined in a county pound or, upon request of and at the expense of the owner, at a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than seven (7) days. A dog properly licensed and vaccinated pursuant to this chapter, that bites any person, may be confined and quarantined at the home of the owner or wherever the dog is harbored and maintained with the consent of and in a manner prescribed by the county enforcement agent. 
(b)  Any animal other than a dog or cat that bites any person shall be confined and quarantined in a county pound or, upon the request of and at the expense of the owner, at a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than fourteen (14) days, provided that livestock shall be confined and quarantined for the fourteen-day period in a manner regulated by the livestock board. If the animal is a caged rodent, it may be confined and quarantined at the home of the owner or where it is harbored or maintained, for the required period of time, with the consent of and in a manner prescribed by the county enforcement agent. 
(c)  Any wild animal which bites any person may be killed and submitted to the county enforcement agent or his deputies for transmission to an appropriate diagnostic laboratory. 
(d)  Whenever an animal bites any person, the incident shall be reported to the county enforcement agent immediately by any person having direct knowledge. 
(e)  Any animal confined and quarantined pursuant to this section may be destroyed by the enforcement agent prior to the termination of the minimum confinement period for laboratory examination for rabies if: 
(1)  Such animal shows clear clinical signs of rabies. 
(2)  The owner of such animal consents to its destruction. Any animal subject to licensing under this chapter found without a tag identifying its owner shall be deemed unowned. 
(f)  Any animal subject to licensing under this chapter found without a tag identifying its owner shall be deemed unowned. 
(Code 1963, § 5-7; Ord. No. 1045, § 2, 10-10-78; Ord. No. 1453, § 3, 10-14-86; Ord. No. 1541, § 6, 5-24-88) 
State Law reference- Animal bites, A.R.S. § 24-372. 
Sec. 6-9. - Proper care, maintenance and destruction of impounded animals. 
(a)  Any animal impounded shall be given proper and humane care and maintenance. 
(b)  Any animal destroyed while impounded in an authorized pound shall be destroyed only by the use of: 
(1)  Sodium pentobarbital or a derivative thereof; or 
(2)  Nitrogen gas; or 
(3)  T-61 euthanasia solution or its generic equivalent. 
(c)  If an animal is destroyed by means specified in subsection (b), paragraph (1) or (3), of this section, it shall be done by a licensed veterinarian or in accordance with procedures established by the state veterinarian pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes section 24-153. The governing body which operates an authorized pound shall establish procedures for the humane destruction of impounded animals by the methods described in subsection (b) and (c) of this section. 
(Code 1963, § 5-8; Ord. No. 1045, § 2, 10-10-78; Ord. No. 1453, § 3, 10-14-86; Ord. No. 1541, § 7, 5-24-88) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 24-381. 
Sec. 6-10. - Unlawful interference with county enforcement agent. 
    It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the county enforcement agent in the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 1045, § 2(5-9), 10-10-78) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 24-373. 
Secs. 6-11-6-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VICIOUS ANIMALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- At the editor's discretion, the title of Art. II has been amended to read as herein set out. Prior to said amendment, Art. II was entitled "Vicious Dogs." 

Sec. 6-20. - Responsible ownership. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1541, § 8, 5-24-88) 
Sec. 6-21. - Seizure of animal. 
(a)  Without a court order, a law enforcement agent, animal control officer or a peace officer may seize and impound an animal for a period of no more than seventy-two (72) hours based on a written allegation stating probable cause to believe the animal is vicious. Notice of the probable cause statement and the seizure or impoundment shall be delivered or left at the last known address of the reasonably presumed owner or custodian of the animal by the seizing officer. The notice shall state: (1) The animal will be released within seventy-two (72) hours of the seizure unless a petition alleging viciousness is filed with the city court; and (2) A written request for hearing may be filed with city court challenging such seizure. Notice shall be by at least one of the following methods: 
(1)  Personal service of notification to the presumed owner or custodian; or 
(2)  Personal service of notification to a person of suitable age and discretion at the last know address of the presumed owner or custodian. 
(b)  The animal shall be released at the expiration of the seventy-two (72) hours unless a petition requesting that the animal be declared vicious is filed with the city court. 
(c)  The court may, upon ex parte petition of any person, a city official or an affected citizen, order impoundment of an animal continued or order an animal seized and impounded. The petition shall state facts showing probable cause to believe that the animal is vicious. Notice of such impoundment shall be provided by one of the methods in section 6-21(a). 
(Ord. No. 2454, § 2, 7-26-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2454, § 2, adopted July 26, 2005, repealed the former § 6-21, and enacted a new § 6-21 as set out herein. The former § 6-21 pertained to determination of a vicious dog and derived from Ord. No. 1541, § 8, adopted May 24, 1988; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, adopted April 23, 1991. 
Sec. 6-22. - Hearing on allegation of vicious animal. 
(a)  A hearing shall be set within ten (10) days upon receipt of the petition requesting the viciousness determination. Notice shall be provided as indicated in section 6-21(a). 
(b)  The person filing the petition has the burden or presenting evidence to the court that the animal is vicious. 
(Ord. No. 2454, § 2, 7-26-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2454, § 2, adopted July 26, 2005, repealed the former § 6-22, and enacted a new § 6-22 as set out herein. The former § 6-22 pertained to control of a vicious dog and derived from Ord. No. 1541, § 8, adopted May 24, 1988; Ord. No. 1680, § 2, adopted April 23, 1991. 
Sec. 6-23. - Sanctions. 
(a)  If a court determines by a preponderance of the evidence presented that an animal is vicious, one or more of the following sanctions may be imposed: 
(1)  Leash and muzzle. A court may order that the animal be securely tethered to a responsible adult by a leash no longer than six (6) feet in length. No person shall permit a vicious animal to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside confinement unless a responsible adult is in physical control of the leash. Such animals may not be leashed to any inanimate objects when not confined. Additionally, all vicious animals on a leash outside of confinement must be muzzled by a commercial device sufficient to prevent the opening of its mouth to an extent sufficient to bite any persons or other animals. 
(2)  Confinement. A court may order that a vicious animal be securely confined indoors or in an enclosed and locked pen, as defined below, except if the court has allowed the animal to be free of the pen when leashed and muzzled. 
a.  All structures used to confine vicious animals must be locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure. Such pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. This structure must have a secure top and bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen. If there is no secure floor, the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two (2) feet. 
b.  No pen wall may be part of a perimeter fence. 
c.  All structures erected to house vicious animals must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All such structures must be adequately lighted, ventilated, and kept in a clean and sanitary condition and any other condition that provides for humane care. 
(3)  Microchip. An animal declared vicious may be required to have an electronic microchip implanted to identify the animal. The owner or custodian of the animal is required to pay for the microchip and its installation. 
(4)  Signs. All owners or custodians of vicious animals within the city may be required to display, in a prominent place on their premises, a sign in three-inch letters which is easily readable by the public using the words "vicious animal". In addition, a similar sign is required to be posted on the pen of such animal. 
(5)  Modification of the animal. The owner or custodian of the animal declared vicious may be required to have the animal modified. The cost of such modification shall be the responsibility of the owner or custodian. Modification of the animal includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Declawing; 
b.  Spaying; or 
c.  Neutering. 
(6)  Insurance and indemnification. An owner or custodian of the animal declared vicious may be required to maintain insurance or indemnification as specified by the court. 
(7)  Reimbursement of costs. The owner or custodian of the animal declared vicious may be required to pay all of the expenses of an impounded animal. If reimbursement of costs is ordered, the animal shall not be released until the expenses are paid. If such expenses are not paid within thirty (30) days of the court order, any ownership or custodial interest in the animal is terminated. The impoundment agency shall give written notice of the termination of ownership or custodianship to the last known address of the owner or custodian. 
(8)  Non compliance with court orders. The court may order that: 
a.  Any ownership or custodial interest in the animal be terminated if compliance with court orders does not occur thirty (30) days of any court order. 
b.  A vicious animal be destroyed. Notice of the destruction order shall be given to the owner or custodian of the animal at the last known address. The notice shall advise the owner or custodian that the animal will be destroyed if a notice of appeal is not received by the date specified in the appeal rules. If the animal is not impounded when the destruction is ordered, the animal shall be seized and impounded. No animal shall be destroyed until the appeal time has expired to challenge the viciousness determination. No animal shall be destroyed while an appeal is pending. The court shall notify the impoundment agency on the status of any appeal. 
(9)  Destruction. A vicious animal may be ordered destroyed. Notice of the destruction order shall be given to the owner or custodian of the animal at the last known address. The notice shall advise the owner or custodian that the animal will be destroyed if a notice of appeal is not received by the date specified in the appeal rules. If the animal is not impounded when the destruction is ordered, the animal shall be seized and impounded. No animal shall be destroyed until the appeal time has expired to challenge the viciousness determination. No animal shall be destroyed while an appeal is pending. The court shall notify the impoundment agency on the status of any appeal. 
(b)  Notification to Maricopa County Animal Control. The court shall require the owner or custodian of the animal declared vicious to report any permanent change of location and/or ownership of the animal to Maricopa County Animal Control. 
(Ord. No. 2454, § 2, 7-26-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2454, § 2, adopted July 26, 2005, repealed the former § 6-23, and enacted a new § 6-23 as set out herein. The former § 6-23 pertained to appeal process and derived from Ord. No. 1541, § 8, adopted May 24, 1988. 
Sec. 6-24. - Penalties. 
    The purpose of complying with these requirements for an animal declared vicious is to prevent attacks, injuries or deaths by mandating the use of control methods. 
(1)  Any person violating or permitting the violation of any provision of this article shall upon conviction in city court be fined a sum not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). In addition to the fine imposed, the court: 
a.  May impose any other penalties specified in section 1-7 of this Code; and 
b.  May order the vicious animal destroyed; and 
c.  May order the owner or custodian to pay all expenses, including shelter, food, handling, and veterinary care, of the animal necessitated by the enforcement of this article. 
d.  The animal held in impoundment for a maximum of thirty (30) days or until the owner or custodian complies with the court order. If, at the end of thirty (30) days, the owner or custodian has failed to comply with the court order, the animal shall be ordered destroyed. Notice shall be by at least one of the methods as indicated in section 6-21(a). 
e.  The animal may be ordered destroyed. In addition, the court may order the owner or custodian to pay all expenses, including shelter, food, handling and veterinary care, necessitated by the enforcement of this article. 
(2)  Any vicious animal that kills a human being, dog, cat or other animal is in violation of this article and the animal may be destroyed. 
(3)  In the event that the owner or custodian of the vicious animal is a minor, the parent or guardian in physical control of such minor at the time of the acts giving rise to the determination of viciousness shall be liable: 
a.  For all injuries and property damage sustained by any person, dog, cat or other animal caused without reasonable provocation by said vicious animal; and 
b.  All violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2454, § 2, 7-26-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2454, § 2, adopted July 26, 2005, repealed the former § 6-24, and enacted a new § 6-24 as set out herein. The former § 6-24 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1541, § 8, adopted May 24, 1988; Ord. No. 1680, § 3, adopted April 23, 1991. 
Sec. 6-25. - Exemption. 
    This article shall not apply to any animal used by a law enforcement agency and trained to assist in carrying out law enforcement duties. 
(Ord. No. 2454, § 2, 7-26-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2454, § 2, adopted July 26, 2005, repealed the former § 6-25, and enacted a new § 6-25 as set out herein. The former § 6-25 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1541, § 8, adopted May 24, 1988. 
Cross reference- Police dogs, § 26-23. 
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL CRUELTY 

Sec. 6-26. - Animal cruelty and neglect. 
(a)  A person commits animal cruelty if the person does any of the following: 
(1)  Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly subjects any animal under the person's custody or control to cruel neglect or abandonment; 
(2)  Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly fails to provide medical attention necessary to prevent protracted suffering to any animal under the person's custody or control; 
(3)  Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly inflicts unnecessary physical injury to any animal; 
(4)  Recklessly subjects any animal to cruel mistreatment; 
(5)  Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly kills or attempts to kill any animal under the custody or control of another person without either legal privilege or consent of the owner; 
(6)  Recklessly interferes with, strikes, kills or harms a working or service animal without either legal privilege or consent of the owner; 
(7)  Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly leaves an animal unattended and confined in a motor vehicle and physical injury to or death of the animal is likely to result; 
(8)  Recklessly allows any dog that is under the person's custody or control to interfere with, kill or cause physical injury to a service animal; 
(9)  Strikes any domestic animal with a vehicle resulting in injury to the animal, and leaves the scene without rendering aid and assistance in the care of such animal, if such action can be taken with reasonable safety. For purposes of this section, "domestic animal" shall mean an animal usually domiciled with or cared for by humans, such as cat, dog, horse or cattle; 
(10)  Intentionally or knowingly poisons or attempts to poison any domestic animal. For purposes of this section, "poison" or "attempt to poison" includes the act of placing food, water, or lure of another sort which contains poison or contains health threatening foreign objects, such as glass or metal, in a location where any animal may be attracted to it; 
(11)  Intentionally, knowingly or recklessly uses a baited trap or mechanical device to capture an animal, causing it injury or death. 
(b)  It is not a defense to subsection (a) of this section if: 
(1)  The animal was trespassing on property owned or controlled by the person alleged to have violated this section; 
(2)  The animal was not restrained in compliance with any leash law, including section 6-6; 
(3)  The person alleged to have violated this section did not know that the animal was under the custody or control of another person; 
(c)  Neglect . The purpose of this subsection is to guarantee that animals under human custody or control are housed in healthy environments and are provided with proper food, water, shelter, medical care, exercise space and ventilation. Any person owning or having care, control or custody of any animal shall provide: 
(1)  That the animal receives daily, food that is free from contamination and is of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain the animal in good health; 
(2)  That potable water is accessible to the animal at all times, either free-flowing or in a clean receptacle; 
(3)  That, except for livestock, all animals have convenient access to natural or artificial shelter throughout the year. Any such artificial shelter shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animal from injury and from the elements, and of sufficient size to permit the animal to enter, stand, turn around and lie down in a natural manner. Any shelter which does not protect the animal from temperature extremes or precipitation, or which does not provide adequate ventilation or drainage, shall not comply with this section. Any shelter, all bedding and any spaces accessible to the animal shall be maintained in a manner which minimizes the risk of the animal contracting disease, being injured, or becoming infested with parasites; 
(4)  That the animal receives care and medical treatment for debilitating injuries, parasites and diseases, sufficient to maintain the animal in good health and minimize suffering; 
(5)  That the animal is given adequate exercise space within an enclosure that shall be constructed of material, and in a manner, to minimize the risk of injury to the animal, and shall encompass sufficient usable space to keep the animal in good condition. With the exception of temporary tethering of horses, the use of tie-outs such as chains, leashes, wires, cables, ropes, or similar restraining devices for the purpose of animal confinement is hereby prohibited; 
(6)  That the animal has access to adequate ventilation and is protected from temperature extremes at all times. In this connection, it is unlawful for any person to keep any animal in a vehicle or other enclosed space in which the temperature is either so high or so low, or the ventilation is so inadequate, as to endanger the animal's life or health. Any peace officer or animal care officer is authorized to use whatever force is reasonable and necessary to remove any animal from a vehicle or other enclosed space whenever it appears that the animal's life or health is endangered by extreme temperatures or lack of ventilation within the vehicle or other enclosed space. 
a.  No peace officer or animal care officer shall be liable for damages to property caused by the use of reasonable force to remove an animal from such a vehicle or other enclosed space under such circumstances. 
(d)  Subsection (b) paragraphs (1) and (2) of this section may be waived by any peace officer or an animal care officer if dictated by treatment under the direction of a licensed veterinarian. 
(e)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(f)  Penalties . A violation of any provision of this section is punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), six (6) months in jail, three (3) years probation, or any combination thereof. No judge may grant probation in lieu of, or otherwise suspend, the imposition of the minimum fine prescribed herein. The judge may order that the owner shall not be permitted to own or control any animal for a period of up to three (3) years, and the judge may order that the animal(s) which are the subject of this action be forfeited to the Arizona Humane Society or other suitable agency to be placed by adoption in a suitable home or humanely destroyed. The court also shall order the convicted person to make restitution to the city or to any person, agency, or volunteer who has contracted with the city to care for an animal that is seized and impounded pursuant to this or other provisions of this section for the cost of care for the animal incurred from the time of seizure or impoundment to the time of conviction. This shall not be construed to affect, in any way, the imposition of any mandatory minimum penalties provided herein. 
(g)  In this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  "Animal" means a mammal, bird, reptile or amphibian, but excludes rodents, which may be controlled as otherwise allowed by the law of the State of Arizona. The exclusion of rodents from the definition of animal shall not apply to rodents classified as fur-bearing animals as defined in A.R.S. § 17-101, or to any particular rodent known by the person alleged to have violated this section to be kept as a pet or any rodent clearly marked and denominated as being a pet, such as rodents wearing collars or harnesses. 
(2)  "Cost of care" means any expense related to the care and treatment of a seized or forfeited animal, including but not limited to housing, feeding, and veterinary care. 
(3)  "Owner" means a person who has an interest in an animal, whether legal or equitable. A person who holds an animal for the benefit of or as an agent for another is not an owner. An owner with power to convey an animal binds other owners, and a spouse binds his or her spouse, by his or her act or omission. 
(Ord. No. 017-25, § 1, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 6-27. - Seizure of animals subjected to cruelty and or neglect; cost of care. 
(a)  An animal subject to forfeiture under section 6-26 may be seized: 
(1)  By a peace officer on process issued pursuant to the provisions of A.R.S. Tit. 13, including a search warrant; 
(2)  By a peace officer upon reasonable grounds to believe that very prompt action is required to protect the health or safety of the animal or the health or safety of other animals. When a peace officer determines that prompt action is required under this paragraph, the officer shall immediately seize the animal and the police department and the court shall comply with the post-seizure hearing requirements of section 6-28. 
(b)  In all cases where there is not a prior judicial determination of probable cause and the need for immediate seizure is not present as provided in paragraph (a)(2) above, the police department shall provide the owner or keeper of the animal with the opportunity for a hearing pursuant to section 6-28 before any seizure or impoundment of the animal. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the city, after seizure of an animal by a peace officer, from taking possession of and keeping the animal when the city deems the animal to be of evidentiary value in any criminal prosecution relating to the condition of the animal. If the city intends to take possession of and retain an animal as evidence in any criminal prosecution, the city shall promptly provide written notice to the police department. 
(d)  The city may contract with any person or agency, including volunteers, to care for an animal that is seized and impounded for evidentiary purposes or pursuant to other provisions of this section. 
(e)  The city shall be responsible for the cost of care incurred for a seized or impounded animal, if any of the following occur: 
(1)  The city causes the animal to be seized or held for evidentiary purposes; 
(2)  The court determines in a post-seizure hearing held under section 6-28, that the seizing officer did not have reasonable grounds to believe very prompt action, including seizure of the animal, was required to protect the health or safety of the animal or the health or safety of other animals; 
(3)  The owner's interest in the animal is not forfeited pursuant to section 6-26 or 6-28; 
(f)  Except as provided in subsection (e), the owner of an animal properly seized and impounded under this section is liable for the actual cost of care for the animal. Unless the seizure or impoundment of an animal is for evidentiary purposes, supported by a written notice of intent as required by subsection (c), or the court determines at a post-seizure hearing that the seizure or impoundment was not justified, the owner shall post with the court a bond in the form of cash or a surety's undertaking to defray some of the cost of care for the animal. The bond shall be in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per animal seized or impounded. The owner shall post the bond within ten (10) days of the date of the notice provided under section 6-28 (a)(1) or within five (5) days after the conclusion of the pre-seizure or post-seizure hearing, whichever is later, excluding weekends and city holidays. If the owner fails to post the bond within the specified time, the owner shall be deemed to have abandoned the animal. The city may dispose of the abandoned animal as authorized in article. 
(g)  Upon forfeiture of an animal, the court shall forfeit the bond to pay the cost of care incurred for the animal. If the bond exceeds cost of care, the court shall exonerate the bond amount and order the security returned to the owner only to the extent the bond exceeds the cost of care incurred for the animal. If at the conclusion of the case, the animal is not forfeited under section 6-26 or section 6-28 the court shall order the bond exonerated and the security returned to the owner minus cost of care incurred for the animal. 
(Ord. No. 017-25, § 1, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 6-28. - Pre-seizure and post-seizure hearings. 
(a)  Whenever a peace officer under section 6-27(a)(2) seizes or impounds an animal based on a reasonable belief that very prompt action is required to protect the health or safety of the animal or the health or safety of other animals, the owner or keeper of the animal, may request a post-seizure hearing to determine the validity of the seizure or impoundment, or both. The burden of proof in the seizure hearing pursuant to this article will be by a preponderance of the evidence. The formal rules of evidence will not be applied and reliable hearsay may be admissible. The post-seizure hearing shall be commenced as follows: 
(1)  The police department or the city, prior to the commencement of any criminal proceedings authorized under section 6-26 and within seventy-two (72) hours, excluding weekends and city holidays, of the seizure or impoundment, shall cause a notice to be affixed to a conspicuous place where the animal was situated or personally deliver a notice of the seizure or impoundment, or both, to the owner or keeper, if known or ascertainable after reasonable investigation. The notice shall include all of the following: 
a.  The name, business address, and telephone number of the person providing the notice; 
b.  A description of the animal(s) seized, including any identification upon the animal(s); 
c.  The authority and purpose for the seizure, or impoundment, including the time, place, and circumstances under which the animal was seized; 
d.  A statement that, in order to receive a post-seizure hearing, the owner or person authorized to keep the animal, or his or her agent, shall request the hearing by signing and returning to the court an enclosed declaration of ownership or right to keep the animal within ten (10) days, including weekends and city holidays, of the date of the notice. The declaration may be returned by personal delivery or by mail. The declaration will be deemed received at the time it is personally served or, if mailed, upon receipt; 
e.  A statement that the owner is responsible for the cost of care for an animal that was properly seized and impounded to protect the health or safety of the animal or the health or safety of other animals; 
f.  A statement that the owner is required to post a bond with the court to defray the cost of care for an animal that has been properly seized and impounded to protect the health or safety of the animal or the health or safety of other animals; 
g.  A warning that if the owner fails to post the bond within ten (10) days of the seizure or five (5) days after the conclusion of the post-seizure hearing, whichever is later, excluding weekends and city holidays, the animal will be deemed abandoned and disposed of by the city. 
(2)  The court shall conduct the post-seizure hearing within five (5) days of the court's receipt of the request, excluding weekends and city holidays. 
(3)  Failure of the owner or keeper, or the owner's or keeper's agent, to request or to attend a scheduled hearing shall result in default and a forfeiture of any right to a post-seizure hearing. 
(4)  Where there is not a prior judicial determination of probable cause and the need for immediate seizure under section 6-27(a)(2) is not present, the owner or keeper of an animal may request a hearing prior to any seizure or impoundment of the animal. The owner or keeper shall produce the animal at the time of the hearing unless, prior to the hearing, the owner or keeper has made arrangements with the police department to view the animal upon request of the police department, or unless the owner or keeper can provide verification that the animal has been humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, animal control agency or animal welfare organization. The pre-seizure hearing shall be commenced as follows. 
(5)  The police department or the city prosecutor, prior to the commencement of any criminal proceedings authorized under section 6-26, shall cause a notice to be affixed to a conspicuous place where the animal was situated or personally deliver a notice to the owner or keeper, if known or ascertainable after reasonable investigation, stating the grounds for believing the animal should be seized to protect the health or safety of the animal or the health or safety of other animals. The notice shall include all of the following: 
a.  The name, business address, and telephone number of the person providing the notice. 
b.  A description of the animal to be seized, including any identification upon the animal. 
c.  The authority and purpose for the possible seizure or impoundment. 
d.  A statement that, in order to receive a pre-seizure hearing, the owner or person authorized to keep the animal(s), or the owner's or keeper's agent, shall request the hearing by signing and returning to the court an enclosed declaration of ownership or right to keep the animal(s) within two (2) days, excluding weekends and city holidays, of the date of the notice. 
e.  A statement that the owner is responsible for the cost of care for an animal that is properly seized and impounded to protect the health or safety of the animal or the health or safety of other animals. 
f.  A statement that the owner is required to post with the court a bond to defray the cost of care for an animal that has been properly seized and impounded to protect the health or safety of the animal or the health or safety of other animals. 
g.  A warning that if the owner fails to post the bond within five (5) days of the seizure, excluding weekends and city holidays, the animal will be deemed abandoned and disposed of by the city. 
(6)  The court shall conduct the pre-seizure hearing within forty-eight (48) hours of the court's receipt of the request, excluding weekends and city holidays. 
(7)  Failure of the owner or keeper, or the owner's or keeper's agent, to request or to attend a scheduled hearing shall result in a forfeiture of any right to a pre-seizure hearing. 
(8)  The court, after the hearing, may affirm or deny the owner's or keeper's right to custody of the animal and, if reasonable grounds are established, may order the seizure or impoundment of the animal for care and treatment. 
a.  In the event of an acquittal or final discharge without conviction of a person who was charged under section 6-26 or animals have not been forfeited pursuant to section 6-27, the court shall, upon demand, direct the release of seized or impounded animals that have not been forfeited upon a showing of proof of ownership. Any questions regarding ownership shall be determined in a separate hearing by the court and the court shall hear testimony from any persons who may assist the court in determining ownership of the animal. If the owner is determined to be unknown or the owner is prohibited or unable to retain possession of the animal for any reason, the court shall order the animal released to the appropriate public agency for lawful disposition. This subsection shall not be construed to cause the release of an animal seized or impounded pursuant to any other local, state or federal law or regulation. The court shall, upon demand, forfeit the bond to pay the cost of care incurred for the animal. If the bond amount exceeds cost of care, the court shall exonerate the bond amount and order the security returned to the owner only to the extent the bond exceeds the cost of care incurred for the animal. 
b.  A person who violates subsection (b) by failing to produce the animal at the time of the hearing, make arrangements with and allow the police department to view the animal upon request, or provide verification that the animal has been humanely destroyed is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 017-25, § 1, 6-13-17) 
Sec. 6-29 - Disposition of seized or impounded animals. 
(a)  A peace officer who has seized or impounded an animal pursuant to section 6-26 or section 6-27, on a showing of probable cause that the animal has been cruelly mistreated as defined in section 6-226 (a) or neglected as defined in section 6-26 (b), may request a disposition hearing before a city judge to determine whether the animal has suffered cruelty or neglect as defined in this section. The hearing shall be set within five (5) business days after the request has been filed. 
(b)  The peace officer who has requested a hearing under subsection (a) of this section shall cause a notice to be affixed to a conspicuous place at the owner's residence. If the owner fails to appear at the hearing or if the city judge determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the animal has been cruelly mistreated or cruelly neglected, the city judge may order the animal forfeited to the officer or any person or agency, including volunteers, contracted with the city to care for an animal that is seized and impounded pursuant to other provisions of this section, or humanely destroyed. The owner shall pay cost of care. The hearing shall be recorded. 
(c)  The procedures and remedies provided for in this section shall neither require nor preclude other enforcement action on the same facts, including a criminal prosecution of the owner. The procedures and remedies provided for in this chapter are remedial and not punitive and are not precluded by an acquittal or conviction in a criminal proceeding. This section shall not be construed as precluding the destruction of any animal if destruction is otherwise authorized by law, nor shall anything in this section be construed as precluding the spaying or neutering of any animal. If any provision of this section is in conflict with any other provisions of this Code, the provisions of this section shall be controlling. 
(d)  Appeal by either party of the decision of the city judge shall be by way of special action to the Superior Court on the record of the hearing. The appealing party shall bear the cost of preparing the record of the hearing on appeal. No appeal shall be taken later than five (5) days after the decision, excluding weekends and city holidays. 
(Ord. No. 017-25, § 1, 6-13-17) 
Chapter 7 - AVIATION AND TRANSPORTATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to operate, etc., airport, A.R.S. § 2-301 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Adopted by reference. 
(a)  The following publications, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length in this Code: 
(1)  Minimum Operating Standards for Commercial and Aeronautical Services and Activities at Glendale Municipal Airport and any amendments thereto as may be approved by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  Glendale Municipal Airport Rules and Regulations (Revised 1996) and any amendments thereto as may be approved by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  The Glendale Municipal Airport "Rules and Regulations" and "Minimum Operating Standards," as such publications may be amended from time to time, shall be interpreted, applied and enforced in a consistent manner. To the extent that any provision of the "Rules and Regulations" may be deemed to be inconsistent with any provision of the "Minimum Operating Standards," the provision contained in the "Rules and Regulations" shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 1397, § 1, 1-14-86; Ord. No. 1435, § 1, 7-1-86; Ord. No. 1506, § 1, 7-28-87; Ord. No. 1909, § 1, 11-26-96) 
Sec. 7-2. - Violations; penalties. 
    A violation of any provision of the Glendale Municipal Airport "Rules and Regulations" or "Minimum Operating Standards" shall be deemed to be a civil code infraction pursuant to Glendale City Code, chapter 13, article II; provided, that the provisions contained in section 13-22(b) shall not apply to any enforcement action under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1397, § 1, 1-14-86; Ord. No. 1435, § 1, 7-1-86; Ord. No. 1909, § 1, 11-26-96) 
Sec. 7-3. - Compliance with administrative regulations. 
    The airport manager may adopt such additional rules and regulations as he or she deems necessary to implement and enforce the provisions contained in the "Rules and Regulations" and "Minimum Operating Standards"; provided, that such administrative rules and regulations are consistent with the "Rules and Regulations" and "Minimum Operating Standards" approved by the city council. All such administrative rules and regulations are subject to the approval of the city manager. All persons using the Glendale Municipal Airport shall comply with all administrative rules and regulations so adopted. 
(Ord. No. 1909, § 3, 11-26-96) 
Secs. 7-4-7-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AVIATION ADVISORY COMMISSION 

Sec. 7-30. - Created. 
    Pursuant to the City Charter of the city of Glendale, Article V, Section 1, the city council does hereby create an aviation advisory commission. 
(Ord. No. 1741, § 4, 11-3-92) 
Sec. 7-31. - Members. 
(a)  The commission shall be composed of seven voting members, who shall be residents of the city and who shall be appointed by the mayor and city council. An eighth member will be a representative from Luke Air Force Base, who will not be required to be a resident of the city and who will not be a voting member. The chairperson of the commission shall be appointed by the city council. All members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years and serve with no compensation. 
(b)  The mayor and city manager shall be ex-officio members, without voting privileges, of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1741, § 4, 11-3-92; Ord. No. 1849, § 4, 7-25-95) 
Sec. 7-32. - Functions. 
    The powers and duties of the commission shall be advisory in nature and all acts and actions thereof shall be subject to review by the city council. The primary powers and duties of the commission shall be to advise the city council on the following matters: 
(1)  Maintenance and operation of the airport; 
(2)  Airport rules and regulations; 
(3)  Proposals for airport development; 
(4)  Fees imposed by the city at the airport; 
(5)  Leases of city property at the airport; 
(6)  Land use policies at the airport; 
(7)  Role of the airport in statewide air transportation; 
(8)  Safety matters under jurisdiction of the airport; 
(9)  Capital improvement programs; 
(10)  Noise concerns; 
(11)  Such other matters as city council may periodically direct. 
(Ord. No. 1741, § 4, 11-3-92) 
Sec. 7-33. - Bylaws. 
    The commission shall establish written bylaws and rules for the conduct of its meetings and said bylaws and rules shall be forwarded to the council for approval by motion and vote. 
(Ord. No. 1741, § 4, 11-3-92) 
Sec. 7-34. - Staff liaison. 
    The airport manager shall serve as the staff liaison to the commission and see that such municipal services and facilities are made available so that the commission can carry forth its purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1741, § 4, 11-3-92) 
Chapter 8 - MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference- Authority to license, register and regulate bicycles and bicycle operation, A.R.S. § 28-627(A)(8); operation of bicycles and play vehicles, A.R.S. § 28-811 et seq. 

Secs. 8-1-8-50. - Reserved. 
State Law reference- Operation of bicycles and play vehicles, A.R.S. § 28-817. 
ARTICLE I. - MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2473, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2005, repealed the former art. I, §§ 8-51-8-58, and enacted a new art. I, §§ 8-51, 8-52, as set out herein. The former art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1867, § 2, adopted Jan. 23, 1996; Ord. No. 2085, §§ 1-4, adopted July 13, 1999. 

Sec. 8-51. - Definition. 
    The following word, term and phrase, when used in this article, shall have the following meaning ascribed to it, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Whenever any words or phrases used in this article are not defined but are defined in the Motor Vehicle Laws of Arizona (Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 28, Chapters 3, 4 and 5 (A.R.S. §§ 28-601, et seq., 28-1301, et seq., and 28-1501, et seq.) and supplements thereto), such definitions shall apply. 
    Motorized skateboard: A self-propelled device that has a motor, gas or electric, a deck on which a person may ride and at least two (2) tandem wheels in contact with the ground and which is not otherwise defined in A.R.S. § 28-101, et seq. as a motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, motorized wheelchair or electric personal assistive mobility device. 
Sec. 8-52. - Banning motorized skateboards; additional prohibitions; penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized skateboard in any city park, on any public sidewalk, roadway, or any other part of a street or city property. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or legal custodian of any minor to authorize or knowingly permit such minor to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  A violation of this article shall result in a fine of not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
Secs. 8-53-8-58. - Reserved. 
Chapter 9 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Art in public projects, § 2-226 et seq.; fire prevention, Ch. 16; floodplain management, Ch. 17; grading and drainage regulations, Ch. 18.5; landscaping, Ch. 19; mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, Ch. 23; smoking pollution control, § 25-50 et seq.; outdoor light controls, Ch. 26.5; private usage of city buildings and facilities, § 27-101 et seq.; planning and development, Ch. 28; construction site temporary encroachment permit, § 30-101 et seq.; subdivisions, Ch. 31; swimming pools, Ch. 32; utility undergrounding regulations, Ch. 32.5; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 33; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference- Copies of building permits to be given to certain state and county officials, A.R.S. § 9-467(A); only licensed contractors to be issued certain permits, A.R.S. § 9-467(B). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Toilet facilities for workers. 
    Suitable toilet facilities shall be provided and maintained in a sanitary condition for use by workers during construction. Toilet facilities of the nonsewer type for the use by workers during construction shall conform to American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Standards Z4.3-79, Minimum Requirements for Nonsewered Waste Disposal Systems. 
Sec. 9-2. - Freeway sound mitigation. 
    All newly constructed residential dwelling units, churches, schools, daycare centers and other noise sensitive uses as defined by the City of Glendale zoning ordinance that are located within one-half (1/2) mile of a freeway right-of-way shall comply with sound attenuation standards adopted by the MAG Building Codes Committee on April 17, 1996. Any development within these categories shall include written certification by an acoustical engineer or a registered architect prior to certificate of occupancy of the current and projected dln noise levels for all interior rooms and that the interior noise levels for all interior rooms will not exceed forty-five (45) dB. Construction plans for these developments shall indicate the appropriate attenuation methods for construction. 
(Ord. No. 2128, § 1, 3-28-2000) 
Sec. 9-3-9-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O19-35, § 1, adopted March 26, 2019, repealed Art. II, §§ 9-16-9-23, and reenacted a new article, §§ 9-16-9-22, as set out herein. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2821, § 1, adopted Oct. 23, 2012. 
Cross reference- Technical standards regarding fire prevention and protection, § 16-16 et seq. 

Sec. 9-16. - Adopted by reference; violation. 
(a)  The following publications, one (1) copy each of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, are adopted by reference as if set out at length in this Code. 
(1)  2018 International Building Code , as published by the International Code Council, Inc., including Appendix Chapters C and I; 
(2)  2018 International Residential Code , as published by the International Code Council, Inc., including Appendix Chapters H, J, P and Q; 
(3)  2018 International Existing Building Code , as published by the International Code Council, Inc.; 
(4)  2018 International Mechanical Code , as published by the International Code Council, Inc.; 
(5)  2018 International Plumbing Code, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., including Appendix Chapters B, C and E; 
(6)  2018 International Fuel Gas Code, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., including Appendix Chapters A, B and C; 
(7)  2017 National Electrical Code , as published by the National Fire Protection Association; 
(8)  2018 International Property Maintenance Code, as published by the International Code Council, Inc.; 
(9)  2018 International Energy Conservation Code , as published by the International Code Council, Inc.; 
(10)  Arizonans with Disabilities Act , (A.R.S. § 41-1492.03) and the Act's implementing rules (28 CFR Part 35, and 28 CFR 36); 
(11)  2010 Americans with Disabilities Act Standards for Accessible Design; 
(12)  City of Glendale Revised Sound Attenuation Standards effective December 31, 2001; 
(13)  Maricopa Association of Governments Fireplace Standard ; 
(14)  Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines as published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development on March 6, 1991. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of the publications adopted in subsection (a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O19-35, § 1, 3-26-2019) 
Sec. 9-17. - Amendments to the 2018 International Building Code. 
    The 2018 International Building Code is amended in the following respects: 
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows: 
101.1 Title . These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Glendale, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 103.1 is hereby deleted and replaced by the following: 
103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency. The authority and responsibility for administration and enforcement of this code is assigned to the building safety official who shall also be known as the building official or functional equivalent. 
Section 104.10.1 is hereby amended as follows: 
Replace the words "building official" with "city engineer or functional equivalent" 
Section 105.2(2) is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Fences not over 6'-8" high except for perimeter subdivision fences. 
Section 105.5 is hereby deleted and replaced by the following: 
Section 105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of the technical codes shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days, or any permit shall expire 180 days after the last approved inspection. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested, prior to expiration, in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated and the fee shall be one half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, a new full permit fee shall be paid based on the current fee schedule adopted by the city. 
Subsection 105.5.1 is hereby added: 
Section 105.5.1 Completing Work and Final Inspection. Every permit issued by the building official shall expire 24 months after the date of permit issuance. If the building or work authorized by such permit has not received final inspection approval prior to the permit expiration date, all work shall stop until a new permit is obtained for the value of the work remaining unfinished. 
Exception: The building official may approve a period exceeding 24 months for completion of work when the permit holder can demonstrate that the complexity or size of the project makes completing the project within 24 months unreasonable. Any request shall be prior to expiration of the permit. 
Section 105.6 is hereby amended by adding the following: 
It shall be unlawful to proceed with any work for which a permit was issued after notice of permit suspension or revocation is served on the permit holder, the owner, or the person having responsible charge of the work. Reinstatement of a suspended permit shall be by written notice from the building official authorizing work to resume, with or without conditions. Revoked permits shall be canceled, and the permit fee shall not be refunded. 
Section 108.3 The last sentence is hereby amended to read as follows: 
...The portion covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the adopted National Electrical Code. 
Section 109 is hereby deleted and replaced by the following: 
Section 109 Fees 
109.1 Fee Schedule. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of this section and shall be as established by council resolution. 
109.2 Permit Fees. Fees shall be as established by council resolution. 
109.3 Plan Review Fees. When submittal documents are required by Section 106 of this code, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the documents for plan review. The plan review fees specified in this section and as by council resolution are separate fees from, and in addition to, the permit fees specified in Section 109.2 of this code. 
109.4 Building Permit Valuations. The determination of valuation under any provisions of the code shall be made by the building official. The valuation to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work including all materials, labor, overhead and profit for which the permit is issued including all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems, and other permanent equipment. 
109.5 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be as adopted by council resolution. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt an applicant from compliance with all other provisions of either this code or other adopted laws and ordinances of this city. 
Section 109.8 is hereby added to read as follows: 
109.8 Reinspection fees. Permit fees provide for customary inspections only. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of the work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. Reinspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the building official. In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, additional inspection of the work will not be performed until the required fees have been paid. 
Section 110.1 is hereby amended by adding the following paragraph: 
Property owners shall obtain and display on the residence, business, or otherwise, the correct building number or numbers as assigned to such property(ies) by the Engineering Department or functional equivalent in accordance with established street assignment policy, prior to final inspection and/or issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The building numbers shall be of a durable material, permanently attached to the building and must be readily distinguished and readable from the nearest paved public/common roadway fronting that property. The size of the building numbers shall comply with the city's adopted fire code and its amendments. 
Section 110.3.4 is hereby amended by adding the following sentence: 
The building shall be weather-tight at the time of the frame inspection. 
Section 110.3.10 is hereby deleted and amended to read as follows: 
110.3.10 Special Inspections. In addition to the inspections required by Section 110, the engineer or architect of record acting as the owner's agent shall employ one or more special inspectors who shall provide inspections during construction for types of work outlined in Section 1705 and as outlined below: 
110.3.10.1 Electrical Special Inspections. 
1.  Ground-fault protection performance tests for equipment are required to be provided with ground-fault protection. 
2.  Switchboards, panelboards, motor control centers, and other equipment rated 1,000 amps or more; or over 600 volts. 
3.  Emergency and standby power systems, including switchboards, panel boards, distribution boards, transfer equipment, power source, conductors, fire pumps, and exhaust and ventilation fans. 
110.3.10.2 Electrical Observation. Electrical observation shall be provided for the following installations: 
1.  Installation or alteration of that portion of health care facility electrical systems which fall within the scope of Article 517, Chapter III of the adopted National Electric Code where critical care areas are present. 
2.  Installations or alterations of high-voltage electrical systems, which exceed 600 volts. Installations or alterations of electrical systems within locations classified as hazardous by the provisions of adopted the National Electric Code, or the International Fire Code, except for gasoline dispensing installations and systems located within storage garages, repair garages or lubritoriums. 
3.  When such observation is specifically required by the building official. 
The owner shall employ the engineer responsible for the electrical design, or another engineer designated by the engineer responsible for the electrical design to perform visual observation of complex electrical equipment and systems for general conformance to the interconnection of equipment. Electrical observation shall be performed at significant stages of the construction and when the installation is complete and ready to be inspected by the building official. 
Section 110.3.12 is hereby added as follows: 
110.3.12 Building Service Equipment Inspections. All building service equipment inspections for which a permit is required by this code shall be inspected by the building official. No portion of any building service equipment intended to be concealed by any permanent portion of the building shall be concealed until inspected and approved. When the installation of any building service equipment is complete, an additional and final inspection shall be made. Building service equipment regulated by the technical codes shall not be connected to the water, fuel or power supply or sewer system until authorized by the building official. 
1.  Electrical inspections. A rough-in inspection is required for all conduit, semi-rigid piping or wiring after installation but prior to being concealed. Final inspection is required when all conduit, wires, fixtures and equipment including covers, have been installed and connected. 
2.  Mechanical inspections. All mechanical equipment and systems for which a permit is required by the code, including all associated ductwork, flues, condensate and refrigeration lines, shall be subject to inspection and shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. 
3.  Plumbing inspections. A rough-in or underground inspection is required for all sewer, drainage and vent piping, and for all water and gas distribution systems prior to their being buried or concealed. A final inspection is required when all fixtures are set and operating or ready to operate. Tests shall be performed as required by the currently adopted plumbing code. 
Section 111.3 is hereby deleted and replaced by the following: 
111.3 Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. If the building official finds no substantial hazard will result from occupancy of any building or portion thereof before the same is completed, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for the use of a portion or portions of a building or structure prior to the completion of the entire building or structure provided the applicant agrees that: 
1.  When construction is complete, final inspection will be requested and a certificate of occupancy issued. 
2.  The building official shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid. The expiration date of the temporary certificate of occupancy shall be stated on the certificate. 
3.  It is the responsibility of the applicant to complete any required work prior to the expiration date of the temporary certificate of occupancy and call for final inspection. 
4.  The building official may request the utility company to de-energize power, if required work is not completed on or before the expiration date of the temporary certificate of occupancy. 
5.  Neither the City of Glendale nor the utility company will be held liable for any damages or delays, for de-energization of power. 
Applicant must be the owner or authorized agent. If the owner is not available to provide signature on the application for temporary certificate of occupancy, then the owner shall provide a letter on company letterhead or notarized letter of authorization stating the name of the person authorized to act on owner's or company's behalf. 
Section 113 is hereby deleted and replaced by the following: 
113 APPEALS 
113.1 General. Decisions of the building official shall be appealed to Glendale City Court. An application for an appeal of any order, decision or interpretation made by the building official shall be filed in writing, along with the appropriate fee established by resolution or pursuant to Glendale City Code Sec. 2-3, and shall be delivered to the Court and to the building official within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the order, decisions or interpretation. The fee shall not be refundable. The decision of the building official may be reversed or modified by the Court upon finding that: 
a.  The decision of the building official is not supported by a reasonable interpretation and application of the city code to the specific facts presented, or the city code does not apply to the facts presented. 
b.  The reversal or modification of the building official's decision will not create or manifest injustice or affect the intent of the city code. 
c.  The reversal of the building official's decision will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
113.2 Limitations of Authority. The Court shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of the codes set forth in Sec. 9-16, nor shall the Court be empowered to waive the requirements of the codes set forth in Sec. 9-16. 
Section 116 is hereby deleted and replaced by the following: 
Section 116 Unsafe Structures and Equipment 
Section 116.1 General. All buildings, structures or existing equipment regulated by this code that are structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or that constitutes a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human health or life are unsafe. Any use of buildings or structures constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is an unsafe use. 
The provisions of this code shall apply to all unsafe buildings, structures or equipment, as herein defined, which are now in existence or which may hereafter become unsafe in the jurisdiction. 
All buildings, structures or equipment which are required to be repaired under the provisions of this code shall be subject to the provisions of the International Existing Building Code. 
Section 116.2 Definitions. Unsafe conditions or defects shall be classified as imminent or incipient hazards. 
Imminent hazard is defined as a high, real and immediate risk to life, health or property. 
Incipient hazard is defined as a condition that can become an imminent hazard if further deterioration occurs or if reasonable additional loads are applied. 
Public Nuisance is defined as an unlawful act or omission which endangers the lives, safety, health, property or comfort of the public or by which the public are obstructed in the exercise or enjoyment of any right common to all. 
Section 116.3 Unsafe Buildings or Structures . Conditions or defects that render a building or structure imminently unsafe include, but are not limited to: 
116.3.1 Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of egress is not sufficient width or size, or is locked, blocked or constricted so as to prevent safe and adequate means of egress in case of fire or panic. 
116.3.2 Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of egress is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to prevent safe and adequate means of egress in case of fire or panic. 
116.3.3 Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed in this code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
116.3.4 Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of this code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
116.3.5 Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
116.3.6 Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one half of that specified in this code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in this code for such buildings. 
116.3.7 Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction. 
116.3.8 Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is likely to partially or completely collapse because of fire, dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or any other causes. 
116.3.9 Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
116.3.10 Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one third of the base. 
116.3.11 Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing walls or outside walls or coverings. 
116.3.12 Whenever the building or structure has become so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, flood, vandalism or theft, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children; a harbor for vagrants or criminals; or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful acts. 
116.3.13 Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in this code or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings. 
116.3.14 Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than 50 percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent of the strength, fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location. 
116.3.15 Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the building official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
116.3.16 Whenever any building or structure, because of fire, obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, exposed conductors, inadequate grounding, overloaded conductors, improper overcurrent protection, faulty gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined to be a fire hazard or a health hazard by the fire marshal or the building official. 
116.3.17 Whenever any building or structure is in such condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
116.3.18 Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure. 
116.3.19 Whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of 180 days so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
116.3.20 Whenever any building service equipment is in such condition as to constitute a fire hazard, or hazard to life, health, property or the public welfare by reason of use, construction, quality of materials or inadequate maintenance or dilapidation. 
Section 116.4 Authority for Inspection and Evaluation. The building official may inspect any property, building, structure or building service equipment to determine compliance with this section whenever there is probable cause to suspect that an unsafe condition exists. Except in cases of emergencies or readily apparent imminent hazards, the building official or designee shall make reasonable attempts to obtain permission from the property owner or the person or persons occupying or having control of the property prior to conducting the inspection. All entry onto property or into buildings of structures for purposes of this inspection shall be in accordance with legal requirements governing such entry. 
When the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any property, building, structure or building service equipment and has found and determined that an unsafe condition exists, the building official is authorized to immediately issue abatement orders in accordance with Section 116.5 of this code, and the building official may require the property owner to obtain a detailed engineering evaluation of the suspected unsafe condition before the building official determines the extent of abatement required. 
116.4.1 When so ordered by the building official, the owner of any building or property suspected of containing an unsafe condition shall engage the services of a design professional registered in Arizona to conduct a detailed investigation and analysis of the suspected unsafe condition. The cost of such an investigation and report shall be paid by the property owner. 
116.4.2 The registered professional retained by the owner shall conduct a detailed investigation and evaluation of the suspected unsafe condition and shall issue a written report to the property owner and to the building official on the condition of the building, structure or building service equipment, including recommendations for steps necessary to abate any unsafe condition found. The report shall be delivered to the building official on or before the date specified in the order requiring such report. 
116.4.3 The content, findings and recommendations contained in the owner's engineering report may be utilized by the building official to determine whether or not an unsafe condition exists, whether the condition creates an imminent or incipient hazard and what, if any, abatement orders shall be issued. The building official reserves the right to approve, deny, make suggestions or require an additional report if deficiencies are found. 
116.4.4 Failure of a property owner to produce an engineering report on or before the date specified in the building official's order shall be grounds for the building official to proceed with abatement proceedings up to and including orders to immediately vacate or demolish the subject building, structure or equipment. 
116.5 Abatement of Unsafe Buildings, Structures, or Building Service Equipment. The building official shall, after inspection, determine whether a building, structure or building service equipment is determined to be unsafe, and, if so, whether it constitutes an imminent hazard or an incipient hazard, as defined in Section 116.2 of this code. 
116.5.1 Incipient Hazards. If a building, structure or any building service equipment is determined to be an incipient hazard, the building official shall issue a written notice to the property owner or occupant of the premises describing the incipient hazard and ordering its repair or abatement within a certain time as necessary to prevent creation of an imminent hazard. The time allowed for repair or abatement shall not be less than 10 days and not more than 180 days from the date of the notice. Failure of the owner, or occupant, to repair or abate the incipient hazard within the time specified shall constitute grounds for the building official to declare the condition an imminent hazard and to thereafter initiate formal abatement procedures. The building official shall record a copy of the Notice of Incipient Hazard with Maricopa County. 
116.5.1.1 Incipient Hazards, extension of time. Where, in the sole judgment of the building official, there are exceptional circumstances, one or more extensions of time shall be granted by the building official. In such cases, it is the sole responsibility of the property owner to provide evidence or information to show cause. Financial feasibility or funding is not an exceptional circumstance. All extensions shall be approved in writing. 
116.5.2 Imminent Hazards. If a building, structure, or any building service equipment is determined to be unsafe and an imminent hazard, the building official shall serve a written notice of violation on the person or persons occupying or having control of the building, structure, or building service equipment. The notice of violation shall declare the unsafe condition to be a nuisance and shall order its immediate abatement in accordance with the provisions of this section. The building official shall record a copy of the Notice of Imminent Hazard with Maricopa County. 
116.5.2.1 Notice of Violation. Notices of violation declaring imminent hazards shall be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Service shall be deemed complete upon delivery. 
The notice of violation shall identify the address and legal description of the property in question and shall state the nature and extent of the unsafe condition. The notice shall provide the name and phone number of a city representative to contact concerning the unsafe condition. The notice shall state the city's authority to abate the violation if the owner fails to do so and the city's ability to assess the costs of such abatement against the property. The notice shall state the procedures to follow should the owner wish to appeal the decision of the building official. The notice shall state that all costs borne by the city are due upon completion and the city's ability to assess the costs of such abatement against the property. Where the costs are not paid within 30 days of issuance of the final invoice, the city shall place a lien upon the property that shall accrue interest at the rate of 10% annually until such time as the lien is satisfied. Such assessment shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and shall be a lien on such real property from the date of its recording until paid. Such lien shall be subject and inferior to a lien for general taxes. 
Nothing herein shall preclude the building official from giving additional verbal or written information notices. Nothing herein shall require the issuance of a notice of violation prior to commencement of emergency abatement or civil or criminal violation proceedings. 
116.5.2.2 Unsafe Buildings or Structures. In the case of an unsafe building or structure containing imminent hazards, the building official shall order the hazard abated by repair or by demolition of the building or structure. The unsafe building or structure and any building or structures placed in jeopardy by the unsafe buildings or structures shall be posted in accordance with this code. The buildings or structures shall not be entered, used or occupied or reoccupied until determined safe by the building official. 
116.5.2.3 Unsafe Service Equipment. In the case of unsafe building service equipment installation containing imminent hazards, the building official shall attach or affix a warning red tag to the service equipment declared to be unsafe. Where equipment is declared to be unsafe, the building official shall order such equipment disconnected or its use discontinued until the nuisance created thereby is abated. In addition, the building official may order any building or structure which is placed in jeopardy by the unsafe equipment to be vacated, or the building official may order the disconnection of the affected utility service to the building, structure or equipment, and these buildings or structures shall not be occupied, reoccupied or building service equipment reconnected until determined safe by the building official. 
116.5.2.4 Posting of Signs. When necessary to protect life, health or public welfare, the building official may post signs which shall prohibit entry into and occupation of an unsafe building, structure or property, provided, however, that with written permission of the building official it shall be lawful to enter the premises for the purposes of removing personal property or affecting any required repairs, rehabilitation or demolition. Every notice to vacate shall be posted at or upon each accessible exit of the building and shall substantially state the following: 
DO NOT ENTER 
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY 
IT IS A CLASS 1 MISDEMEANOR TO OCCUPY THESE PREMISES, 
OR TO REMOVE OR DEFACE THIS NOTICE 
Whenever such notice is posted, the building official shall include a notification in the notice of violation issued reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting. 
It shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor for a person, firm or corporation to enter, use or occupy any building or structure that has been so posted. It shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor for any individual to remove any sign posted pursuant to this section. 
116.5.2.4.1 Whenever a building or structure is posted as unsafe a notice thereof shall be recorded in the county recorder's office. 
116.5.2.4.2 Emergency Barricades. If any building or structure is a hazard to life or limb of persons using a public street, alley or sidewalk, the public way shall be barricaded to prevent public use. The necessary barricades shall be erected on order from the building official. The costs for barricading of a public way under this section shall be assessed to and paid by the owner of the unsafe building or structure causing the need for such barricades and is due upon completion. Where the costs are not paid within 30 days of issuance of the final invoice, the city shall place a lien upon the property and charge interest at the rate of 10% annually until such time as the lien is satisfied. Such assessment shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and shall be a lien on such real property from the date of its recording until paid. Such lien shall be subject and inferior to a lien for general taxes. 
116.5.2.4.3 Emergency Abatement. In the event an emergency should occur wherein the continued existence of a building, structure or building service equipment would constitute an imminent hazard to life, health or other property, the building official may cause such building or structure to be demolished, building service equipment removed or disconnected, all without notice. Such abatement shall be limited to the minimum work necessary to remove the imminent hazard. 
116.5.2.4.4 Failure to comply. If the owner of any unsafe building, structure, or building service equipment fails to abate an imminent hazard within the time specified in the notice of violation, the building official is authorized to begin the formal abatement of those hazards as outlined in section 116.6.5 of this code. The city may abate any such unsafe condition by repair, removal or demolition in accordance with the provisions of this code. 
116.6 Appeals. Decisions, orders and notices of violations relating to unsafe buildings, structures or building service equipment may be appealed to the building official. The appeal shall be filed within 30 days from the date of the order or action of the building official; provided however, that if the building or structure or building service equipment is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property, or safety of the public or adjacent property and is ordered vacated and is posted in accordance with this code, such appeal shall be filed within 10 days from the date of the notice from the building official. 
116.6.1 Processing, Scheduling and Noticing of Appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the building official shall schedule a hearing with a hearing officer appointed by the city manager's office. As soon as practicable, the hearing officer shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal. Such date shall not be less than 10 days nor more than 60 days from the date the appeal was filed with the building official, unless the parties agree to another date. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by either causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal. 
116.6.2 Failure to Appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this code shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice of violation or any portion thereof. 
116.6.3 Scope of Hearing on Appeal. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal. 
116.6.4 Staying of Notice of Violation. Except for vacation orders made pursuant to this section, enforcement of any notice of violation issued under this code shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. 
116.6.5 Failure to Abate. 
(a)  If the unsafe building, structure or building service equipment is not repaired or demolished as required by the notice provided for in section 116, the building official shall give written notice to the owner of the unsafe building, structure or service equipment and other parties in interest, by certified mail or personal service, to appear before a hearing officer at a designated time and place to show cause why the unsafe conditions have not been repaired or demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the notice provided for in section 116. The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer who shall conduct the hearing in accordance with this section. 
(b)  The hearing officer shall hear such testimony as the building official, owner and other parties in interest may offer relevant to the condition of the unsafe building, structure or building service equipment and the failure to repair or demolish the same. 
(c)  The hearing officer shall make written findings of fact from the testimony offered as to whether or not the building, structure or building service equipment in question is an unsafe condition as defined in this section and whether good cause exists for the failure to repair or demolish the unsafe condition. 
(d)  If the hearing officer finds the building, structure, or building service equipment to be unsafe and if the owner of the unsafe building, structure or building service equipment or other parties in interest fail to show good cause why the unsafe building, structure or building service equipment should not be demolished forthwith, the hearing officer shall authorize the building official to cause the damaged building to be demolished. The costs of such demolition shall be charged against the real property on which the unsafe building, structure or building service equipment existed as an assessment. Such assessment shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and shall be a lien on such real property from the date of its recording until paid. Such lien shall be subject and inferior to a lien for general taxes and to all prior encumbrances of record. 
(e)  If the hearing officer finds the building, structure or building service equipment to be unsafe and that good cause exists to grant the owner or other parties in interest additional time to complete the repair or demolition of the damaged building, structure, or building service equipment, the hearing officer shall order that such repairs or demolition be completed with diligence and before a date certain, provided that no extension of time longer than 270 days shall be granted to complete the repairs or demolition. If an extension of time to complete repairs or demolition of the unsafe building, structure or building service equipment is granted but the owner and other parties in interest do not complete the repair or demolition of the unsafe conditions within the extension of time granted, the building official, upon the expiration of the extension granted, shall cause the unsafe building, structure or service equipment to be demolished forthwith, no further extensions shall be allowed or granted. The costs of such demolition are the responsibility of the property owner and are due 30 days after the final invoice is submitted. Where costs are not paid within 30 days of issuance of the final invoice, the city shall place a lien upon the property and charge interest at the annual rate of 10% until such time as the lien is satisfied. Such assessment shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and shall be a lien on such real property from the date of its recording until paid. Such lien shall be subject and inferior to a lien for general taxes. 
(f)  Any determination by the hearing officer, including any additional extension in time beyond that initially granted by the hearing officer may only be appealed to Maricopa County Superior Court. 
116.6.6 Notice by Publication. 
If the whereabouts of any person entitled to notice under this section cannot be ascertained by the city in the exercise of reasonable diligence, service of such notice may be made by publishing the notice in a newspaper printed and published in the city for two (2) consecutive weeks. 
116.7 Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official, and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notorized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
116.8 Failure to Comply 
Failure of the property owner or occupant to comply with any part of this article or any lawful order given under the scope of this article is a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
Section 201.4 is hereby amended by adding to the end of this subsection: 
Mirriam-Webster's Unabridged Dictionary of the English Language shall be considered as providing ordinarily accepted meanings. 
Section 202 Definitions is hereby amended as follows: 
Delete definitions for EXISTING BUILDING and EXISTING STRUCTURE. 
Section 310.3 is hereby amended by adding the following item to the list of R-2 residential occupancies: 
Residential condominiums 
Section 406.3 is hereby amended by adding the following subsection: 
406.3.4 Open Carports. Carports for other than single family residential use which are open on all sides and constructed entirely of noncombustible materials, except for an approved fascia, shall not exceed 5,000 square feet and shall be located no closer than 3 feet to an adjacent lot line, nor closer than 6 feet to any projecting element of an adjacent building or structure. The edge of the carport roof shall be used to measure the separation distance to adjacent lot lines, buildings or structures. 
Section 707.3.11 Electrical Rooms with Service Entrance Equipment is hereby added and shall read as follows: 
Fire-resistance rated walls and/or horizontal assemblies with a fire-resistance rating of one hour shall be provided to separate an electrical room containing service entrance equipment from adjacent rooms and spaces. 
Section 903.2 is hereby amended by replacing the first sentence with the following: 
Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures, and in existing buildings and structures, that are modified, expanded, remodeled, renovated or change occupancy classifications, shall be provided in accordance with the Glendale City Code, Chapter 16, Article III. 
Section 1010.1.10: The second paragraph is hereby amended deleting the words "and over 6 feet (1,829mm) wide." 
Section 1206 is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
For requirements on sound transmission refer to City of Glendale Revised Sound Attenuation Standards effective December 31, 2001. 
Section 1609.4.3 Exposure Categories is hereby amended to read as follows: 
The City of Glendale is predominantly categorized as exposure category C. Deviating from this shall require additional proof and verification from the registered design professional in responsible charge. The engineer shall provide a surface roughness analysis, provide aerials, etc. proving that the proposed site meets exposure category B as defined in ASCE 7-10, Section 26.7.3. 
Exception: Single story one- and two-family dwellings are permitted to use exposure category B for wind design. 
Section 1705.4 Masonry Construction is hereby amended by deleting Exception 2. 
Section 1806.1 Load Combinations is hereby amended by adding the following: 
In lieu of the presumptive load-bearing values of Table 1806.2, a soils report is required for all new construction. 
Section 1806.2 Presumptive Load- Bearing Values is hereby amended by adding the following: 
In lieu of the presumptive load-bearing values of Table 1806.2, a soils report is required for all new construction. 
Section 1809.4 Depth and width of footings is hereby amended by revising the first sentence to read as follows: 
The minimum depth of footings below the undisturbed ground surface shall be 18 inches (458 mm), unless otherwise recommended by a soils report. 
Table 2902.1 Minimum Number of Required Plumbing Fixtures is hereby amended as follows: 
Revise footnote "e" to "25 or fewer." 
Delete footnote "f" as written in the code. 
Add new footnote "f" to read as follows: 
f.  24 inches (610 mm) of wash sink or 18 inches (457 mm) of a circular wash basin shall be considered equivalent to one lavatory. 
Section 2902.6 is hereby amended by revising "15" to "25." 
Chapter 31 is hereby amended by deleting Section 3109, Swimming Pool Enclosures. See Chapter 32 of the Glendale City Code for requirements. 
(Ord. No. O19-35, § 1, 3-26-2019) 
Sec. 9-18. - Amendments to the 2018 International Residential Code. 
    The International Residential Code, 2018 Edition is hereby amended in the following respects: 
Chapter 1. Administration is hereby amended by the deletion of Sections R101 through R114. 
For the administration of this code, see the 2018 International Building Code and related amendments. 
Section R201.4 is hereby amended by adding to the end of this subsection: 
Mirriam-Webster's Unabridged Dictionary of the English Language shall be considered as providing ordinarily accepted meanings. 
Table R301.2(1 ) is amended to read as follows: 
GROUND 
SNOW 
LOAD WIND DESIGN SEISMIC 
DESIGN 
CATEGORY f SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM WINTER 
DESIGN 
TEMP e ICE BARRIER 
UNDERLAYMENT 
REQUIRED h FLOOD 
HAZARDS g AIR 
FREEZING 
INDEX i MEAN 
ANNUAL 
TEMP i SPEED d 
(mph) Topographic 
effects k Weathering a Frost line 
depth b Termite c N/A 115 mph (ultimate) 89 mph (ASD) None B Negligible N/A Moderate to Heavy 32° F No FEMA N/A 72.6° F  
Section R302.5.1 is hereby amended by adding the following to the end of this subsection: 
Doors providing opening protection shall be self-closing, self-latching and tight-fitting. 
Section R310.2.3 is hereby amended by adding the following to the first paragraph: 
A window well shall not be located beneath an emergency escape and rescue opening. A protective grate shall be provided over all window wells. The grate shall comply with Section R310.4 and shall be designed for a minimum uniformly distributed live load of 40 pounds per square foot. 
Section R311.1 is hereby amended by adding the following sentences: 
The means of egress from dwelling units or sleeping rooms shall not lead through other sleeping rooms, toilet rooms or bathrooms. 
Section R311.3.2 is hereby amended by adding the following text: 
A door shall not swing over a lower floor or landing. 
Section R313.2 Automatic Fire Sprinklers: In accordance with A.R.S. § 9-807, delete this section in its entirety. 
Section R319.1 is hereby deleted it its entirety and replaced with the following: 
R319.1 Address Numbers. Property owners shall obtain and display on the residence, the correct building number or numbers as assigned to such property(ies) by the Engineering Department or functional equivalent in accordance with established street assignment policy, prior to final inspection and/or issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The building numbers shall be of a durable material, permanently attached to the building and must be readily distinguished and readable from the nearest paved public/common roadway fronting that property. The size of the building numbers shall comply with the city's adopted fire code and its amendments. 
Section R401.4 is hereby amended by adding the following sentence: 
A soils test and geotechnical evaluation report shall be required for all new buildings governed by this code. 
Section R403.1.1 the third sentence is hereby revised to read as follows: 
Spread footings shall be at least 10 inches in thickness. 
Section R403.1.3 is hereby amended by adding Seismic Design Categories B and C to all seismic design requirements listed in this section. In addition, this section is amended by deleting the exception for one- and two-family dwellings. 
Section R403.1.3.1 is hereby amended by adding the following: 
No. 4 vertical reinforcing bars shall be installed at 48 inches maximum spacing. The vertical bars shall tie the foundation stem wall to the footing and a 90 degree bend shall be provided at the no. 4 bar located in the footing. 
Section R403.1.3 is hereby amended by adding the following subsection: 
Section R403.1.3.3 Foundation Ties. When an addition is constructed, the new foundation shall be tied to the existing foundation by installing two (2) No. 4 dowel bars, minimum 12 inches long. These shall be embedded a minimum of 6 inches into the existing footing. 
Section R403.1.4 Minimum Depth is hereby amended by revising 12 inches to 18 inches, unless otherwise recommended by a soils report. 
Section R403.4.1 Crushed Stone Footings is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
Section R502.9 is hereby amended by adding the following subsection: 
R502.9.1 Framing Connections. Framing details for bearing walls and posts shall be such that all components are tied together with positive connections to transmit wind uplift forces from the roof to the foundation. Nails loaded in withdrawal by such forces shall not be considered as positive connections. 
Approved metal framing anchors shall be provided at the top and bottom of every other stud of a wood-frame bearing wall, except where structural panel sheathing is nailed directly to the studs, top plate and bottom plate in accordance with Table R602.3(1). 
Floor-to-floor connections shall have approved metal strap ties at a maximum of 48 inches on center, except where justified by an engineered analysis that bears the seal of a registered design professional. 
Each truss, joist and rafter shall be connected to the top plate of the supporting wall with an approved metal framing anchor. The framing anchor shall be of the type which connects to both members of the double top plate. Beams shall be anchored to supporting walls and posts with approved metal framing connectors. 
Section R608.1 General is hereby amended by revising the last sentence to read: 
Project drawings, details, calculations and specifications are required to bear the seal of a registered design professional. 
Section R610.1 General is hereby amended by revising the last sentence to read: 
Project drawings, details, calculations and specifications are required to bear the seal of a registered design professional. 
Section R802.8 Lateral Support is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Rafters and ceiling joists shall be provided with lateral support at points of bearing to prevent rotation. Where lateral support is provided by solid wood blocking, 1X nominal lumber shall not be allowed. 
Section R802.8.1 Bridging. The first sentence is revised to read as follows: 
Rafters and ceiling joists shall be supported by nominal 2 x solid blocking, diagonal bridging (wood or metal) or a continuous 1-inch by 3-inch wood strip nailed across the rafters or ceiling joists at intervals not exceeding 8 feet. 
Section N1103.3.1 Insulation (Prescriptive) is amended by adding the following Exceptions: 
1.  Ducts or portions thereof located completely inside the building thermal envelope. 
2.  Supply ducts may be insulated to a minimum of R-6 when one or more of the following prescriptive conditions are met: 
a.  Minimum SEER rating of HVAC system is increased to 15. 
b.  Maximum U-factor is decreased to 0.35 for all fenestration products. 
c.  Wall cavity insulation minimum R-value is increased to R-19. 
d.  Attic radiant barrier is provided in accordance with ASTM C1313 and installed in accordance with ASTM C1743. 
Section E3404.1 Applicability is amended by adding the following sentence: 
"For electrical systems not covered by this Code, see the 2017 National Electrical Code." 
(Ord. No. O19-35, § 1, 3-26-2019) 
Sec. 9-19. - Amendments to the 2018 International Existing Building Code. 
    The 2018 International Existing Building Code is amended in the following respects: 
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Glendale, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 305.8.10 is amended by adding the following: 
As an alternative, in existing toilet rooms and bathing rooms, one fixture (water closet or urinal) may be removed (where two or more fixtures exist) to create the required space for an accessible water closet. 
Section 1203.3 is hereby amended by revising the title and the first sentence to read as follows: 
1203.3 Means of Egress and Emergency Escape and Rescue. Existing window openings, door openings and corridor and stairway widths less than ... (remaining text unchanged). 
Section 1204.6 is hereby amended by revising the title and the first sentence to read as follows: 
1204.6 Means of Egress and Emergency Escape and Rescue. Existing window openings, door openings and corridor and stairway widths less than...(remaining text unchanged). 
(Ord. No. O19-35, § 1, 3-26-2019) 
Sec. 9-20. - Amendments to the International Plumbing Code. 
Section 301.6 Prohibited Locations is hereby amended to reference Section 1003 in its entirety and any requirements in that section shall be deferred to the City of Glendale's Pre-Treatment Department. 
Section 305.4.1 Sewer Depth is hereby amended as follows: 
This section allows the Authority Having Jurisdiction to determine the minimum depth below grade of the sewer for private sewage disposal systems and building sewers. The City of Glendale requires that the minimum depth below grade shall be 12 inches for private sewer systems and building sewers. 
Table 308.5 Table Hanger Spacing is hereby amended as follows: 
This Table shall be amended by adding the following to footnote "a": 
 A hanger shall be located within eighteen inches of each coupling or hub for lengths up to ten feet. 
 For multiple joints within a four-foot length, a hanger shall be located at alternate couplings or hubs. 
 Support shall be provided at each floor for vertical stacks. 
 Information on hanging, seismic and sway bracing can be found in General Installation Instruction in Chapter Four of the Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings Handbook. 
Table 403.1 Minimum Number of Required Plumbing Fixtures is hereby amended by deleting this table entirely. The 2018 International Building Code Table 2902.1 and its amendments shall be used to determine the minimum number of plumbing fixtures required. 
Section 410.4 Substitution is hereby amended by revising the last sentence to read: 
In other occupancies where drinking fountains are required, water dispensers shall be permitted to be substituted for drinking fountains. 
Section 608.17.1.1 Carbonated beverage dispensers is hereby amended as follows: 
This section is amended to require a Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Assembly to be installed at each water supply to Carbonated Beverage dispensers. 
Chapter 7 is hereby amended as follows: 
Any reference in this chapter that refers to the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be deferred to the Maricopa County Health Department. 
Section 701.5 Damage to drainage system or public sewer is hereby amended to reference Section 1003 in its entirety and any requirements in that section shall be deferred to the City of Glendale's Pre-Treatment Department. 
Section 803 Special Wastes is hereby amended to defer to the City of Glendale's Pre-Treatment Department. 
Section 903.1 Roof Extension is hereby amended as follows: 
This section allows the Authority Having Jurisdiction to determine the minimum height above a roof that a vent must terminate. The City of Glendale shall require that all vents terminate a minimum of 6 inches above the roof and not less than 12 inches from any vertical surface. 
Section 1003 Interceptors and Separators is hereby amended by deferring to the requirements of the City of Glendale Pre-Treatment Department. 
Chapter 13 Non-potable Water Systems is hereby amended by deleting this chapter in its entirety and authority is deferred to the Maricopa County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. O19-35, § 1, 3-26-2019) 
Sec. 9-21. - Amendments to the 2017 National Electrical Code. 
Article 90 - Introduction 
Section 90.1 (A) is hereby amended to read as follows: 
90.1 (a) Practical safeguarding. The purpose of this code is the practical safeguarding of persons and property from hazards arising from the use of electricity. Any and all electrical work for light, heat, power, or any other purposes shall be installed in conformity with the rules and regulations as set forth in this code and that document titled, National Electrical Code, 2017 edition , also known as NFPA 70 , and in conformity with the rules, policies, regulations and amendments as set forth by the building official. This Code is not intended as a design specification or an instruction manual for untrained persons. 
Section 90.2(A)(5) is added to read as follows: 
Special Inspection. The City of Glendale requires Special Electrical Inspections for the types of work specified below as amended by adding sections [90.2(a)(5)] and 90.2(a)(6). Special Electrical Inspections include, but are not limited to, testing or observation of the work assigned for conformance with the approved design drawings and specifications, and submission of appropriate inspection reports or certificates to the City of Glendale Electrical Inspector. 
The Special Electrical Inspector shall be a qualified person who demonstrates competence to the satisfaction of the Building Official for the type of work requiring Special Inspection. These individual(s) or firm(s) shall be responsible for performing the Special Inspection tasks and reports required by the City of Glendale. The Special Electrical Inspector(s) shall be an independent, third-party individual, firm or testing agency and shall not be the installing contractor or any other person responsible for the work. 
Electrical Special Inspection: 
1.  Ground-fault protection performance tests for equipment provided or required to have ground-fault protection. 
2.  Switchboard, panelboards, motor control center, and all other equipment rated 1,000 amps or more; or over 600 volts. (over-potential test, also known as a dielectric withstand test, and commonly referred to as a hi-pot test.) 
3.  Emergency and standby power systems including switchboards, panelboards, distribution boards, transfer equipment, power source, conductors, fire pumps, exhaust and ventilation fans. 
4.  Other special inspections as required by the building official. 
Section 90.2A(6) is added to read as follows: 
Electrical observation. Electrical observation by the 'Registrant of Record' shall be provided for the following installations: 
1.  Installation or alteration of that portion of a health care facility electrical system which fall within the scope of article 517, Part 3- "Essential Electrical System" of the 2017 National Electrical Code . 
2.  Installations or alterations of high voltage electrical systems, which exceed 600 volts. 
3.  Installations or alterations of electrical systems within locations classified as hazardous by the provisions of the 2017 National Electrical Code , or the currently adopted International Fire Code, except for gasoline dispensing installations and systems located within storage garages, repair garages or lubritoriums. 
The owner shall employ the Engineer responsible for the electrical design, or another Engineer designated by the Engineer responsible for the electrical design to perform visual observation of complex electrical equipment and systems for general conformance to the approved plans and specifications, including but not limited to, placement and interconnection of equipment. Electrical observation shall be performed at intermediate significant stages of the construction progression and when installation is complete and ready to be inspected by the Building Official. Certificates of Electrical Observation shall be completed and sealed by the Engineer of Record for all life safety items as one of the requirements prior to release of a temporary certificate of occupancy. All certificates of Electrical Observation shall be completed and sealed prior to the project's final approval and the electrical portion of the certificate of occupancy is completed. 
Section 90.4 is hereby amended by adding the following paragraph at the end of the section: 
Periodically, technical bulletins may be issued by the Building Official to clarify policy of certain sections found within this code. These technical bulletins shall not be considered as code amendments. 
Article 90 is hereby amended by adding Section 90.10 to read as follows: 
90.10 Wiring in public right-of-way. No person, firm, or corporation shall place any wire for conduction of electricity for any purpose across or within the boundaries of any public street, alley, park or sidewalk, unless such a person, firm, or corporation is operating under a franchise or a permit from the proper authorities to do so. 
Article 100 Definitions 
Article 100 is hereby amended by revising the definition of the following items to read as follows: 
Kitchens. Commercial and Institutional Kitchens and Bars. For the purposes of this section, a kitchen or bar is defined as any area where food or beverage is prepared, served or dispensed. 
Section 110.22(B) Engineered Series Combination Systems and all sections in this code referring to this section are deleted in their entirety. 
Article 210 - Branch Circuits 
Section 210.5 is hereby amended by adding a subsection (D) to read as follows: 
(D)  Color code. Where branch circuits requiring a neutral, are installed in raceways, the conductors of branch circuits connected to the same system shall conform to the following color code: 
VOLTS PHASE SYSTEM PHASE A PHASE B PHASE C NEUTRAL 120/208 3 WYE BLACK RED BLUE WHITE 277/480 3 WYE BROWN ORANGE YELLOW GRAY 120/240 3 DELTA BLACK ORANGE BLUE OR RED WHITE  
Section 210.8(B)2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
(2)  Kitchens: Commercial and Institutional Kitchens and bars. For the purposes of this section, a kitchen or bar is defined as any area where food or beverage is prepared, served or dispensed. 
Article 230 - Services 
Section 230.2 is revised by adding the following sentence and Exception to the end of the first paragraph: 
No electrical service on one property shall supply power to another separate and distinct property unless these properties are legally combined and under the same ownership. 
Exception: Dwellings shall be allowed to supply other accessory structures on the same property. 
Section 230.43 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 230.43 . Wiring methods for 600 volts, nominal, or less. Service-entrance conductors shall be installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of this code covering the type of wiring method used and shall be limited to the following methods: 
1.  Rigid metal conduit 
2.  Intermediate metal conduit 
3.  Wire ways 
4.  Bus ways 
5.  Auxiliary gutters 
6.  Rigid non-metallic conduit may be used underground 
7.  Schedule 80 rigid non- metallic conduit may extend above ground to the service equipment. 
(Informational note): Refer to the serving utility company's requirements for additional information on installing service-entrance conductors on or within buildings and underground laterals serving the premises. 
Section 230.70(A)(1) is hereby amended to read as follows: 
(A)  Location. The service disconnecting means shall be installed in accordance with 230.70(a)(1), (a)(2) and (a)(3). 
(1)  The service disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location either outside of a building or structure, or inside nearest the point of entrance of the service-entrance conductors. The service disconnecting means shall be installed adjacent to, and accessible from, the same working area as the utility meter. All service disconnecting means located inside a building shall be enclosed within a room or space separated from the rest of the building by not less than a one-hour fire-resistive occupancy separation. 
Exception: the ceiling of this service entrance room may be constructed as required for a one-hour wall assembly with protected opening. 
Section 240.86(A) and all sections in this code referring to this section are deleted in their entirety. 
Article 250 - Grounding 
Section 250.4(A)(6) is added to read as follows: 
250.4(a)(6) Protection. All copper bonding, grounding, and grounding electrode conductors shall be routed inside buildings unless impractical to do so if determined by the Authority having Jurisdiction. Where it is absolutely necessary to route external to the building, conductors shall be installed in minimum schedule 40 non-metallic rigid conduits or other approved means and secured per NEC requirements. If metallic conduits are used, both ends of the conduits shall be bonded as required in 250.64(e). 
Section 250.52(A)(3) is hereby amended by adding the following Exception: 
Exception: A concrete encased electrode shall not be permitted in post-tensioned or mat slabs unless the concrete encased electrode terminates at an electrode as specified in 250.52(a)(5) or 250.52(a)(7) and complies with 250.53. 
Article 300 Wiring Methods 
Section 300.4(D) Exception 1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Exception 1: Steel plates, sleeves, or the equivalent shall not be required to protect rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal conduit, or electrical metallic tubing. Rigid nonmetallic conduit (PVC conduit) is required to be protected . 
Subsection 334.12(A)(11) is added to read as follows: 
(11)  In all non-residential occupancies. Non-residential occupancies include all occupancies other than one-and two-family dwellings and within each individual apartment of a multi-family dwelling (R-2 apartments). 
Article 358 Electrical Metallic Tubing: Type EMT 
Section 358.10(B)1 & 2 is deleted and replaced with the following: 
358.10(B) Corrosive Environments. Ferrous or nonferrous EMT, elbows, coupling, and fittings shall not be in concrete that is in direct contact with the earth, or in areas subject to severe corrosive influences and judged unsuitable for the condition by the Authority having Jurisdiction. 
Section 358.12 is hereby amended by adding a new item number (3). 
(3)  Where in direct contact with the soil. 
Article 410 Luminaires, Lampholders, and Lamps 
Section 410.36(B) is hereby amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Intermediate or heavy-duty ceiling systems shall be used for the support of luminaires (lighting fixtures). All light fixtures shall be positively attached to the suspended ceiling system. The attachment device shall have a capacity of 100 percent of the lighting fixture weight acting in any direction. Luminaires (fixtures) weighing less than 56 pounds and track lighting shall have two 12 gauge wires attached at opposing corners of the luminaire(s) (fixture) or track lighting strip to the structure above. These wires may be slack, and shall contain, at a minimum, at least 3 tight twists within a 3-inch length of the wire at each end. Recessed luminaire housings, exit signage, all single bulb fixtures and emergency unit equipment that are installed within or on a suspended ceiling shall have a minimum of at least one 12-gauge wire attached to the structure above and this wire may be slack and shall contain, at a minimum, at least 3 tight twists of the wire within a 3-inch length at each end. Luminaires weighing more than 50 pounds shall comply with NEC 314.27 (a)(2). 
Article 725 - Class 1, Class 2, and Class 3 Remote-Control, Signaling, and Power-Limited Circuits 
Section 725.4 is added and shall read as follows: 
725.4 Bell and signal transformers. In residential occupancies, bell or signal transformers shall not be installed in attics, closets, or in any inaccessible concealed spaces. 
(Ord. No. O19-35, § 1, 3-26-2019) 
Sec. 9-22. - Amendments to the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code. 
Section C202 Residential Building is amended to allow the residential provisions of this energy code to apply to residential occupancies R-2, R-3 and R-4 of four or more stories in height. Also, as an option, these R-2, R-3 and R-4 occupancies may be constructed to comply with the commercial provisions of this energy code, 
Section R202 Residential Building is amended to allow the residential provisions of this energy code to apply to residential occupancies R-2, R-3 and R-4 of four or more stories in height. Also, as an option, these R-2, R-3 and R-4 occupancies may be constructed to comply with the commercial provisions of this energy code, 
Section R403.3.1 Insulation (Prescriptive) is amended by adding the following Exceptions: 
3.  Ducts or portions thereof located completely inside the building thermal envelope. 
4.  Supply ducts may be insulated to a minimum of R-6 when one or more of the following prescriptive conditions are met: 
e.  Minimum SEER rating of HVAC system is increased to 15. 
f.  Maximum U-factor is decreased to 0.35 for all fenestration products. 
g.  Wall cavity insulation minimum R-value is increased to R-19. 
h.  Attic radiant barrier is provided in accordance with ASTM C1313 and installed in accordance with ASTM C1743. 
Table R406.4 Maximum Energy Rating Index shall be revised as follows: 
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX 2 64  
Section C408.2.1 is amended by adding the following sentence: 
The provision of a commissioning plan shall be optional. 
(Ord. No. O19-35, § 1, 3-26-2019) 
Secs. 9-23-9-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER CONSERVATION PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 9-31. - Purpose. 
    This article establishes maximum rates of water flow or discharge for plumbing fixtures and devices in order to promote water conservation. 
(Ord. No. 1793, § 1, 14-12-93) 
Sec. 9-32. - Certification. 
    The plumbing fixtures and devices required to be installed pursuant to this article shall be certified by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and comply with all applicable American-National Standards Institute standards. 
(Ord. No. 1793, § 1, 14-12-93) 
Sec. 9-33. - Definitions. 
    In this article, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Commercial, industrial and public construction: Buildings used for commercial, industrial or public purposes, including restaurants, bars, nightclubs, public buildings, comfort stations, schools, gymnasia, factories, offices, athletic clubs, hotels and motels. 
    Director: The building safety director or his designee. 
    Person: An individual, public or private corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, society, estate or trust, any other private organization or enterprise, the United States, any state, territory or country or a governmental entity, political subdivision or municipal corporation organized under or subject to the constitution and laws of this state. 
    Plumbing fixture: A lavatory faucet, lavatory faucet replacement aerator, kitchen faucet, kitchen faucet replacement aerator, shower head, urinal, water closet, evaporative cooler or decorative fountain. "Plumbing fixture" does not include parts necessary for routine maintenance. 
    PSI: Pounds per square inch of water pressure. 
    Residential construction or residential dwelling: Buildings used for temporary or permanent human habitation, including single-family residences and accessory guest houses, multifamily dwellings, townhouses, condominiums, apartments, the sleeping quarters of hotels and motels, dormitories and group housing units. 
    Urinal: A fixture that consists of a water flushed bowl, and any associated flush valve, and that is used for the disposal of human urine. 
    Water closet: A fixture that consists of a water flushed bowl, and any associated flush valve, and that is used for the disposal of all wastes from the human body. 
(Ord. No. 1793, § 1, 14-12-93) 
Sec. 9-34. - Prohibited plumbing fixtures; residential construction. 
    Except as provided in Arizona Revised Statutes Sections 45-315 and 45-319, beginning January 1, 1994, no person may install any plumbing fixture for use in this city in any new residential construction or for replacing plumbing fixtures in existing residential construction, unless the fixtures meet the following water-saving performance standards: 
(1)  Lavatory faucets and replacement aerators shall be designed to deliver no more than an average of three (3) gallons of water per minute at a pressure of eighty (80) psi or shall be equipped with permanent flow control devices that allow delivery of no more than an average of three (3) gallons of water per minute at a pressure of eighty (80) psi. 
(2)  Kitchen faucets and replacement aerators shall be designated to deliver no more than an average of three (3) gallons of water per minute at a pressure of eighty (80) psi or shall be equipped with permanent flow control devices that allow delivery of no more than average of three (3) gallons of water per minute at a pressure of eighty (80) psi. 
(3)  Shower heads shall be designed to deliver no more than an average of three (3) gallons of water per minute at a pressure of eighty (80) psi. 
(4)  Water closets shall be designed to use no more than an average of one and six-tenths (1-6/10) gallons of water per flush. 
(5)  Urinals shall be designed to use no more than an average of one (1) gallon of water per flush. No urinals may be installed that use a timing device to flush periodically regardless of demand. 
(6)  Evaporative cooling systems and decorative fountains shall be equipped with water recycling or reuse systems. 
(Ord. No. 1793, § 1, 14-12-93) 
Sec. 9-35. - Prohibited plumbing fixtures; commercial, industrial and public construction. 
    Except as provided in Arizona Revised Statutes Sections 45-315 and 45-319, beginning January 1, 1994, no person may install any plumbing fixtures for use in this city in any new commercial, industrial or public construction or for replacing plumbing fixtures in existing commercial, industrial or public construction, unless the fixtures meet the following water-saving performance standards: 
(1)  Lavatory faucets shall be equipped with a mechanism that causes the faucet to close automatically after delivering no more than an average of one (1) quart of water. 
(2)  Shower heads shall be designed to deliver no more than an average of three (3) gallons of water per minute at a pressure of eighty (80) psi. 
(3)  Water closets shall be designed to use no more than an average of one and six-tenths (1-6/10) gallons of water per flush. 
(4)  Urinals shall be designed to use no more than an average of one (1) gallon of water per flush. No urinals may be installed that use a timing device to flush periodically regardless of demand. 
(5)  Evaporative cooling systems and decorative fountains shall be equipped with water recycling or reuse systems. 
(Ord. No. 1793, § 1, 14-12-93) 
Sec. 9-36. - Violation; civil penalties. 
(a)  A person who knowingly violates any provision of this article is subject to a civil penalty of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation. A person who has previously been found in violation of any provision of this article is subject to a civil penalty of not more than two hundred fifty-dollars ($250.00) for a second or any subsequent violation. The installation in this city of each plumbing fixture that fails to comply with the standards prescribed by this article constitutes a separate violation. Tampering with a fixture that was originally designed to comply with the standards prescribed by this article constitutes a violation. If a violation involves installing a fixture that does not comply with the standards prescribed by installing a fixture that does not comply with the standards prescribed by this article, the person who acquired the building or plumbing permit or the person who installed the fixture, or both, are subject to the penalties specified in this section. 
(b)  The city may bring an action to recover penalties under this section in superior court in the county in which the violation occurred, after a hearing conducted pursuant to Sec. 9-37. 
(c)  This section does not apply to the owner or occupant of a residential dwelling who violates this article in connection with the installation of a plumbing fixture in a residential dwelling occupied by the owner or occupant. 
(Ord. No. 1793, § 1, 14-12-93) 
Sec. 9-37. - Inspections. 
    The director or the director's authorized representative shall, during normal business hours, have access to unoccupied new residential construction for the purpose of making periodic inspections to determine compliance with this article. New residential construction shall only be inspected prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy or upon final electrical inspection. Inspections pursuant to this section shall be on reasonable notice to the owner or occupant of the premises to be inspected unless reasonable grounds exist to believe that such notice would frustrate the enforcement of this article. The director may, and if required by law shall, apply for and obtain warrants for entry and inspection to carry out the administration and enforcement purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1793, § 1, 14-12-93) 
Sec. 9-38. - Cease and desist order; hearing; injunctive relief. 
(a)  If the director has reason to believe that a person is violating or has violated this article, the director may give the person written notice by certified mail that the person may appear and show cause at a hearing to be held at least thirty (30) days from the date of mailing the notice why the person should not be ordered to cease and desist from the violation. The notice shall inform the person of the date, time and place of the hearing and the consequences of failure to appear. 
(b)  After a hearing pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, or after the expiration of the time to appear, the director shall issue a decision and order. The decision and order may take such form as the director determines to be reasonable and appropriate and may include a determination of violation, a cease and desist order, a recommendation of a civil penalty and an order directing that positive steps be taken to abate or ameliorate any harm or damage arising from the violation. The person affected may appeal the decision to superior court in the county in which the violation is alleged to have occurred. 
(c)  If the person continues the violation after the director or local official has issued a final decision and order pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the city may apply for a temporary restraining order or preliminary or permanent injunction from the superior court according to the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. A decision to seek injunctive relief does not preclude other forms of relief or enforcement against the violator. 
(Ord. No. 1793, § 1, 14-12-93) 
Chapter 10 - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Franchises, Art. XII, § 1. 
Editor's note- Ordinance 2053, § 1, 12-8-98, repealed and replaced Ch. 10, which was derived form Ord. No. 1151, 1-27-81. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Short Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the city's "Cable Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: 
(a)  Provide a procedure for the granting of nonexclusive licenses for providing cable service in the city; 
(b)  Regulate the construction, operation and dismantling of cable systems in the streets and public ways within the jurisdiction of the city, as they now or in the future may exist; 
(c)  Provide for the payment of certain license fees and other valuable considerations to the city which, among other purposes, may be used to pay for the use of the streets and public ways and to regulate the construction, operation and dismantling of cable systems within the city; and 
(d)  Provide remedies and liquidated damages for any violation of this chapter and the terms and conditions of licenses granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-3. - General definitions. 
    Words not defined in this chapter shall have the meanings given them by the Cable Act and by the F.C.C. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases, and their derivations, shall have the following meanings: 
    Affiliate: A corporation or entity which is effectively controlled by another corporation or entity, which effectively controls another corporation or entity or which is under common ownership or control with another corporation or entity. 
    Basic cable service: Any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
    Cable Act: The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and future amendments thereto. 
    Cable service: 
(a)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of: (1) video programming; or (2) other programming service; and 
(b)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
    Cable system or cable television system: A facility consisting or a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city, but such term does not include: (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1) or more television broadcast stations; (B) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; (C) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (D) an open video system that complies with 47 United States Code section 573; or (E) any facility of an electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. 
    City: The City of Glendale a municipal corporation of the State of Arizona, and all of the territory within its present and future corporate boundaries. 
    City council: The council of the City of Glendale. 
    City manager: The city manager of the City of Glendale or his or her designee. 
    Consumer price index: The latest available consumer price index for the Western Region (All Cities and All Urban Consumers), as prepared by the U. S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics or, if such index is discontinued, a comparable consumer price index selected by the city. 
    Customer or subscriber: Any person or entity that subscribes to a cable service provided by a licensee or anyone requesting a cable service provided by a licensee. 
    Educational channel or educational access channel: Any channel on a cable system designated for educational access use. 
    F.C.C.: The Federal Communications Commission, or a designated representative. 
    Government channel or government access channel: Any channel on a cable system designated for governmental access use. 
    Initial license: A license sought by or granted to a person or entity which does not hold a license. An initial license which is transferred shall remain an initial license, provided that the transfer shall be governed solely by section 10-26 and not by article II of this chapter. 
    Initial service area: 
(1)  For an initial license, all areas of the city which are specified in the license to receive cable service within a specific time frame, subject to a line-extension policy; and 
(2)  For a renewal license, all areas of the city which are already receiving cable service under the existing license and all other areas of the city specified in the renewal license to receive cable service, subject to a line-extension policy. 
    Leased channel or leased access channel: Any channel available for lease and programming by persons or entities unaffiliated with a licensee under section 612 of the Cable Act. 
    License or license agreement: The non-exclusive authorization granted by the city to construct and operate a cable system and to occupy or use the streets and public ways within the city. A license shall be evidenced by a granting ordinance or resolution and by a separate written agreement signed by the city manager. 
    License fees: The fees a licensee pays the city under section 10-32. 
    Licensee: A person or entity to which a license is granted for the construction and operation of a cable system. 
    Normal business hours: Those hours during which most similar businesses in the city are open to serve customers and in all cases must include some evening hours at least one night per week or some weekend hours. 
    Normal operating conditions: Those service conditions which are within the control of a licensee. Those conditions which are not within the control of a licensee include but are not limited to natural disasters, civil disturbances, utility company power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of a licensee include but are not limited to special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
    Other programming service: Information that a licensee makes available to all subscribers generally. 
    P.E.G., P.E.G. channels or P.E.G. requirements: Public, educational and government access channels or requirements. 
    Public access channel: Any channel on a cable system designated for public access use. 
    Renewal license: A license granted to a licensee already providing cable service in the city. A renewal license which is transferred shall remain a renewal license. 
    Resident: Any person residing in the city or otherwise defined by applicable law. 
    Service interruption: The loss of picture or sound on one (1) or more cable channels or the significant deterioration of signal or sound. 
    Streets and/or public ways: The surface of and the space above and below any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, alley, right-of-way easement or other public way of any type whatsoever, now or hereafter existing as such within the city. 
    Two-way communication: The transmission of telecommunication signals from subscriber locations or other points throughout a cable system back to the cable system's control center and the transmission of telecommunication signals from the control center to subscriber locations. A license may authorize switching at a level other than the control center. 
    V.D.S.L.: Very high speed digital subscriber lines. 
    Video programming: Programming provided by or generally considered comparable to programming provided by a television broadcast station. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-4. - Gross revenues defined. 
(a)  For purposes of this chapter, "gross revenues" means all cash, credits, property of any kind or other consideration received directly or indirectly by a licensee or any of its affiliates, or by any person or entity in which a licensee has a financial interest or which has a financial interest in a licensee, which are derived from a licensee's operation of its cable system to provide cable service within the city, including all revenue from: 
(1)  All charges for services provided to subscribers; 
(2)  All charges for the insertion by the licensee of commercial advertising into the cable system; 
(3)  All charges for the use of studio facilities of the cable system; 
(4)  All charges for the use of leased access channels or bandwidth; 
(5)  All revenues from the production for transmission over the cable system of video programming by the licensee, including programming produced by its mobile facilities; 
(6)  All charges for the installation, removal, connection and reinstatement of equipment necessary for a subscriber to receive cable service; 
(7)  All charges for the sale, exchange, use or cablecast of any programming by the licensee within the service area; and 
(8)  And any other income derived from the operation of the cable system to provide cable service, including forfeited deposits, rental of remote equipment and converters, late charges, interest charges, sale of program guides and all other receipts from subscribers. 
(b)  Gross revenues shall not include taxes collected by a licensee on behalf of any governmental authority (the license fee is not such a tax), any increase in the value of any stock, security or asset, or any dividends or other distributions made in respect of any stock or securities. 
(c)  Gross revenues shall not include cash, credit, property of any kind or other consideration received by a licensee's affiliates or any person or entity in which a licensee has a financial interest or which has a financial interest in a licensee for any sales of advertising on the cable system, services to provide programming on the cable system, production services or telecommunication services which is cable service when such services are provided by an affiliate or such other person or entity which has all the following characteristics: (1) the affiliate or such other person or entity is a separate legal entity, with separate employees, separate financial records (which may be part of consolidated financial reporting records) and a separate mission; (2) it makes payments to the licensee which meet market standards for the services and industries involved; and (3) it was established for valid business purposes and not for the purpose of circumventing payment of license fees on gross revenues. Nothing contained in this exclusion from gross revenues shall be interpreted to exclude from gross revenues such cash, credit, property of any kind or other consideration which would be considered a cable operator's gross revenues derived from the operation of the cable system under the Cable Act. 
(d)  When a licensee or an affiliate holds one (1) or more other cable licenses in Maricopa County and receives and allocates among various licensing authorities gross revenues from subsections (a)(2), (a)(4) or (a)(5), then such gross revenues shall be allocated pro rata to the city based on the ratio of the number of subscribers of the licensee in the city to the total number of subscribers of the licensee or an affiliate in all of such licensing authorities' jurisdictions. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Secs. 10-5-10-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPLICATION PROCESS 

Sec. 10-11. - Application for initial license. 
    Each application for an initial license to construct or operate a cable system in the city shall be filed with the office of the city clerk and shall be on forms prescribed or approved by the city manager. Each application shall include the following information: 
(a)  The applicant's name, address and telephone number; 
(b)  A detailed statement of the business entity organization of the applicant including the following: 
(1)  The names and addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
(2)  The names and addresses of all persons and entities having a ten percent (10%) or larger share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each such person or entity; 
(3)  The names and addresses of any affiliate of the applicant and a statement describing the nature of any such affiliate relationship; 
(4)  Such financial information as the city manager may deem necessary to evaluate the applicant's financial ability to construct and operate a cable system, including a financial plan (pro forma), if necessary; 
(5)  A statement identifying the five (5) largest cable systems operated by the applicant or its affiliates within the United States; and for each such cable system, the name, address and telephone number of the primary contact person at the licensing authority from whom the city can obtain additional information about the cable system. 
(c)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include the following: 
(1)  A map indicating all areas proposed to be served in the applicant's initial service area, a proposed time frame for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the initial service area and a line extension policy for any undeveloped areas of the city not included in the initial service area for which a specific service time frame cannot presently be determined; 
(2)  A statement describing the equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
(3)  A statement setting forth all agreements, whether formal or informal, written or oral, between the applicant and any third party which materially affect the applicant's legal, financial or technical qualifications to construct or operate a cable system. 
(d)  A copy of any agreement concerning the license area between the applicant and any provider of local facilities to be used as a part of the cable system, including the use of such provider's poles, lines or conduits; and 
(e)  Any other information which the city manager determines to be necessary to evaluate the applicant's legal, financial and technical qualifications to construct and operate a cable system. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-12. - Application fees for initial license. 
(a)  Each applicant seeking an initial license must furnish with its application a filing fee in the amount of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) by certified or cashier's check made payable to the city. No application for an initial license shall be considered without receipt of said check. All checks received shall be deposited to an account of the city and shall serve to partially recover costs incurred by the city in the processing and granting of initial licenses. 
(b)  All fees paid pursuant to this section are non-refundable, regardless of whether an initial license is granted or whether a person or entity for which an initial license has been approved by the city council actually constructs or operates a cable system. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-13. - Processing of applications. 
(a)  The granting or denial of a license is a legislative function invested exclusively in the discretion of the city council. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an application for an initial license, the city may, in its sole discretion, solicit competing proposals or process such application without issuing a request for proposals. 
(c)  All applications received by the city shall be verified as being true and accurate by the applicant and shall become the sole property of the city. 
(d)  Before submitting an application, each applicant shall: 
(1)  Thoroughly examine all applicable chapters of the city code; 
(2)  Be familiar with local conditions which may affect performance under a license, including community and institutional cable needs, relevant demographics, topographies, pole attachment policies of appropriate utility authorities, undergrounding requirements and subscriber desires; and 
(3)  Be familiar with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations affecting performance under a license. 
(e)  The city may make such investigations as it deems necessary to determine the ability of an applicant to perform under a license. An applicant shall furnish to the city all such information and data for this purpose as the city may request. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-14. - Approval or denial of applications; public hearing. 
(a)  In evaluating an application for a license, the city shall consider, among other things, the following factors: 
(1)  The extent to which an applicant has substantially complied with applicable law and the city's application process; 
(2)  An applicant's financial, technical and legal qualifications to provide cable service; 
(3)  Whether the application satisfies any minimum requirements established by the city and is otherwise reasonable to meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests; 
(4)  Whether an applicant will provide adequate P.E.G. channel capacity, facilities and support; 
(5)  The effect on the streets and public ways and private property that would be used by the cable system; 
(6)  The relative superiority or inferiority of competing applications; and 
(7)  Whether the issuance of a license will result in the competitively neutral treatment of all licensees in the city. 
(b)  Prior to issuing a license, the city shall provide for the holding of a public hearing pursuant to A.R.S. section 9-507, as amended. 
(c)  The city shall issue a license if it finds that it is in the public interest to do so, subject to an applicant's compliance with section 10-22. The city may reject any application that is incomplete or would result in the issuance of licenses which are not competitively neutral. This chapter is not intended and shall not be interpreted to grant any applicant or existing licensee standing to challenge the issuance of a license to another. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Secs. 10-15-10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL LICENSE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 10-21. - License requirements; conflicts. 
    A license may include such provisions as the city deems necessary to protect the public welfare, safety and health and to comply with the standards established by this chapter. In the event of any conflict between the terms and conditions of a license and the terms and conditions on which the city can grant a license under any applicable law, the applicable law shall control. Nothing in a license shall be deemed to waive the requirements of any codes, ordinances and regulations of the city concerning permits, fees to be paid or manner of construction. 
Sec. 10-22. - Issuance of license; conditions precedent. 
(a)  All licenses shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter, regardless of whether such provisions are specifically set forth or incorporated by reference into such licenses. 
(b)  No license shall become effective until the city manager has executed the license agreement and all other requirements of this section have been met. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance or resolution awarding any initial or renewal license, or within such extended period of time as the city council in its discretion may authorize, a licensee shall execute an appropriate license agreement in a form approved by the city attorney and shall provide the city with the security fund, construction bonds and insurance polices (or certificates of insurance) required by this chapter and the license. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-23. - Authorized use of streets and public ways. 
(a)  A license shall authorize a licensee to engage in the business of operating a cable system in the city, and for that purpose the licensee may construct, maintain, repair and reconstruct in the streets and public ways such wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, cabinets, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the cable system. 
(b)  For its cable system in the ordinary course of business, a licensee may lease or license for use facilities such as wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, cabinets, attachments and other property and equipment as it deems appropriate from a third party; provided that neither a licensee nor the third party shall thereby be relieved of any regulation or obligation as to its use of such facilities in the streets and public ways. Any such lease or license from a third party of its facilities in the streets and public ways which is not in the ordinary course of a licensee's cable business shall be subject to the approval of the city on such terms and conditions as the city may require. The city manager may establish rules and procedures to provide for the review and approval of all such requests for approval for leasing or licensing from third parties. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-24. - Term. 
    The term of a license shall be for a term specified in the license agreement not to exceed fifteen (15) years. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-25. - License non-exclusive. 
    All licenses granted are non-exclusive. The city reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional licenses as it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-26. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  A transfer is any transaction in which: (1) an ownership or other interest in a licensee or in its cable system is transferred from one (1) person or entity to another person or entity so that control of a licensee or its cable system is transferred; or (2) the rights or obligations held by a licensee under a license are transferred or assigned to another person or entity. Control for these purposes means working control, in whatever manner exercised. 
(b)  No transfer shall occur without prior approval of the city. The city shall act upon any request for approval of a transfer within one hundred twenty (120) days of such request if such request contains or is accompanied by such information as is required by F.C.C. regulations and by this chapter. 
(c)  An application for a transfer shall provide complete information on the proposed transaction, including details on the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the proposed transferee, and on the potential impact of the transfer on subscriber service. At a minimum, the information required under federal law shall be provided with respect to the proposed transfer. The city may require additional information related to its determination regarding the proposed transfer. 
(d)  In making a determination as to whether to grant, deny or grant subject to conditions an application for a transfer of a license, the city shall consider the following: the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the proposed transferee to operate the cable system; whether a licensee is in compliance with its license and this chapter and, if not, the proposed transferee's commitment and ability to cure such noncompliance; whether operation by the proposed transferee would affect competition in the delivery of cable service in the city, including whether the proposed transferee owns or controls any other cable system in the city; and whether operation by the proposed transferee would affect subscribers or the city's interest under this chapter, the license or other applicable law. 
(e)  No application for a transfer of a license shall be granted unless the proposed transferee agrees in writing that it will accept all terms of this chapter and the license, and that it will assume all obligations, liabilities and responsibility for all acts and omissions, known and unknown, of the previous licensee for all purposes, including renewal. 
(f)  Approval by the city of a transfer of a license does not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the city under this chapter or the license, whether arising before or after the date of the transfer. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any other subsection, pledges in trust or mortgages of the assets of a cable system to secure the construction or operation of the cable system may be made without the city's prior consent; except that no such arrangement may be made which would prevent a licensee or any successor from complying with a license, this chapter and any other applicable laws and regulations. 
(h)  A non-rebuttable presumption that transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or entity which did not previously hold such interest of more than fifty percent (50%) of the voting interest of a licensee or for an affiliate exercising management authority over a licensee. A change in a general partner, a managing partner or a managing corporation is a change of control. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-27. - Expiration; renewal. 
(a)  Upon expiration of the initial term of a license, the city shall have the right to: 
(1)  Renew or extend the license in accordance with the Cable Act, if the city or the licensee requests such renewal in a timely manner; or 
(2)  Deny license renewal subject to applicable provisions of federal law; or 
(3)  Purchase the cable system for fair market value as provided under the Cable Act; provided that no right to purchase the cable system shall apply with respect to facilities lawfully in use for the provision of non-cable services as to which no franchise or license from the city is required or as to which any franchise or license that is required from the city has been obtained. 
(b)  If a licensee fails to seek renewal in a timely manner under the Cable Act, then the licensee shall comply with the provisions of the application process specified in article II if the licensee wants to continue operating a cable system within the city. 
(c)  Any lawful action to revoke a license for cause shall not be negated by the subsequent initiation or pendency of renewal proceedings or the filing of a new application or proposal by a licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-28. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-29. - Continuity of service mandatory. 
(a)  It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving cable service during the term of a license insofar as their financial and other obligations to a licensee are honored. 
(b)  If a license is terminated, the licensee shall cooperate with the city to ensure continuity of cable service to all subscribers for a period of at least thirty (30) days. The licensee shall be entitled to all revenues for any such period during which it operates the cable system. 
(c)  If a licensee fails to operate the cable system for five (5) consecutive days without prior approval of the city or without just cause, the city may, at its option, operate the cable system or designate an operator until such time as the licensee restores cable service to the standards required by its license or a new permanent operator is selected. If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for a licensee, the licensee shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs and damages that are the result of the licensee's failure to perform. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-30. - License area. 
    Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, each license shall be for the territorial limits of the city, including all areas annexed by the city during the term of a license. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-31. - Indemnification. 
(a)  The licensee shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city (including its officers, agents and employees) from all suits (including attorney's fees and costs of litigation), actions, loss, damage, expense, costs or claims of any character or any nature, attributable to bodily injury, sickness, disease, death or injury to or destruction of tangible personal property, including loss of use resulting therefrom, caused by, arising out of or alleged to arise out of any negligent act, omission or work done by the licensee in fulfillment of the terms of its license or on account of any negligent act, omission, claim or amount giving rise to a recovery under worker's compensation law, or arising out of the failure of the licensee to conform to applicable and appropriate statutes, ordinances, regulations, laws, court decrees or professional standards. It is the intent of this chapter that the city shall be indemnified, defended and held harmless by a licensee even in those instances where it is alleged that the city was negligent, grossly negligent or at fault in reviewing, inspecting, accepting or approving the plans, specifications, work product or work provided, or performed, by the licensee. In all situations where a licensee is obligated to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, the licensee shall be responsible for primary loss investigation, defense and judgment costs. 
(b)  The city shall cooperate with a licensee and reserves the right to participate in the defense of any claim or litigation to which the licensee's indemnification obligations apply. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impose any liabilities on the city not imposed by other law or to waive any immunities the city may have under federal or state law. 
(d)  A licensee shall make no settlement in any matter identified in this section without the city's written consent, which the city shall not unreasonably withhold. Failure to inform the city of settlement shall constitute a breach of a license, and the city may seek any redress available to it against a licensee as set forth in this chapter or under any other federal, state or local laws. 
(e)  This section shall be construed to provide for the indemnification of the city and those persons specified in subsection (a) by a licensee to the greatest extent permitted by law. All rights of the city pursuant to indemnification, insurance, the security fund or the construction bonds required by this chapter are in addition to all other rights the city may have under this chapter or any other law, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-32. - License fees. 
(a)  Subject to any offsets and credits that may appear in a license, licensee shall pay to the city a license fee no less than five percent (5%) of the licensee's gross revenues. The payment of the license fee by a licensee shall be made quarterly by delivery of the same to the city treasurer or the treasurer's designee no later than thirty (30) days after the end of each calendar quarter. If such payment is not made in a timely manner, a licensee shall pay interest on the unpaid license fees at a rate of eighteen percent (18%) per annum commencing on the date payment should have been made and continuing until payment in full is received by the city. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to inspect a licensee's income records and the right to audit and recompute any amounts determined to be due under this chapter. Any additional amount due to the city as a result of an audit shall be paid with applicable interest within thirty (30) days following written notice to a licensee of the amount due. Said notice shall include a copy of the audit report. If the audit result shows that a licensee has underpaid license fees by more than three percent (3%) of amount due for the period audited, then the licensee shall, within thirty (30) days of a request to do so by the city, reimburse the city for the full cost of the audit. If a licensee protests an audited license fee assessment, then the amount of such assessment shall not be due until a final determination of the amount due as provided in section 10-93. Upon resolution as provided in section 10-93, a licensee shall pay interest on the final amount determined to be due at the rate of eighteen percent (18%) per annum, commencing from the date payment was originally due and continuing until payment is made. If a licensee pays an audited license fee assessment under protest and such assessment is determined to have been overpaid upon exhaustion of all appeals, then the city shall refund such overpayment plus interest at the rate of eighteen percent (18%) per annum from the date of such payment to the date of refund. 
(c)  Each license fee payment shall be accompanied by a report, in a form approved by the city, showing the basis for the computation. 
(d)  No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim the city may have for additional sums due under the provisions of a license. 
(e)  If a license is terminated prior to the term specified in the license agreement, the licensee shall immediately submit to the city a detailed financial statement showing the licensee's gross revenues for the time elapsed since the last period for which the licensee has paid the required license fee, and the licensee shall pay to the city no later than thirty (30) days following the termination, all remaining license fees due under the license. 
(f)  For the purpose of proper administration of this chapter and to prevent evasion of license fees imposed by this chapter, it shall be presumed that all gross revenues are subject to the license fee until the contrary is established by a licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-33. - Abandonment; right to require removal of property. 
(a)  If the use of a substantial part of a cable system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, or if such cable system has been installed in any street or public way without complying with the requirements of a license or this chapter, or if a license has been terminated or has expired without renewal, the licensee shall promptly remove from the streets and public ways all such parts of the cable system other than any underground cable or property that the city permits to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the licensee shall promptly restore the streets and public ways from which the cable system has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the city. 
(b)  Any property of a licensee remaining in the streets and public ways without the consent of the city one hundred eighty (180) days after the termination or expiration of a license shall, at the option of the city, be considered permanently abandoned. 
(c)  Any property of a licensee permitted to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such a manner as the city shall prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of a licensee in place, the property shall become property of the city, and the licensee shall submit to the city an instrument in writing, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, indicating the licensee's loss of any further ownership or possessory rights to such property. 
(d)  The provisions of subsections (a)-(c) shall not apply to facilities lawfully in use for the provision of non-cable services as to which no franchise or license is required or as to which any franchise or license that is required from the city has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-34. - Costs of hearings and publication. 
    A licensee shall pay the cost of all public hearings concerning a license and of the publication of a license to the extent such hearings and publication are required by law. A licensee shall pay all such costs within thirty (30) days after the city's billing for the same. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-35. - Inspection of records. 
    A licensee shall maintain its pertinent licensee records at the licensee's principal office in the Phoenix metropolitan area. The city shall have the right to inspect at any time during normal business hours all books, records, maps, plans, income records, service complaint logs, performance test results and other like materials of a licensee which relate to the licensee's obligations under its license. All records and any additional information which may be required by the city shall be furnished by a licensee to the city upon request and at the licensee's own cost. Access to such records shall not be denied by a licensee on the basis that such records contain proprietary information. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-36. - Communications with regulatory agencies. 
    Copies of all petitions, applications, communications and reports submitted by a licensee to the F.C.C., the Securities and Exchange Commission and any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction with respect to any matters affecting the cable system or a licensee's cable operations in the city shall be available to the city upon request. Copies of responses from such regulatory agencies to a licensee shall also be available to the city upon request. A licensee shall, without request, promptly provide all documents required by law to be submitted to the city. A licensee shall provide city with copies of any petition, application, communications or other documents related to any filing by the licensee of bankruptcy, receivership or trusteeship. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-37. - Reports. 
(a)  No later than April 30 of each year or one hundred twenty (120) days after the close of a licensee's fiscal year, a licensee shall provide written reports to the city which shall include: 
(1)  Full financial statements for the previous year, including an income statement, balance sheet, cash flow statement and appropriate explanatory footnotes, for the licensee or any parent company. Financial statements for the licensee or any parent company shall be audited by an independent certified public accountant, and all other statements shall be certified by an officer of the licensee to be an accurate reflection of the licensee's books and records. 
(2)  A report, compiled as to subsections b. and d. of this section 10-37(a)(2) with due regard for public disclosure of confidential information to competitors and certified as being correct by an officer of the licensee, that includes the following information specific to the city: 
a.  Gross revenues from each source attributable to the cable operations of the licensee; 
b.  A summary of the previous year's major activities applicable to its video operations, including the total number of subscribers for services authorized by its license, the number of homes passed, miles of cable plant, a description of other significant system facilities or equipment added or deleted, a description of any services added or dropped and any significant technological changes occurring in the cable system; 
c.  A summary of the number and nature of complaints received and handled; and 
d.  Projected plans for the future. 
(b)  A licensee shall provide the city upon its request with a written report of any performance tests performed for its cable system no later than thirty (30) days after the completion of such tests. The city may establish a performance testing process to supplement the F.C.C. standards. 
(c)  A licensee shall prepare and furnish to the city, at the times and in the form prescribed, such additional reports with respect to its cable operations and system as the city may reasonably request in order to review the performance of the licensee in connection with its license. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-38. - Customer service standards. 
(a)  A licensee shall at all times satisfy federal customer service standards and the customer service standards set forth in this chapter and in the license agreement. In the event of a conflict among standards, the stricter standard shall prevail. 
(b)  A licensee shall maintain a publicly listed, toll-free or collect telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, and be operated so as to receive subscriber complaints, requests for repairs, service calls or billing adjustments. 
(c)  A licensee shall maintain a written log listing all subscriber complaints when the subscriber complains that he or she did not receive the service requested consistent with the requirements of a license. The log shall include the name, address and telephone number, if given, of the subscriber making the complaint and the disposition of the complaint. The record shall be maintained for at least three (3) years. Upon request, a licensee shall report to the city specific complaint categories that the licensee tracks as a reasonable measure of customer service response standards. 
(d)  A licensee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as practicable, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the cable system. A written log shall be maintained for all major service interruptions, including trunk and feeder line outages, and the record shall be kept for a period of three (3) years. 
(e)  A licensee shall maintain a repair force of technicians capable of responding to subscriber complaints or requests for service after receipt of such complaints or requests. 
(f)  A licensee shall ensure that all subscribers, programmers and members of the general public have recourse to a satisfactory hearing of any complaints. A licensee shall provide each subscriber with a statement that delineates the process for submitting a complaint and that specifies: 
(1)  The telephone number and the address of the licensee that the subscriber can utilize to make a complaint; and 
(2)  The phone number of the official in the city designated by the city manager to review complaints. 
(g)  Upon request by the city, a licensee shall submit a detailed description of any complaint, whether written or oral, and the action taken by the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-39. - Local office. 
    A licensee shall at all times maintain at least one (1) full service office in the city which is staffed during normal business hours with employee(s) trained to handle all normal requests and complaints by cable customers, including the return of cable equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-40. - Safety. 
    A licensee shall at all times employ the standard of care attendant to the risks involved and shall use and install commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public. All lines, equipment and connections over, under, across and upon the streets and public ways and private property in the city, wherever located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe and suitable condition and in good order and repair. Special attention shall be paid to placing guy wires and anchors before the placement of cable. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-41. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  A licensee shall file with the city within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance or resolution awarding an initial or renewal license, and shall maintain on file throughout the term of its license for the mutual benefit of the city and the licensee, commercial general liability insurance policies, written on an occurrence basis, against claims for bodily injury, death or property damage occurring on or about the licensee's cable system and appurtenances, which insurance shall cover such claims as may be occasioned by any act, omission or fault of the licensee or its officers, agents, representatives or employees during all times that the licensee will be constructing or operating the cable system authorized by its license. The minimum types of coverage and limits of such liability coverage shall not be less than: 
Type of 
Insurance Minimum Limits 
of Liability Commercial General Liability $1,000,000.00 combined single limit premises/operations products/completed operations contractual independent contractors (OCP) personal injury with exclusion "C" deleted Automobile Liability $1,000,000.00 combined single limit owned hired non-owned Catastrophic Umbrella Insurance $4,000,000.00 combined single limit in excess of the $1,000,000.00 underlying coverage  
(b)  The city shall have no responsibility or liability for such insurance coverage. An enumeration of specific insurance coverage and amounts shall not limit the indemnity covenants contained in a license. A licensee shall at all times furnish the city with appropriate certificates of insurance. The certificates shall be issued by an insurance company licensed by the Arizona Department of Insurance or named by the Department on a list of authorized insurers maintained by the Department and in a form acceptable to the city's risk manager. A licensee shall provide a renewal certificate of the required insurance coverage to the city no less than ten (10) days prior to the expiration date. 
(c)  The city and its elected or appointed boards, commissions, officers, agents and employees shall be named as an additional insured on a licensee's policies, except for worker's compensation and employer's liability coverage, and this shall be indicated on the certificates of insurance issued to the city. A licensee's coverage shall be primary for all losses related to its license. 
(d)  A licensee's policy shall specifically provide full coverage for explosion, collapse and underground incidents. 
(e)  All liability insurance policies shall carry a thirty (30) day notice of cancellation or modification endorsement. 
(f)  All deductible amounts under liability insurance coverage shall be approved by the city. 
(g)  The city may, during the term of a license, no more frequently than every three (3) years, modify the amounts of liability insurance required by this section, based on increases in the Consumer Price Index, so as to ensure full protection of the city and the public. A licensee shall have three (3) months from the date of notification from the city to comply with any increase. 
(h)  The city may allow a licensee to self-insure all or part of the above-described insurance coverages if such licensee is of sufficient financial standing to reasonably provide such insurance. A licensee that desires to self-insure shall file with the city information that will enable the city to evaluate the request. Authorization to self-insure shall be reviewed annually on the anniversary of the license. Any licensee which wishes to continue self insurance shall notify the city and provide the city with information to enable the city to evaluate the request at least sixty (60) days before the anniversary date of its license. A licensee which does not intend to continue self insurance shall file with the city certificates of insurance conforming with subsection (b) for all of the above-described policy coverages at least thirty (30) days prior to the anniversary date of its license. 
(i)  If a licensee fails to meet the insurance requirements of this section, the city, at its option, may acquire necessary insurance for the licensee and charge the licensee the cost of that insurance, or suspend part or all of the licensee's rights under the license. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-42. - Construction bonds. 
(a)  A licensee which is required to or elects to construct, upgrade or reconstruct its cable system pursuant to its license shall, within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance or resolution awarding the license, file with the city payment and performance bonds in the amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), conditioned on the licensee's fully performing all of its construction obligations in the streets and public ways pursuant to the license. Upon completion of phases of the construction, upgrade or reconstruction of the system, the amount of the bond shall be reduced as and to the amount(s) specified in the license. The payment bond shall be solely for the protection of claimants supplying labor or materials for the required construction work, and the performance bond shall be solely for the protection of the city. Each bond shall include a provision allowing the prevailing party in a suit on such bond to recover as part of its judgment such attorney's fees as may be fixed by the court. Each bond shall be executed by a surety company licensed by the Arizona Department of Insurance and in a form acceptable to the city's risk manager. 
(b)  The city may increase or decrease the amount of the required bonds at any time to levels commensurate with ongoing construction in the streets and public ways. 
(c)  Claims against such bond shall be recoverable by the city in case of noncompliance by the licensee or its agents, assignees, vendees, lessees or successors in interest. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-43. - Security fund. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance or resolution awarding an initial or renewal license, a licensee shall deposit into an interest-bearing account, established by the city, and the licensee shall maintain on deposit through the term of its license, the sum of not less than forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00), as security for the faithful performance by the licensee of all provisions of its license, and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any city agency having jurisdiction over the licensee's acts or defaults under this chapter or the license, and the payment by the licensee of any claims, liens, liquidated damages and taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction and operation of the cable system. The city shall have the full power of withdrawal of funds from the account, except that all interest accrued shall be payable to the licensee on demand. No withdrawals from the security fund account other than withdrawals of interest shall be made by the licensee without the prior written approval of the city manager. 
(b)  The city may, during the term of a license, no more frequently than every three (3) years, modify the amount of the security fund required by this section, based on increases in the consumer price index, so as to maintain the initial protection provided by this section. A licensee shall have thirty (30) days from the date of notification from the city to comply with any increase. 
(c)  Prior to making any withdrawal from the security fund, the city shall give a licensee written notice of the city's intent to make such withdrawal. If a licensee fails to pay any fees or amounts due and unpaid under its license within thirty (30) days of receiving the city's notice, and if the licensee does not request an administrative hearing pursuant to section 10-92 within such thirty (30) day period, the city may immediately withdraw the appropriate amount from the security fund. Upon such withdrawal, the city shall notify the licensee of the amount and date thereof. 
(d)  Within thirty (30) days after notice to a licensee that any amount has been withdrawn by the city from the security fund pursuant to this section, the licensee shall deposit a sum of money sufficient to restore such security fund to the original amount. 
(e)  The security fund shall become the property of the city if a license is terminated for cause. A licensee shall be entitled to the return of such security fund as remains on deposit within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the term of a license, if there is then no outstanding default on the part of the licensee. 
(f)  Any funds that the city improperly withdraws shall be returned to a licensee, with interest at the rate of eighteen percent (18%) per annum from the date of withdrawal, within thirty (30) days of a final determination that the withdrawal was improper 
(g)  The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are in addition to, not in lieu of, any other rights of the city specified in this chapter or a license or authorized by law. 
(h)  In lieu of providing a security fund, a licensee may provide a letter or credit in a form approved by the finance director. All provisions set forth in subsections (a) through (g) shall apply to such letter of credit. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-44. - Lock-out devices. 
    A licensee shall provide subscriber controlled lock-out devices for both audio and visual signals, or such equivalent devices as may be developed and approved by the city, at no cost to subscribers upon their request for such devices. A licensee shall provide those devices which provide the greatest degree or parental discretion and control and which are commercially practicable. A licensee shall notify all subscribers in writing at least annually of the availability of the lock-out devices. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Secs. 10-45-10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10-51. - Standards for construction. 
    A cable system shall be constructed in accordance with F.C.C. requirements and the provisions of this chapter and a license. If F.C.C. requirements are terminated and this chapter or a license provide no corresponding requirements, then the F.C.C. regulations shall remain in effect on licensees by order of this chapter until the city approves the terminations or adopts substitute requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-52. - Interconnection. 
    For the purpose of providing services specified in licenses on a city-wide basis, each licensee shall provide, at its own cost, the connection from broadcasting origination points to such licensee's cable system. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-53. - Right of inspection of construction. 
    The city shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of a license and to make such tests as it may find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter, the license and other applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-54. - Construction notification. 
    A license may establish reasonable requirements consistently applied to other users of the streets and public ways for notification of nearby residents prior to cable system construction. The city manager may from time to time establish and apply to licensees additional reasonable and uniform requirements for notification applicable to all users of the streets and public ways. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-55. - System construction schedule and reports. 
(a)  For any construction or reconstruction required by a license, the license agreement shall establish minimum construction deadlines which shall be met. The construction schedule shall designate the amount of construction required during the construction period in increments of no more than six (6) months. 
(b)  After construction begins, a licensee shall report to the city on construction progress on a monthly basis, showing specifically whether the construction schedule is being met and the reasons for any delay. The written report shall state, if applicable, the number of feet of strand in place, the number of feet of cable installed overhead and underground, the number of amplifiers installed, the number of V.D.S.L. or other cabinets installed, the number of dwelling units which can be served directly by the energized cable, the number of dwelling units which have been offered service, the number of video subscribers, maps showing areas with cable installed and areas with cable energized, and a map showing areas to be installed or energized within the next month. The report for each month shall be submitted to the city by the last day of the following month. The city may determine the format to be used by a licensee in completing this report. The city manager may, in his or her discretion, change the reporting period to a quarterly basis and/or the information to be included in the written report. 
(c)  A licensee shall schedule its construction activities to coordinate with the city's construction activities on the streets and public ways as they are made known to the licensee, so as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-56. - Undergrounding of cable. 
    All cables which are required to undergo underground conversion pursuant to chapter 32.5 shall be placed in conduit. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-57. - Joint trench policy. 
(a)  The city may issue reasonable policy guidelines consistent with the Cable Act to all licensees to establish procedures for determining how to control issuance of engineering permits to multiple users of the streets and public ways for their facilities. Each licensee shall cooperate with the city in establishing such policy and shall comply with the procedures established by the city to coordinate the issuance of multiple engineering permits in particular segments of the streets and public ways. 
(b)  To maximize public and employee safety, to minimize visual clutter of aerial plant and to minimize the amount of trenching and excavation in streets and public ways for underground plant, a licensee shall make every commercially reasonable effort to collectively bundle its facilities which are compatible with the facilities of other users of the streets and public ways, subject to engineering requirements of the owners of utility poles and other facilities used by the licensee. 
(c)  The installation of a cable system shall be accomplished in new subdivisions at the same time and in the same trench as other cable, communications, electric and other permanent services to structures. Developers of new residential buildings or mobile homes within a new or undeveloped subdivision, new residential units within new multiple occupancy residential developments, and new commercial and industrial buildings and structures shall treat cable television facilities as they treat other communication facilities, utilities and other underground facilities, with regard to availability and cost of trenching for undergrounding. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-58. - Construction standards and codes. 
(a)  Construction, installation and maintenance of a cable system shall be performed in an orderly and professional manner and in such manner that it will not interfere with any installations of the city or any public utility. All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with and in a manner similar to the installation of electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. 
(b)  Each cable system shall include equipment capable of providing standby power as specified in the license, constructed so as to automatically revert to the standby mode when the electrical utility power returns. The system shall incorporate safeguards necessary to prevent injury to cable service technicians resulting from a licensee's standby power sources. 
(c)  A licensee shall at all times comply with all applicable electrical, building and other codes adopted by the city relating to construction, including all codes specified in chapters 9, 18.5, 19, 31, 32.5 and 33 of the City Code, and all city subdivision regulations, as such codes and regulations may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-59. - Preconstruction tests. 
    Before beginning the actual installation, a licensee shall test its system components to assure that the components individually and in aggregate provide high signal quality and are dependable. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-60. - Technical and performance standards. 
(a)  A licensee shall comply with the F.C.C. Technical Standards for Class 1 channels (part 76, subpart K of the F.C.C. Rules and Regulations). A license may set forth additional objectives, standards and requirements for operating a cable system as the city deems necessary, consistent with federal law. A licensee shall demonstrate to the city whether the cable system meets F.C.C. technical standards for each channel. 
(b)  Upon adoption by the F.C.C. of applicable standards for digital transmission of cable service over the cable system, a licensee shall comply with all applicable standards. 
(c)  A licensee shall construct and operate its system in such manner that it operates at all times consistent with all laws and regulations, all construction standards of the city, and the license, which establish minimum technical standards relating to the cable system's technical operations and signal quality. A licensee shall provide the city, upon request, the opportunity to observe the conduct of and a written report of the results of the licensee's annual proof of performance tests. The city may at any time conduct independent measurements of a cable system by the use of city personnel or use of contract services. If inaccurate proof of performance reports are shown to have been the result of a licensee's fault, the licensee shall pay the costs reasonably incurred by the city in obtaining such independent verification of technical compliance with all standards. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-61. - Use of cable system during an emergency. 
    Consistent with the requirements of the F.C.C.: 
(a)  A licensee shall design and construct its cable system to provide for a restricted audio override of the audio portion of all channels during emergencies. Emergency or standby power sources shall be installed at the main electronic control center and appropriate locations so as to minimize loss of signal. Key cable routings shall also be equipped with a standby power source. In case of any declared emergency or disaster, a licensee shall, upon request of the mayor or city manager, make its facilities available immediately to the city for emergency use during the emergency or disaster period. A "declared emergency or disaster" means such event that has been proclaimed by the mayor, the governor or other competent authority. 
(b)  If a licensee's cable system passes any emergency command centers of state and local government within the city, the licensee shall make the cable system available to such centers so that emergency audio and visual communications to the public are possible from those centers. 
(c)  During declared emergencies or disasters, a licensee shall make its local origination and other necessary equipment, if any, available at the emergency command centers to facilitate television communications from those centers. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-62. - Damage to cable system during an emergency. 
    Subject to this code and Arizona statutes, the city shall have the right, because of a public emergency, to sever, disrupt, dig up or otherwise destroy facilities of a cable system, without any prior notice to a licensee, if such action is reasonably deemed necessary by the city manager, fire chief, police chief, transportation director, city engineer, public works director or utilities director. A public emergency shall be any condition which, in the reasonable opinion of any of the officials named, poses an immediate threat to the lives or property of the residents of the city, caused by any natural or man-made disaster, including storms, floods, fire, accidents, explosions, major water main breaks and hazardous material spills. As between the city and a licensee, the licensee shall be responsible for repair of its facilities damaged pursuant to any such action taken by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-63. - Restoration of streets. 
(a)  Whenever a licensee disturbs the surface or subsurface of any street or public way, adjoining public property or the public improvements located thereon or thereunder, the licensee shall promptly, at its own expense, restore, repair or replace the same to the satisfaction of the city. 
(b)  If such restoration, repair or replacement of the surface, subsurface or any structure thereon or thereunder is not completed in a reasonable time or if such restoration, repair or replacement does not meet the city's satisfaction, the city may perform the necessary restoration, repair or replacement, either through use of its own forces or through a hired contractor, and the cost thereof, including the cost or inspection and supervision, shall be paid by the licensee within thirty (30) days after receipt of the city's invoice therefor. 
(c)  All excavations made by a licensee in the streets and public ways shall be properly safeguarded for the prevention of accidents. The work hereby required shall be done in strict compliance with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the city as are now or hereafter provided. 
(d)  Where consistent with the Cable Act and to the extent required by any pavement cut surcharge ordinance or resolution, a licensee shall reimburse the city for all costs arising from the reduction in the service life of a street or public way resulting from the licensee's pavement cuts. A licensee shall pay such costs no later than thirty (30) days after the city issues its invoice for the same. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-64. - Construction permits. 
(a)  A licensee shall obtain all necessary construction permits prior to constructing, removing, abandoning, relocating or reconstructing any portion of its cable system, except for repairs of an emergency nature. A licensee, as a part of submitting construction plans to obtain a permit, shall provide the city with a description of the cable service to be provided by the licensee using that portion of its cable system in sufficient detail for the city to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  In the case of emergency repairs, a licensee may obtain oral approval for the repair from the appropriate city personnel. In such cases, a licensee shall later file plans and obtain a permit as soon as possible. Whenever the facilities or related construction activity of a licensee creates a serious hazard to public safety or welfare, the licensee shall take all necessary actions to immediately abate the hazard. If a licensee cannot contact the city immediately, the licensee shall proceed to abate the hazard immediately and shall notify the city, file plans, obtain a permit and make any required changes as soon as possible. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-65. - Mapping; agreements with utilities. 
(a)  A licensee shall keep accurate installation records of the design and location of all of its underground and above ground cable facilities in the streets and public ways in an electronic mapping format compatible with the current city electronic mapping format. Upon completion of any new or relocation construction of cable facilities in the streets and public ways for which a new construction permit is required, a licensee shall promptly provide to the city engineer accurate "as-built" maps and installation records for such construction in a compatible electronic mapping format. 
(b)  Upon request, a licensee shall, on an annual basis, provide the city with accurate "as-built" maps and installation records for the entire city in an electronic mapping format and in a form approved by the city engineer showing the location of underground and above ground facilities. 
(c)  Upon request, a licensee shall make available for inspection, at its offices, complete design maps of the cable system and all agreements between the licensee and any utility providing for the use of the utility's facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-66. - Design conflicts. 
(a)  A cable system shall be so located or relocated as to interfere as little as possible with traffic or other authorized uses of streets and public ways. Those phases of construction relating to traffic control, backfilling, compaction, paving and the location or relocation of the cable system shall be subject to regulation by the city. 
(b)  The city shall make reasonable efforts to design projects pursuant to this section so as to avoid relocation expense to a licensee. If the city discovers a potential conflict with proposed construction during the design process for public improvements, a licensee shall either: (1) at its own cost, locate and, if necessary, expose its facilities in conflict; or (2) use a pothole service under contract with the city to locate or expose its facilities, in which case the licensee shall reimburse the city for the cost of such services. Reimbursements for such pothole services are separate from and in addition to any license fees due under section 10-32. A licensee shall furnish the location information in a timely manner, but in no case later than 30 days after the city's request for the same. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-67. - Prior rights. 
(a)  The city reserves the prior and superior right to construct, erect, install, use, operate, repair, replace, remove, relocate, regrade, widen, realign or maintain any streets and public ways or any aerial, surface or subsurface improvement, including water mains, traffic control conduits, cable and devices, sanitary or storm sewers, subways, tunnels, bridges, viaducts or any other public construction within the streets and public ways. 
(b)  When the city uses its prior and superior right to the streets and public ways, a licensee shall move its property located in the streets and public ways, at its own cost, to such a location as the city directs. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the public purpose project is paid for totally or in part by non-public funds (including non-public fund reimbursement or repayment of public funds), then a licensee's costs of moving its property shall be borne by the source of the non-public funds in the same ratio as the non-public funds bear to the total project costs. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-68. - Construction conflicts. 
    If the city determines during the course of a project that a licensee's facilities are in conflict with the city's use of the streets and public ways, the following shall apply: 
(a)  Prior to city notice to proceed to the city's contractor, the licensee shall remove or relocate the conflicting facility within a reasonable time not to exceed three (3) months, unless otherwise agreed by the city. The relocation period shall begin running upon receipt by the licensee of written notice from the city. 
(b)  Subsequent to city notice to proceed to the city's contractor, the city and the licensee shall immediately begin the coordination necessary to remove or relocate the facility. Actual construction of such removal or relocation is to begin no later than seventy-two (72) hours, if practicable, after written notification of the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-69. - Relocation costs in general. 
    Subject to section 10-70, the city shall not bear any cost of relocation of existing facilities, regardless of the function served, where any facilities occupying the streets and public ways must be relocated and the conflict between a licensee's potential facilities and existing facilities can only be resolved expeditiously, as determined by the city, by the movement of the existing facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-70. - Private utility easements; relocation costs. 
    If a licensee's cable system is located in a private easement or right-of-way prior to the dedication of such private property to the city as a street or public way, and if the city requires the licensee to relocate its facilities after such dedication of the street or public way, the city shall bear the entire cost of such relocation. The licensee's prior rights in such circumstances shall not be affected by any subsequent relocation required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-71. - Construction delays; damages. 
(a)  If the city becomes aware of a potential construction delay claim situation involving the construction, relocation or operation of a licensee's cable system in the streets or public ways, the city shall promptly notify the licensee of such potential delay. 
(b)  If a licensee's construction, relocation or operation of a cable system so delays construction of a public project causing the city to be liable for delay damages, the licensee shall reimburse the city for those damages attributable to the delay created by the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-72. - Non-interference requirements. 
(a)  The construction and operation of a licensee's cable system within the streets and public ways shall be in such a manner as not to interfere with the city's placement, construction, use and maintenance of its streets and public ways, street lighting, water pipes, drains, sewers, traffic signal systems or other city systems that have been, or may be, installed, maintained, used or authorized by the city. 
(b)  A licensee shall not construct or operate any of its cable system in such a manner as to damage or interfere with any existing facilities of another utility located within the streets and public ways. A licensee shall relocate its facilities, if necessary, to accommodate another facility relocation that has a prior rights interest in the streets and public ways. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-73. - Blue stake center requirements. 
    A licensee shall at all times comply with A.R.S. section 40-360.21 et seq. by participating as a member of the Arizona Blue Stake Center with the necessary records and persons to provide location service for the licensee's cable system upon receipt of a locate call or as promptly as possible, but in no event more than two (2) working days after such call. A licensee shall at all times maintain on file with the city a copy of the licensee's Blue Stake Center agreement or proof of membership. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-74. - Locating expenses. 
    A licensee shall reimburse the city for all costs of locating the licensee's cable system in the streets and public ways for design and construction purposes and for all cost of pavement damage related to such locating of facilities. Reimbursements for such locating expenses and pavement damage are in addition to and separate from any license fees due under section 10-32. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-75. - Trimming of trees. 
    Any trimming of trees by a licensee in the streets and public ways shall be subject to the city's Urban Forestry Ordinance (section 19-90, et seq.) and such regulations as the city may establish in order to protect the public health, safety and convenience. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-76. - Vacated street. 
    If any street or public way used by a licensee is vacated by the city, or the use thereof discontinued by a licensee, during the term of a license, the licensee shall forthwith remove its facilities therefrom unless a public utility easement remains or the licensee is specifically permitted to continue in place. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-77. - Temporary removal of cable to move large objects. 
    If it is necessary to temporarily move or remove any of a licensee's wires, cables, poles or other facilities placed pursuant to a license, in order lawfully to move a large object, vehicle, building or other structure over the streets and public ways, the licensee upon reasonable notice shall at the expense of the person requesting, other than such a request by the city for public purposes, remove its facilities as may be required to facilitate such movements. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Secs. 10-78-10-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - P.E.G. CHANNELS 

Sec. 10-81. - Government access channels and programming. 
    A licensee shall provide access and other channel capacity for the use of the city and other government agencies, at no charge to the city or such agencies, as is specified in its license. A licensee shall provide such additional support for government access programming, including funding for government access equipment, as is specified in its license. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-82. - Educational access channels and programming. 
    A licensee shall provide channel capacity for educational access use, at no charge to users, as is specified in its license. A licensee shall provide such additional support for educational access programming, including funding for educational access equipment, as is specified in its license. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-83. - Public access channels and programming. 
    A licensee shall provide channel capacity for public access use, at no charge to users, as is specified in its license. A licensee shall provide such additional support for public access programming, including funding for public access equipment, as is specified in its license. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Secs. 10-84-10-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LICENSE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 10-91. - Revocation of license; administrative hearings. 
(a)  The city may, subject to federal law, revoke any license for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Making false or misleading statements to the city or otherwise attempting to deceive the city with regard to a license or cable system; 
(2)  Failing to provide the required construction bonds, security fund or insurance coverage; 
(3)  Failing to pay license fees or other fees or payments required under this chapter or the license; 
(4)  Repeated failure to maintain signal quality under the standards prescribed by this chapter and the license agreement; 
(5)  Any sale, lease, assignment or transfer of control of the license without prior consent of the city; 
(6)  Willful or grossly negligent repeated violations of any order or regulation of the city; 
(7)  Excessive delays in beginning construction or reconstruction of the cable system, in meeting the required construction schedules for the initial service area, in following the line extension policy or in providing customer service after completion of construction; or 
(8)  Any other protracted or recurring breach of this chapter or the license agreement which substantially affects the provision or quality of cable service, the ability of the city to effectively regulate a licensee or the city's collection of fees and charges. 
(b)  The city shall give written notice of the revocation to the licensee, which notice shall contain the reasons for the revocation. Such notice shall either be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address pursuant to the terms of the license. 
(c)  A licensee may request an informal hearing on such revocation by submitting a written request to the city manager within thirty (30) days after the notice of revocation is given. An informal hearing before the city manager shall be held within thirty (30) days after the request for the same is received by the city. If a licensee does not request a hearing within said thirty (30) day period, the revocation shall take effect on the thirty-first day after service of the notice of revocation. If a hearing is requested, the revocation shall not take effect until after the informal hearing and the service of a new notice from the city manager on the licensee setting forth the city manager's final decision. Such notice shall be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address pursuant to the terms of the license. 
(d)  A licensee whose license has been revoked after an informal hearing with the city manager may appeal such decision to a hearing officer. The appeal shall be requested within thirty (30) days from the date on which such licensee is given notice of the city manager's final decision pursuant to subsection (c). The request shall be in writing, shall be filed with the city manager and shall set forth specifically the grounds for the appeal. If a timely appeal from the city manager's final decision to revoke a license is filed, such revocation shall be stayed pending the final determination of the appeal by the hearing officer. 
(e)  The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct a hearing in accordance with this section. The hearing officer shall not be a regular employee of the city. 
(f)  The burden of proof at the hearing shall be on the city to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that grounds for revocation of a license exist. The hearing officer shall hear such testimony and consider such evidence as is relevant to the determination of such issue. The hearing officer shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence or procedure in conducting the hearing. 
(g)  The hearing officer shall render a written decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing is concluded based on the evidence presented by the city and the licensee. The decision of the hearing officer shall become final on the thirty-first day after the decision is rendered. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-92. - Liquidated damages; administrative hearings. 
(a)  A license agreement shall contain provisions for assessing liquidated damages, at the discretion of the city, in lieu of or in addition to any other non-monetary remedy for a licensee's failure to comply with the terms of this chapter or the license. Such provisions shall include liquidated damages to be paid by a licensee in specified amounts chargeable to the security fund for the following: 
(1)  Failure to complete system construction or reconstruction within the time frames specified in the license, unless the city council formally approves the delay; 
(2)  Failure to provide a cable connection in a line extension area within the time(s) set forth in the license; 
(3)  Failure to properly restore the streets and public ways or to correct related violations of specifications, codes or standards after having been notified to correct such defects; 
(4)  Failure to comply with customer service standards as required by the license; 
(5)  Failure to test and report on the performance of the cable system as required by the license; 
(6)  Failure to cure any violation of the license, following notice and an opportunity to cure. 
(b)  The city shall give written notice of its intention to assess liquidated damages to the licensee, which notice shall contain the reasons for and the amount of such assessment. Such notice shall either be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address pursuant to the terms of the license. 
(c)  A licensee may request an informal hearing on a notice of intent to assess liquidated damages or a notice of intent to make a withdrawal from the security fund pursuant to section 10-43 by submitting a written request to the city manager within thirty (30) days after the notice is given. An informal hearing before the city manager shall be held within thirty (30) days after the request for the same is received by the city. If a licensee does not request a hearing within said thirty (30) day period, the assessment of liquidated damages shall be considered final, and the city may exercise all remedies provided in this chapter and the license to collect such damages. If a hearing is requested, the assessment shall not take effect until after the informal hearing and the service of a new notice from the city manager on the licensee setting forth the city manager's final decision. Such notice shall be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address pursuant to the terms of the license. 
(d)  A licensee against whom liquidated damages have been assessed after an informal hearing with the city manager may appeal such decision to a hearing officer. The appeal shall be requested within thirty (30) days from the date on which such licensee is given notice of the city manager's final decision pursuant to subsection (c). The request shall be in writing, shall be filed with the city manager and shall set forth specifically the grounds for the appeal. 
(e)  The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct a hearing in accordance with this section. The hearing officer shall not be a regular employee of the city. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may: 
(1)  Find that the licensee is not in violation of the terms of this chapter or the license; 
(2)  Find that the licensee is in violation but that such violation was with just cause, waive or reduce any liquidated damages that could be imposed, and permit the city to foreclose on the security fund provided pursuant to section 10-43 to the extent liquidated damages are not waived; or 
(3)  Find that the licensee is in violation without just cause, impose the specified liquidated damages and permit the city to foreclose on the security fund provided pursuant to section 10-43. 
(f)  The burden of proof at the hearing shall be: 
(1)  On the city to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the licensee is in violation of term(s) of this chapter or the license authorizing the assessment of liquidated damages; and 
(2)  On the licensee to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that any violation was with just cause for purposes of reducing or waiving assessment of liquidated damages. 
(g)  The hearing officer shall hear such testimony and consider such evidence as is relevant to the determination of the issues specified in subsection (f). The hearing officer shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence or procedure in conducting the hearing. 
(h)  The hearing officer shall render a written decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing is concluded based on the evidence presented by the city and the licensee. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-93. - License fee disputes; administrative hearings. 
(a)  The provisions of this section apply only to administrative hearings for an assessment of additional license fees pursuant to section 10-32(b). 
(b)  If within thirty (30) days after written notice is sent to a licensee that an additional amount of license fees is due pursuant to section 10-32(b), the licensee petitions the city manager in writing setting forth the reasons why the additional amount is not due and requesting a hearing or a redetermination without a hearing, the city manager shall appoint a hearing officer qualified to hear petitions for hearings under chapter 21.1 of the City Code. The hearing officer shall set a hearing date at least sixty (60) days and no more than one hundred twenty (120) days after the date the licensee's petition is filed. 
(c)  If a petition for hearing or redetermination of the audit determination is not made within the time periods specified herein, a licensee shall be deemed to have waived and abandoned its right to question the additional amount of license fees determined to be due, and any license fees and interest determined to be due shall be final, due and payable. 
(d)  The licensee and the city shall make written disclosure to each other as fully as possible within thirty (30) days after the petition is filed, and shall update such disclosure in a timely manner up to the date of hearing, concerning the following: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of each person whom the disclosing party expects to call as an expert witness at the hearing, the subject matter on which the expert is expected to testify, the substance of the facts and opinions to which the expert is expected to testify, a summary of the grounds for each opinion, the qualifications of the witness and copies of any reports prepared by the expert; 
(2)  The existence, location, custodian and general description of any tangible evidence or relevant documents that the disclosing party plans to use at the hearing. 
(e)  The licensee may amend its petition at any time before the licensee rests its case at the hearing. The hearing officer may require that amendments be in writing and, in that case, shall provide a reasonable period of time to file the amendment. The hearing officer shall provide a reasonable period of time for the city to review and respond to the petition and to any written amendments. 
(f)  Hearings shall be conducted by a hearing officer and shall be continuous until the hearing officer closes the record. The licensee may be heard in person or by its authorized representative at such hearing. Hearings shall be conducted informally as to the order of proceeding and presentation of evidence. The hearing officer shall admit evidence over hearsay objections where the offered evidence has substantial probative value and reliability. Copies of records and documents prepared in the ordinary course of business may be admitted, without objection as to foundation, but subject to argument as to weight, admissibility and authenticity. Summary accounting records may be admitted subject to satisfactory proof of the reliability of the summaries. In all cases, the decision of the hearing officer shall be made solely upon substantial and reliable evidence. All expenses incurred in the hearing shall be paid by the party incurring the same. 
(g)  Redeterminations upon a "petition for redetermination" shall follow the same conditions, except that no oral hearing shall be held unless the city requests such hearing. If the city does request a hearing on the licensee's petition for redetermination, all of the provisions of this section concerning hearings shall apply. 
(h)  The hearing officer shall issue a ruling no later than forty-five (45) days after he or she closes the record. 
(i)  The decision made by the hearing officer shall become final thirty (30) days after the licensee receives notice by the city of the amount payable recalculated, if necessary, to conform to the hearing officer's decision, unless the licensee or the city files an action for judicial review of the amount due in the manner provided in subsection (j). 
(j)  The licensee or the city may bring an action in the superior court located in Maricopa County for judicial review of the amount due. An action for judicial determination of the amount due shall not be commenced more than thirty (30) days after the licensee receives notice of the amount payable recalculated, if necessary, to conform to the hearing officer's decision. Failure by either party to bring the action within such thirty (30) day period shall constitute a waiver of the right to bring said action, except that if one (1) party initiates a court action, the other party may file such counterclaim as would be allowed pursuant to the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(k)  The court shall consider only those grounds and issues set forth in the petition filed under this section or amendments allowed by the hearing officer during the administrative hearing or redetermination process prior to the issuance of his or her ruling. Subject to such limitation, the appeal shall be considered de novo. 
Secs. 10-94-10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - VIOLATIONS; MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 10-101. - Existing systems; unauthorized systems; annexation. 
(a)  Subject to subsection (b), it shall be unlawful for any person or entity to construct or operate a cable system unless a license has been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter authorizing such construction or operation. 
(b)  A cable system in an annexed area with a cable license issued by the board of supervisors of Maricopa County shall be deemed in compliance with the terms or this chapter for the balance of the term fixed in the county license. The city shall succeed to the rights of the county under the cable license at the time of annexation. Upon the expiration of the term of a cable license issued by the county in an annexed area, the licensee must comply with the terms of this chapter. If the cable license issued by the county in an annexed area does not have a specific term, such license shall expire at such time as is set by the city council, but in no event later than ten (10) years after the date of annexation. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-102. - Theft of service. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, to any part of a licensed cable system within the city for the purpose of enabling any person to receive any video, audio, digital or other signals or information without payment to a licensee. Each day's violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-103. - Tampering with system. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or entity, without the consent of a licensee, to knowingly tamper with, remove or damage any cable, wire, cabinet, pedestal or other component used in connection with a licensed cable system within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-104. - Discriminatory practices prohibited. 
    A licensee shall not deny service, deny access, discriminate in hiring, compensation or promotion, discriminate in purchasing or ownership, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, programmers, employees, vendors, investors, the general public or any other person on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age or disability. A licensee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and city laws, and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination. A licensee shall submit reports on its actions and success in affirmative action as required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-105. - Permission of property owner required. 
    A license granted hereunder does not convey the right to install any cable, line, amplifier, converter or other piece of equipment by a licensee on private property. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-106. - Subliminal transmission prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee to cablecast subliminal transmissions at any time, for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-107. - Compliance with laws. 
    A licensee shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations heretofore or hereinafter enacted and shall be subject to all applicable requirements of city ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted or established by the city pursuant to its governmental powers, police powers and taxing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-108. - Non-enforcement by the city. 
    A licensee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or its license by reason of any failure of the city upon any occasion(s) to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms and conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-109. - Rights reserved to the city. 
(a)  Neither the granting of any license nor any provision of this chapter shall constitute a waiver of or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the city. There is hereby reserved to the city the power to amend any section of this chapter as to require additional or greater standards of construction or operation of cable systems or otherwise pursuant to the city's lawful police powers. 
(b)  If any state or federal law or regulation shall require or permit a licensee to perform any service or shall prohibit a licensee from performing any service, in conflict with the terms of its license or any law or regulation of the city, then as soon as possible following knowledge of such perceived conflict, the party asserting that such conflict exists shall notify the other party of the conflict. If the city determines that a material provision of this chapter or a license is affected by any action or the state or federal government, the city shall have the right to modify any of the affected provisions to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent of this chapter and the license consistent with state or federal law 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 10-110. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter, all of which are hereby declared to be severable from each other. 
(Ord. No. 2053, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Chapter 11 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to establish, maintain, etc., cemeteries, A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(11). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Perpetual care fund; creation. 
    An irrevocable trust fund is hereby established for the future payment, as hereinafter provided, of expenses associated with the expansion, operation and maintenance of Glendale Memorial Park Cemetery. The irrevocable trust fund shall be known as the "perpetual care fund." 
(Ord. No. 1384, § 1, 10-1-85; Ord. No. 1982, § 1, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 2330, § 1 (part), 7-8-03) 
Sec. 11-2. - Purpose of perpetual care fund. 
    The purpose of the perpetual care fund is to provide future funds sufficient to pay all or a portion of the operational and maintenance expenses of Glendale Memorial Park Cemetery when operations no longer produce revenue. The fund may be used to expand the cemetery by acquiring real property adjacent thereto, improving existing property, and making capital improvements, provided that the projected revenues to be generated from such expansion and improvements (including projected investment income) exceed the costs of acquiring the adjacent property, making the improvements, and operating and maintaining the property and improvements as a part of the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 1384 § 1, 10-1-85; Ord. No. 1982, § 1, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 2330, § 1 (part), 7-8-03) 
Sec. 11-3. - Perpetual care fund; procedures. 
    All revenues from sales of lots, headstones, domes, appurtenances and services provided through the operation of Glendale Memorial Park Cemetery shall be deposited to the city's general fund. The perpetual care fund shall be invested pursuant to the city investment policy and consistent with A.R.S. § 9-453(B), and investment earnings shall continue to accumulate in the perpetual care fund. Moneys may be withdrawn from the perpetual care fund when: (1) the cemetery may be expanded by acquiring adjacent real property, improved or enhanced through capital improvements, and the projected revenues (including interest and investment earnings) generated from sales of lots, headstones, domes, appurtenances and services related to such expansion or improvement exceeds the costs of acquiring the adjacent property or making the capital improvements plus the costs of operating and maintaining such property or improvement as a part of the cemetery; (2) to cover the costs of operating and maintaining the cemetery when the burial rights in all plots have been sold (after which these moneys shall continue to be available for operating and maintenance costs regardless of the subsequent repurchase of any burial rights); or (3) the perpetual care fund is self-sufficient. Self-sufficiency shall be considered achieved when the interest and investment earnings on the balance in the perpetual care fund are sufficient to meet projected operational and maintenance costs. The determination of self-sufficiency shall be made by the city council in conjunction with the city budgetary process. 
(Ord. No. 1384 § 1, 10-1-85; Ord. No. 1982, § 1, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 2330, § 1 (part), 7-8-03) 
Sec. 11-4. - Cemetery operations. 
    Glendale Memorial Park Cemetery shall be operated consistent with best industry practices. The sale of interment rights in the cemetery shall be restricted to individuals who: 
(a)  At the time of the sale reside in the city of Glendale; 
(b)  Are purchasing a lot for a deceased Glendale resident; or 
(c)  Are immediate family members of an individual who is then interred or has an interment right in the cemetery at the time of the sale. Immediate family members are grandparents, parents, siblings, spouse, children, grandchildren, and lawful guardians and dependents. 
    Fees for the sale of interment rights and other products and services shall be determined based on current market rates. Management shall use appropriate mechanisms to ensure fees are set properly for the Glendale market. The city manager or designee shall have the authority to update the adopted fees set for the cemetery annually. Residents of the city of Glendale at the time of the sale or the person making the arrangements for a deceased Glendale resident shall be charged eighty percent (80%) of the fees set for interment rights as stated above. All other individuals shall be charged the fee set as stated above. Fees for all products and services other than interment rights shall be charged at market rate to all individuals. 
(Ord. No. 1384 § 1, 10-1-85; Ord. No. 1982, § 1, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 2330, § 1 (part), 7-8-03) 
Secs. 11-5-11-15. - Reserved. 
Chapter 12 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 

Sec. 12-1. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the city's charitable solicitations ordinance (being chapter 18, article III of the Code of The City of Glendale, 1963) and such ordinance is hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Chapter 13 - CITY COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1380, adopted July 30, 1985, deleted sections 2-1.1-2-1.3 of the 1963 Code, which had been codified as § 13-1, concerning assistant city judge. Said ordinance enacted new provisions, §§ 2-1.1-2-1.6, which have been included as §§ 13-2-13-7 herein. Former § 13-2, concerning juries, has been redesignated as § 13-1 in order to accommodate the new material. 
Charter reference- City court, Art. XI. 
Cross reference- Penalty for ordinance violation, § 1-7. 
State Law reference- City courts, A.R.S. § 22-401 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Juries. 
    The formation and summoning of juries in the city court shall be done in the same manner as provided for by law in courts of record, in accordance with the provisions of Arizona Revised Statutes Section 22-426. Each juror in the city court shall be paid as provided by law. 
(Code 1963, § 2-17; Ord. No. 1274, 4-24-84) 
Sec. 13-2. - Presiding city judge- Appointment. 
    The presiding officer of the city court shall be the presiding city judge who shall be appointed by the city council, after recommendation of the judicial selection advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § 1(2-1.1), 7-30-85; Ord. No. 2242, § 1, 2-12-02) 
Sec. 13-3. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the city judge shall include: 
(1)  The powers and duties set forth and conferred upon him under the provisions of the state Constitution and statutes, the City Charter, this Code and the ordinances and resolutions of the city. 
(2)  The keeping of a docket in which shall be entered each action and the proceedings of the court therein. 
(3)  The responsibility for fixing and receiving all bonds and bails and receiving all fines, civil sanctions, penalties, fees and other moneys as provided by law. 
(4)  Payment of all fees, civil sanctions, fines, penalties and other moneys collected by the court to the treasurer. 
(5)  Submitting a monthly report to the council summarizing court activities for that month. 
(6)  Management of the city court as a division of the city, which shall be in accordance with the fiscal policies established by the city council in the adoption of the budget and the management policies established by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § 1(2-1.3), 7-30-85) 
Sec. 13-4. - City judges. 
    There is hereby established in the city the office of city judge. City judges shall be appointed by the city council, after recommendation of the judicial selection advisory board. City judges shall be under the direct supervision and control of the presiding city judge. City judges shall have all the judicial powers and jurisdictions of the presiding judge of such court. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § 1(2-1.2), 7-30-85; Ord. No. 1795 § 1, 12-14-93; Ord. No. 2242, § 1, 2-12-02) 
Sec. 13-5. - Removal of presiding city judge, city judge, judge pro tempore or court hearing officer from office. 
(a)  The council may suspend or remove the presiding city judge or any city judge: 
(1)  If the presiding city judge or city judge pleads guilty or no contest or is found guilty of a crime punishable as a felony under any law of this state or a federal law, or of any other crime that involves moral turpitude under such law; 
(2)  If the presiding city judge or city judge has a disability that prevents the judge from performing the essential functions of the position, with or without reasonable accommodations; 
(3)  If the presiding city judge or city judge engages in actions that constitutes willful misconduct in office, willful and persistent failure to perform the judge's duties, habitual intemperance or conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice that brings the judiciary and judicial office into disrepute. 
(b)  The presiding judge may suspend or remove judges pro tempore or court hearing officers: 
(1)  If the judge pro tempore or court hearing officer pleads guilty or no contest or is found guilty of a crime punishable as a felony under any law of this state or a federal law, or of any other crime that involves moral turpitude under such law; 
(2)  If the judge pro tempore or court hearing officer has a disability that prevents the judge from performing the essential functions of the position, with or without reasonable accommodations; 
(3)  If the judge pro tempore or court hearing officer engages in actions that constitutes willful misconduct in office, willful and persistent failure to perform the judge's duties, habitual intemperance or conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice that brings the judiciary and judicial office into disrepute. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § 1(2-1.4), 7-30-85; Ord No. 2242, § 1, 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2687, § 1, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 13-6. - Compensation of judicial officers. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of any term of the presiding city judge, the city council shall set the compensation of the presiding city judge for that term. The compensation paid the presiding city judge shall not be adjusted during said judge's term of office except for adjustments which are applicable to all employees of the city without regard to performance. 
(b)  The salary of a city judge shall be set at eighty-five percent (85%) of the salary of the presiding city judge. The salary of a city judge shall not be adjusted during said judge's term of office except for adjustments which are applicable to all employees of the city, without regard to performance, or adjustments required to establish the city judge's salary at eighty-five percent (85%) of the presiding city judge's salary. The salary of a city judge shall remain the same and not be reduced as the result of the appointment of a presiding judge until such time as the presiding city judge's salary is made greater than a city judge's salary divided by eighty-five percent (85%). 
(c)  The salary of a court hearing officer shall be set at sixty percent (60%) of the salary of the presiding city judge. The salary of a court hearing officer shall not be adjusted during said term of office except for adjustments which are applicable to all employees of the city, without regard to performance, or adjustments required to establish the court hearing officer's salary at sixty percent (60%) of the presiding city judge's salary. The salary of a court hearing officer shall remain the same and not be reduced as the result of the appointment of a presiding judge until such time as the presiding city judge's salary is made greater than a court hearing officer's salary divided by sixty percent (60%). 
(Ord. No. 1380, § 1(2-1.5), 7-30-85; Ord. No. 1795 § 1, 12-14-93; Ord No. 2242, § 1, 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2455, § 1, 7-26-05; Ord. No. 2829, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Sec. 13-7. - Term of judges and court hearing officers. 
(a)  Any city judge or court hearing officer shall be appointed for an initial term of two (2) years. The initial reappointment term shall be for a period of two (2) years and all subsequent re-appointments shall be for a period of four (4) years. 
(b)  The presiding city judge shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 1380, § 1(2-1.6), 7-30-85; Ord. No. 1795 § 1, 12-14-93; Ord No. 2242, § 1, 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2455, § 2, 7-26-05; Ord. No. 2687, § 1, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 13-8. - Appointment of judges pro tempore and court hearing officers. 
(a)  The presiding city judge shall create a special judicial officer selection committee pursuant to Arizona Supreme Court Administrative Order. 
(b)  The city court shall assess a default fee for each default judgment entered on a civil traffic violation upon failure to appear or failure to pay a civil traffic sanction, unless such default judgment is set aside under rule 28 of the rules of procedure in civil traffic violation cases. Upon notification to the department of transportation by the city court to suspend the defendant's driving privilege for a failure to pay a criminal traffic sanction, the city court shall assess a suspension fee for each criminal traffic violation. A city judge may waive all or any part of the fee if the payment of the fee would cause a hardship to the defendant. 
(c)  Members and terms are at the discretion of the presiding city judge. 
(d)  Judges pro tempore. The presiding city judge may appoint qualified persons, who have been recommended by the special judicial officer selection committee, to serve as judges pro tempore. Judges pro tempore shall have all the powers of a city judge, shall be compensated on a contractual or hourly basis, and shall not be eligible for any employee benefits unless required by an entity other than the city. The appointment of a judge pro tempore shall be for a term of two (2) years and may be renewed for additional two (2) years terms at the discretion of the presiding city judge. 
(e)  Court hearing officers. The presiding city judge may appoint qualified persons, who have been recommended by the special judicial officer selection committee, to serve as court hearing officers. Court hearing officers shall have powers only in cases involving City Code infractions under Article II of this chapter and civil traffic matters arising under state law. Court hearing officers shall not have authority to adjudicate criminal matters arising under state law or City Code or City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 1647, § 1, 6-26-90; Ord. No. 1817, § 2, 9-27-94; Ord No. 2242, § 1, 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2416, § 1, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 2687, § 1, 6-23-09; Ord. No. O19-19, § 1, 2-12-2019) 
Sec. 13-9. - City court fees. 
(a)  The city court shall assess a court improvements fee on all fines or civil sanctions, except fines and civil sanctions for parking violations, imposed by the city court. The fee shall be collected and deposited in a separate fund established for the payment of expenses for technology, security or other needed improvements at the city court. 
(b)  The city court shall assess a default fee for each default judgment entered on a civil traffic violation upon failure to appear or failure to pay a civil traffic sanction, unless such default judgment is set aside under rule 28 of the rules of procedure in civil traffic violation cases. Upon notification to the department of transportation by the city court to suspend the defendant's driving privilege for a failure to pay a criminal traffic sanction, the city court shall assess a suspension fee for each criminal traffic violation. A city judge may waive all or any part of the fee if the payment of the fee would cause a hardship to the defendant. 
(c)  A defendant who defaults in his or her obligation for the payment of monies owed or due to the city court including, but not limited to, restitution, fines, sanctions, surcharges, assessments, penalties, bonds, costs and fees, is liable for any fees and charges assessed by a collection agency that is licensed pursuant to A.R.S. Tit. 32, Ch. 9, Art. 2 (A.R.S. § 32-1021 et seq.), and that is engaged by the city court to collect and enforce such payment. The collection fees and charges assessed by the collection agency shall be added to the sum or sums due from and chargeable against the defendant. 
(d)  The city court shall assess an administrative fee for the issuance of warrants issued by the city court. A city judge may waive all or any part of the warrant fee if the payment of the warrant fee would cause a hardship to the defendant or to be in the best interest of justice. 
(e)  The city court shall assess a diversion fee in each case referred to a diversion program established by the city prosecutor pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-500.22. The fee shall be collected by the court and deposited in a separate fund and applied to the city prosecutor's case management systems and technology expenses. A city judge may waive all or part of the diversion fee if the payment of the diversion fee would cause hardship to the defendant or otherwise be in the best interests of justice. 
(f)  The city court shall assess a contract fee on each case where a payment contract is established at time of final adjudication on a court ordered penalty, fine, assessment or sanction including parking penalties and restitution. This fee is in addition to any other fees. A city judge may waive all or any part of the fee if the payment of the fee would cause a hardship to the defendant or would be in the best interests of justice. Funds collected under this provision shall be deposited in the Court Improvement Fund as established in Sec. 13-9(a). 
(g)  The amount to be charged by the city court for all fees set forth in this section is to be set by the presiding judge of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1770, § 1, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 2244, § 1, 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2480, § 1, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 2698, § 1, 8-25-09; Ord. No. 2792, § 1, 12-13-11; Ord. No. O19-19, § 1, 2-12-2019) 
Secs. 13-10-13-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CIVIL CODE ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 13-21. - Civil code infractions; Jurisdiction; Purpose. 
(a)  The city court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to adjudicate, and assess and collect penalties for civil violations of the City Charter, city code and other ordinances, as declared in sec. 1-7(c) of this Code. The city court's jurisdiction over civil code infractions shall extend, under sections 3 and 6 of the City Charter, article XI, to issuance of orders requiring abatement of violations and requiring compliance with the applicable provisions of the City Code and other ordinances. 
(b)  The jurisdiction of the city court over civil code infractions shall not be interpreted or applied in any manner to limit the jurisdiction of the superior court over civil actions for declaratory relief, for injunctive relief, for abatement of public or private nuisances, or for damages, the basis of which may be an act, omission or condition in violation of the City Code or other ordinances. 
(c)  The purpose of this article is to provide, as an additional alternative to other enforcement means, for an informal, speedy and inexpensive process for the adjudication of civil code infractions, based upon an administrative hearing model, in which citizens who receive a civil code infraction complaint may obtain a prompt, simplified hearing, without the need in most cases to retain an attorney to represent them and without the severity of the consequences which might follow a criminal conviction for a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1817 § 3, 9-27-94) 
Sec. 13-22. - Commencement of enforcement action on civil code infraction. 
(a)  "Civil code infraction" means any violation of the City Charter, City Code or any city ordinance wherein the enforcement action undertaken may result in the imposition of a civil sanction. 
(b)  Prior to initiation of an enforcement action on a civil code infraction, a notice of violation may be served on the person or persons responsible for the civil code infraction. The notice of violation shall include: 
(1)  Identification of the property; 
(2)  A statement of the violation(s) in sufficient detail to allow a responsible party to identify and correct the problem; 
(3)  A re-inspection date; 
(4)  Name and telephone number of the inspector to contact; and 
(5)  Civil penalties for failing to correct the violation. 
(c)  Service of the notice of violation shall be deemed effective on the date when the written notice is: 
(1)  Delivered in person to the owner, occupant, manager or agent of the premises where the violation has occurred, or the person responsible for the violation; or 
(2)  Posted on or about the entrance of the premises where the violation occurred; or 
(3)  By certified or first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner, occupant, agent, manager or responsible person at the last known address. Service by mail is deemed effective upon deposit in the U.S. Mail; or 
(4)  Served on the owner, occupant, agent, manager or responsible person in the same manner as provided by the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(d)  The city manager or designee is authorized to commence civil enforcement action by issuing a citation to the owner, the occupant of the property where the violation has occurred, agent or manager of record, or any person responsible for the violation. 
(e)  The citation form will be substantially the same form as the Arizona Uniform Traffic Ticket and Complaint currently in use and shall direct the defendant to appear in Glendale City Court within thirty (30) days after issuance of the citation. The citation shall contain the date and location of the violation and reference to the City Code section violated. 
(f)  The citation shall be served by delivering a copy to the defendant by any of the following means: 
(1)  By service upon the defendant; 
(2)  By posting the citation on the property where the violation has occurred or upon the property of the person responsible for the property where the violation has occurred; 
(3)  By certified and first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the defendant at the last known address. Service by mail is deemed complete upon deposit in the U.S. Mail; or 
(4)  By any of the methods described in Rules 4, 4.1 or 4.2, Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(g)  A defendant served with a civil citation shall appear at the time and place stated in the citation, or may appear prior to the time and admit or deny the allegations of the complaint. Allegations not denied at the time of appearance are deemed admitted. 
(h)  If the allegations are admitted, the court shall enter judgment for the city and impose a civil sanction. 
(i)  If the defendant denies the allegations, the court shall set the matter for hearing. Civil code infraction hearings are informal and held without a jury, and the city is required to prove the violation(s) charged by a preponderance of the evidence. Technical rules of evidence do not apply, except for relevancy and privileged communications. If the defendant elects to be represented by counsel, the defendant shall so notify the court at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. Hearings may be recorded. 
(j)  If the court finds in favor of the defendant, the court shall enter an order dismissing the complaint. If the court finds in favor of the city, the court shall enter judgment for the city and impose a civil sanction. 
(k)  If the defendant served with a civil citation fails to appear on or before the time directed to appear or at the time set for hearing by the court, the allegations shall be deemed admitted and the court shall enter judgment for the city and impose a civil sanction. 
(l)  In the event that service of the civil citation is made by licensed process server, the court or hearing officer may enter an award of the costs of such service in favor of the city in addition to the civil sanction imposed, if a civil code infraction is found to have been committed by the defendant(s) named in the civil enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 1817 § 3, 9-27-94; Ord. No. 2676, § 1, 3-10-09) 
Sec. 13-23. - Civil code infractions. 
    A city judge, assistant city judge, judge pro tempore, or an administrative hearing officer may hear civil code infractions and make such orders as may be proper and necessary to dispose of such cases. Such cases shall be heard without a jury. The presiding city judge shall adopt such local rules of procedure as may be necessary to implement the hearing of civil code infraction cases. 
(Ord. No. 1817 § 3, 9-27-94) 
Sec. 13-24. - Civil sanctions. 
    Any person or persons who commits a civil code infraction or who causes, permits, facilitates, or aids and abets any civil code infraction is subject to a civil sanction of not less than twenty dollars ($20.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), unless sanctions are otherwise set by ordinance or by the court specific to the violation; and, in addition to any monetary civil sanction, the court shall order the defendant to abate the civil code infraction, unless it has been abated by the date of the hearing. The court shall have the power to suspend the payment of any civil sanction. A civil sanction shall run with the land. The city, in it sole option, may record a notice of civil sanction and abatement order with the Maricopa County Recorder and thereby cause compliance by any person(s) or entity thereafter acquiring such property. When the property is brought into compliance by the owner or responsible party, a satisfaction of notice of civil sanction and abatement order shall be filed at the request and expense of the owner or responsible party. It is the property owner's responsibility to secure the satisfaction of notice of civil sanction and abatement order from the city. 
(Ord. No. 1817 § 3, 9-27-94; Ord. No. 2734, § 1, 8-31-10) 
Sec. 13-25. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any party may appeal a final order or judgment entered by an administrative hearing officer. Any such appeal shall be for a trial de novo before a city judge, assistant city judge, or judge pro tempore. 
(b)  Any party may appeal to the superior court form a final order or judgment entered by a city judge, assistant city judge, or judge pro tempore as provided by the law. 
(Ord. No. 1817 § 3, 9-27-94) 
ARTICLE III. - JUDICIAL SELECTION ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 13-26. - Establishment. 
    There is hereby created a judicial selection advisory board. 
(Ord No. 2242, § 1, 2-12-02) 
Sec. 13-27. - Members. 
(a)  The judicial selection advisory board shall be composed of the presiding city judge of the city court, who shall serve as a nonvoting member, and seven (7) voting members, consisting of the following: 
(1)  The presiding judge of the Superior Court of Maricopa County or designee; 
(2)  An appellate court judge to be appointed by the chief justice of the Arizona Supreme Court; 
(3)  A member of the Maricopa County Bar Association who shall reside in the COUNTY OF MARICOPA and who shall be appointed by the city council from among three nominees recommended by the association's board of directions; 
(4)  A member of the State Bar of Arizona who shall reside in the COUNTY OF MARICOPA and who shall be appointed by the city council from among three nominees recommended by the state bar's board of governors; 
(5)  And three (3) public members who are residents of the city of Glendale and are appointed by the city council. None of the public members shall be an employee of the City of Glendale. Voting members shall serve a term of three years and shall be eligible for reappointment for one additional three (3) year term. The members shall serve without salary or compensation. 
(b)  The board's officers shall consist of a chairman and vice-chairman, each selected by a majority of the board. Officers shall serve one-year terms. No members shall serve more than two (2) terms as chairman or two (2) terms as vice-chairman, not including any term filled for the remainder of another member's unexpired term. Upon expiration of the chairman's first term or, if selected for a second term, upon expiration of the chairman's second term, the vice-chairman shall become the chairman. If upon expiration of the chairman's first term, the chairman is selected by the board for a second term, the vice-chairman shall continue in that office for a second term. A vacancy in the office of chairman caused other than by the expiration of a term shall be filled by the vice-chairman for the remainder of the unexpired term. The vice-chairman shall preside whenever the chairman is absent or unable to act. The chairman will have the duty to prepare written reports as may be requested by the city council. The members shall determine operating procedures for the board, which shall be kept in writing. 
(Ord No. 2242, § 1, 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2880, § 1, 2-25-14) 
Sec. 13-28. - Powers and duties. 
    The board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  To seek out and encourage qualified individuals to apply for the office of presiding city judge and city judge of the city court. 
(b)  To conduct investigations into the background and qualifications of candidates for appointment or reappointment to the office of presiding city judge and city judge of the city court, including but not limited to the use of questionnaires, personal interviews, and contacting such individuals and institutions as it deems reasonable to obtain as much background information on the candidate as possible. 
(c)  To submit its recommendations for candidates for appointment or reappointment to the office of presiding city judge or city judge of the city court, without regard to race, religion, political affiliation or sex of the candidate, to the city council. 
(Ord No. 2242, § 1, 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2687, § 2, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 13-29. - Meetings. 
    The meetings of the board shall be held once each year for the purpose of reviewing operating procedures and on call of the chair of the board. The chair of the board shall issue a call for a meeting of the board: 
(1)  Promptly upon learning of a vacancy in the office of presiding city judge or city judge of the city court, 
(2)  Not less than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the term of the sitting presiding city judge or any city judge. The board shall, whenever practical, hold public meetings designed to permit interested parties and groups to submit and recommend persons for appointment consideration. 
(Ord No. 2242, § 1, 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2687, § 2, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 13-30. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the judicial selection advisory board shall constitute a quorum and the affirmative vote of a majority of the board members present at a meeting shall be required to take action. 
(Ord No. 2242, § 1, 2-12-02) 
Chapter 14 - CIVIL DEFENSE AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Civil defense and emergency services, A.R.S. § 26-301 et seq. 

Sec. 14-1. - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Reduce vulnerability of people and the community to damage, injury and loss of life and property resulting from natural or manmade catastrophes, riots or hostile military or paramilitary action. 
(2)  Prepare for prompt and efficient rescue, care and treatment of persons victimized or threatened by disaster. 
(3)  Provide a setting conducive to the rapid and orderly start of restoration and rehabilitation of persons and property affected by disasters. 
(4)  Clarify and strengthen the roles of the mayor, city council, city manager and city agencies in prevention of, preparation for, response to and recovery from disasters. 
(5)  Authorize and provide for cooperation in disaster prevention, preparedness, response and recovery. 
(6)  Authorize and provide for coordination of activities relating to disaster prevention, preparedness, response and recovery by agencies and officers of this city, agencies of the private sector and similar activities in which the federal government, the state and its political subdivisions may participate. 
(7)  Provide a disaster management system embodying all aspects of predisaster preparedness and post-disaster response. 
(Code 1963, § 8-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Director: The city manager or his designated alternate. 
    Disaster: The occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property, or extreme peril to the safety of persons or property, resulting from any natural or man-made causes, including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, blight, drought, famine, infestation, air contamination, epidemic, explosion, riot or other acts of civil disobedience which endanger life or property or hostile military or paramilitary action. 
    Emergency: The existence of a disaster within the city limits requiring immediate action by the emergency forces of the city. 
    Emergency forces: All city governmental and private sector agencies, volunteers, facilities, equipment, trained manpower, and other resources required to perform emergency services functions. 
    Emergency services: The organization, administration, trained manpower, facilities, equipment, material, supplies, programs, emergency plans, ability to execute emergency plans, and all other measures necessary and incidental thereto relating to disaster prevention, preparedness, response, and recovery by all governmental and private sector agencies to protect or save health, life or property. 
    Local emergency: The existence of a disaster within the city limits, and the situation is or is likely to be beyond the capability and resources of the city as determined by the mayor and which requires the combined efforts of other political subdivisions. 
    Regulations: The orders, rules, and emergency procedures deemed essential for emergency services. 
    State of emergency: The duly proclaimed existence of a disaster within the state except a disaster resulting in a state of war emergency which is or is likely to be beyond the capabilities and resources of any single county, city or town, and requires the combined efforts of the state and the political subdivision. 
    State of war emergency: The situation which exists immediately whenever this nation is attacked or upon receipt by this state of a warning from the federal government indicating that such an attack is imminent. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, A.R.S. § 26-302. 
Sec. 14-3. - Emergency services organization. 
    The city manager shall create an emergency services organization. (Code 1963, § 8-3) 
State Law reference- Local emergency services organizations, A.R.S. § 26-308. 
Sec. 14-4. - Director generally. 
    The city manager shall be the director of the emergency services organization. The director is responsible in nonemergency periods to act on behalf of the mayor and council to develop a readiness for the city's civil preparedness and for coordinated operations in disaster situations. During emergencies the director shall act as the principal advisor or aide to the mayor on emergency operations. His major responsibility is to assure coordination among emergency forces and with higher and adjacent governments, by assuring that the emergency services organization functions effectively. He shall assist the mayor in the execution of operations, plans and procedures required by the emergency. 
(Code 1963, §§ 8-3, 8-4(c)) 
State Law reference- Director, A.R.S. § 26-308. 
Sec. 14-5. - Disaster plan. 
    The director shall prepare a comprehensive disaster basic plan which shall be adopted and maintained by resolution of the council upon the recommendations of the director. In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to city organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies be used to the fullest extent. The disaster plan shall be considered supplementary to this ordinance and have the effect of law whenever emergencies have been proclaimed. (Code 1963, § 8-4(c)) 
Sec. 14-6. - Mutual aid. 
    In periods of local emergency, the city is granted full power to provide mutual aid to any affected area in accordance with local laws, ordinances, resolutions, emergency plans or agreements therefor. The city may request from state agencies mutual aid, including personnel, equipment and other available resources to assist the city during the local emergency in accordance with emergency plans or at the direction of the governor. 
(Code 1963, § 8-5) 
Sec. 14-7. - Emergency powers of mayor. 
(a)  In addition to the powers granted by other provisions of law or city charter, the mayor may, by proclamation, declare an emergency or a local emergency to exist. The proclamation may be rescinded by a majority of the city council after twenty-four (24) hours. 
(b)  During an emergency or local emergency, the mayor shall govern the city by proclamation and shall have the authority to impose all necessary regulations to preserve the peace and order of the city, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Imposition of curfews in all or in a portion of the city. 
(2)  Ordering the closing of any business. 
(3)  Closing to public access any public building, street or other public place. 
(4)  Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations within or without the city for assistance. 
(Code 1963, § 8-4(b)) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to so provide, A.R.S. § 26-311. 
Sec. 14-8. - Civil liabilities. 
(a)  The city shall not be liable for any claim based upon the exercise or performance, or the failure to exercise or perform, a discretionary function or duty on the part of the city or any employee of the city excepting wilful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith of any such employee, in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. This immunity shall not extend to emergency services as defined in section 26-301, paragraph 6. 
(b)  The immunities from liability, exemptions from laws, ordinances and rules, all pensions, relief, disability workers' compensation and other benefits which apply to the activity of officers, agents or employees of the city when performing their respective functions within the territorial limits of the city shall apply to them to the same degree and extent while engaged in the performance of any of their functions and duties extra territorially under the provisions of this chapter, excepting wilful misconduct, gross negligence, or bad faith. 
(c)  Volunteers duly enrolled or registered with the city in a local emergency, a state of emergency, or a war emergency, or unregistered persons placed into service during a state of war emergency, in carrying out, complying with, or attempting to comply with any order or regulation issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or performing any of their authorized functions or duties or training for the performance of their authorized functions or duties, shall have the same degree of responsibility for their actions and enjoy the same immunities as officers and employees of the city performing similar work. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 26-314. 
Chapter 15 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Elections, Art. IX. 
Cross reference- Financial disclosure, § 2-31 et seq. 
State Law reference- City elections, A.R.S. §§ 9-821 et seq., 16-101 et sq. 

Sec. 15-1. - Challenges. 
(a)  Each candidate shall be allowed to appoint one (1) challenger for each polling place in all city elections. The appointment shall be in writing, addressed to the city clerk and delivered no later than 5:00 p.m. on the Friday preceding a primary or general election. All challengers must be both residents of the city and registered voters as determined by the rolls of the county on the last day for registration prior to the election. 
(b)  The city clerks shall establish an identification card containing a photo of each challenger which shall be provided without cost to a duly appointed challenger. 
(c)  Only those challengers wearing the official identification card shall be allowed inside a polling place for the purpose of challenging, and no more than one (1) challenger per candidate may be in any polling place at any time during voting hours. One (1) challenger, however, may visit any number of polling places during election hours. 
(d)  The grounds for challenging an elector, the proceedings on challenge and the rules shall be as set forth in Arizona Revised Statutes sections 16-591 to 16-593 inclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1190, §§ 4-7, 1-5-82) 
Sec. 15-2. - Redistricting; time requirements. 
    The mayor and council shall redistrict the city following the general city election in 1992 and may redistrict the city every five (5) years thereafter, if the mayor and council determine that the districts are not of reasonably equal population. The mayor and council shall redistrict the city at least once every ten (10) years based on the United States Decennial Census. 
(Ord. No. 1682, § 1, 4-23-91) 
Sec. 15-3. - Nomination papers. 
    Beginning with the election to be held on February 13, 1990, a person desiring to become a candidate and to have his name printed on the official ballot for municipal office shall file a nomination paper and other nomination materials not less than seventy-five days nor more than one hundred and five days before the primary election date. All such nomination papers must be completed and filed with the city clerk by 5:00 p.m. on the last day for filing such papers. 
(Ord. No. 1618, § 1, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 15-4. - Ballot arguments for special elections. 
    When the city council orders a referendum measure to be submitted at a special election, not later than thirty (30) days preceding the special election, a person may file with the city clerk an argument advocating or opposing a measure proposed in the referendum petition. 
(Ord. No. 2189, § 1, 3-27-01; Ord. No. 2209, § 1, 9-25-01) 
Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Auxiliary firemen, § 2-52; fire department authority to direct traffic, § 24-15; designation of fire lanes, § 24-58(b), (c); tampering with fire hydrants, § 33-24; emergency fire sprinkler systems, § 33-25; fire hydrants generally, § 33-26 et seq. 
State Law reference- Fire prevention powers of city, A.R.S. §§ 9-240(B)(7), 9-276(A)(15). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2774, § 1, adopted June 28, 2011, repealed Art. I, §§ 16-1-16-6, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Art. I, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

Sec. 16-1. - Creation; appointment of members; powers and duties of fire chief. 
    There shall be a fire department, headed by a fire chief who shall be responsible for the direction of all firefighting, fire prevention, fire protection, emergency medical service, hazardous materials emergency response, technical rescue emergency response, and fire department units assigned to provide emergency crisis response services of the city and be responsible for developing departmental programs to protect the life and property in the city from both natural and man-made emergencies. The fire chief and the city manager shall be responsible for establishing departmental policies and rules necessary for the operation of the department. The fire chief shall assign personnel and maintain a training program. The city manager shall, on the basis of merit and fitness, appoint the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 2774, § 1, 6-28-11) 
Sec. 16-2. - Enforcement. 
    The chief of the fire department is hereby given authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2774, § 1, 6-28-11) 
Sec. 16-3. - Fire department answering calls outside the city. 
    The fire department is hereby authorized to answer fire alarms and fight fires beyond the corporate limits of the city whenever the city manager, in his discretion, shall deem it necessary for the protection of lives and property. 
(Ord. No. 2774, § 1, 6-28-11) 
State Law reference- Mutual aid authorized, A.R.S. § 26-309. 
Sec. 16-4. - Tampering, injuring, etc., fire alarm systems or pumps and hydrants. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper or injure any part of the fire alarm system or any reservoir, pumps, pipes, valves, gates and fire hydrants or to use or remove, without permission of the chief of the fire department, except for the protection of property from fire damage, any part of the equipment of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2774, § 1, 6-28-11) 
Sec. 16-5. - Interference with firefighters in performance of duties; disobedience to orders of firefighters engaged in duties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the lawful efforts of any firefighter or company or firefighters in the performance of duty, or to engage in any disorderly conduct which might reduce the efficiency of such firefighters, or to forbid, prevent or dissuade others from assisting such firefighters in the performance of their duties, or to disobey the lawful orders of the public officer or firefighter while engaged in extinguishing any fire or responding to an alarm or fire. 
(Ord. No. 2774, § 1, 6-28-11) 
State Law reference- Obstructing government operations, A.R.S., § 13-2402; refusing to assist in fire control, A.R.S. § 13-2402. 
Sec. 16-6. - Fire department providing emergency medical services, hazardous materials emergency response, technical rescue response, and emergency victim assistance crisis response services. 
    The fire department is hereby the only authorized provider of emergency medical services, hazardous materials emergency response, and technical rescue emergency response services in the City of Glendale. The Glendale Fire Department in partnership with other city and private victim assistance agencies and organizations is also an authorized victim assistance crisis response service provider in the City of Glendale. 
(Ord. No. 2774, § 1, 6-28-11) 
Sec. 16-7. - Advanced life support service fee. 
    The City of Glendale Fire Department is hereby authorized to collect a fee for advanced life support services provided by the fire department. The amount of the fee shall be established by either a resolution or an agreement approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2774, § 1, 6-28-11) 
Sec. 16-8. - Assumption of jurisdiction. 
    The City of Glendale, pursuant to A.R.S. § 37-1383(A)(5), having in effect a nationally recognized fire code, does hereby assume jurisdiction from the office of the state fire marshal for prescribing and enforcing fire and life safety codes and standards within the City of Glendale, to include all public schools, state and county properties located within the jurisdictional boundaries with the exception of the multi-use stadium facility and adjacent private property located on Maricopa County Assessor's Parcel Numbers 102-01-001P, 102-01-001M, 102-01-001Q, 102-01-001N, 102-01-002Y, 102-01-002W, 102-01-002S, 102-01-002T, 102-01-002U, 102-01-257A, 102-01-002Z, 102-01-257B, 102-01-256, and 102-01-002P, all of which are generally located at the intersection of 95th and Maryland avenues and are owned by the tourism and sports authority or utilized by that entity in the operation of the multi-use stadium facility. The office of the state fire marshal retains jurisdiction over Maricopa County Assessor's Parcel Numbers 102-01-001P, 102-01-001M, 102-01-001Q, 102-01-001N, 102-01-002Y, 102-01-002W, 102-01-002S, 102-01-002T, 102-01-002U, 102-01-257A, 102-01-002Z, 102-01-257B, 102-01-256, and 102-01-002P. 
(Ord. No. 2774, § 1, 6-28-11; Ord. No. 2886, § 1, 4-8-14; Ord. No. 018-60, § 1, 8-14-18) 
Sec. 16-9. - Appointment of fire code official. 
    The fire chief shall designate and appoint the fire marshal to act as the fire code official. 
(Ord. No. 2774, § 1, 6-28-11) 
Secs. 16-10-16-15. - Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2774, § 1, 6-28-11) 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2750, § 1, adopted Nov. 9, 2010, repealed Ch. 16, Art. II, §§ 16-16-16-20, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Art. II pertained to Technical Standards. See Code Comparative for derivation. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9. 
State Law reference- State fire marshal, A.R.S. § 26-231 et seq. 

Sec. 16-16. - Adopted by reference; violation. 
(a)  The following publication(s), one copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length in this Code. 
(1)  2018 International Fire Code, as published by the International Code Council, Inc. 
(2)  2018 International Fire Code, Appendix Chapters B, C, D, E, F, H, I, K, and N; these chapters may be use as acceptable alternate methods and optional considerations or requirements as determined or approved by the Fire Code Official. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of the publications adopted in subsection (a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. O18-86, § 1, 12-11-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O18-86, § 1, adopted Dec. 11, 2018, repealed § 16-16 and enacted a new section as set out herein. Former § 16-16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2750, § 1, adopted Nov. 9, 2010. 
Sec. 16-17. - Amendments to the 2018 International Fire Code. 
    The 2018 International Fire Code is hereby amended in the following respects: 
Section 101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. This Code shall be known as the Glendale Fire Code, may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this Code". 
Section 105.6.30 is hereby deleted and replaced with the follows: 
105.6.30 MOBILE FOOD UNIT. MOBILE FOOD UNITS SHALL NOT BE REQUIRED TO OBTAIN A SPECIAL PERMIT THAT IS NOT REQUIRED FOR OTHER MOBILE VENDING BUSINESSES. MOBILE FOOD UNITS ARE REQUIRED TO BE INSPECTED BY A CITY OR TOWN FIRE DEPARTMENT BEFORE OPERATION. 
EXCEPTION: IF THE MOBILE FOOD VENDOR PROVIDES EVIDENCE THAT THE MOBILE FOOD UNIT PASSED A FIRE INSPECTION BY ANOTHER CITY OR TOWN FIRE DEPARTMENT IN THIS STATE WITHIN THE PRECEDING TWELVE MONTHS. 
Section 109 is hereby deleted and replaced with the following: 
SECTION 109 BOARD OF APPEALS. APPEALS OF ORDERS, DECISIONS OR DETERMINATIONS MADE BY THE FIRE CODE OFFICIAL RELATIVE TO THE APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION OF THIS CODE, SHALL FALL UNDER THE APPEALS PROCESS ADOPTED IN THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE AND AS ESTABLISHED BY CITY COUNCIL. 
Section 110.4 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
110.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Fire Code Official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this Code, shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor and punished as Class 1 misdemeanor under state law. 
Section 112.4 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be assessed a fee in accordance with the fees established by council resolution for operating without a permit. 
Section 903.2.13 is hereby added to read as follows: 
903.2.13 NEW BUILDINGS WITH UNKNOWN OCCUPANCY TYPE OR HAZARD CLASSIFICATION. IN NEW BUILDINGS CONSTRUCTED WITH AN INTERIOR CEILING/DECK HEIGHT EXCEEDING 20 FEET AND THE OCCUPANCY OR HAZARD CLASSIFICATION IS UNKNOWN, THE MINIMUM FIRE SPRINKLER DESIGN DENSITY CRITERIA SHALL BE .495/2000 SQUARE FEET. 
Section 903.3.8 is hereby added to read as follows: 
903.3.8 Access to fire sprinkler risers. Fire sprinkler risers shall be installed indoors and an exterior door leading directly into the room containing the fire sprinkler riser and shut off controls shall be provided. 
Exception: An exterior door is not required when an approved alternate and accessible method of controlling the sprinkler water supply from the outside of the structure is provided. 
Section 1103.5.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
1103.5.3 GROUP I-2, CONDITION 2. IN ADDITION TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF SECTION 1103.5.2, EXISTING BUILDINGS OF GROUP I-2, CONDITION 2 OCCUPANCY SHALL BE EQUIPPED THROUGHOUT WITH AN APPROVED AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 903.3.1.1. THE AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM SHALL BE INSTALLED WITHIN 12 MONTHS OF WRITTEN NOTIFICATION. 
EXAMPLE: GROUP I-2, CONDITION 2 OCCUPANCIES INCLUDE: 
FACILITIES THAT PROVIDE NURSING AND MEDICAL CARE AND COULD PROVIDE EMERGENCY CARE, SURGERY, OBSTETRICS, OR INPATIENT STABILIZATION UNITS FOR PSYCHIATRIC OR DETOXIFICATION, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO HOSPITALS. 
(Ord. No. O18-86, § 1, 12-11-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O18-86, § 1, adopted Dec. 11, 2018, repealed § 16-17 and enacted a new section as set out herein. Former § 16-17 pertained to amendments to the 2009 International Fire Code and derived from Ord. No. 2750, § 1, adopted Nov. 9, 2010. 
Sec. 16-18. - Establishment of limits in which storage of liquefied petroleum gases is restricted. 
    The limits referred to in chapter 38 of the International Fire Code in which storage is restricted are established as being all areas except M-1 and M-2 as shown in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Glendale, Arizona. 
(Ord. No. 2750, § 1, 11-9-10) 
Sec. 16-19. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of explosive and blasting agents is prohibited. 
    The limits referred to in chapter 33 of the International Fire Code in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited are established as being all areas except M-1 and M-2 as shown in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Glendale, Arizona. 
(Ord. No. 2750, § 1, 11-9-10) 
Sec. 16-20. - Minimum qualifications for fire protection system design professionals. (Includes: fire alarm and fire sprinkler systems) 
    Construction documents (shop drawings) for fire protection systems shall be prepared or reviewed and stamped by a design professional with a minimum of NICET level III or equivalent certification. 
(Ord. No. 2750, § 1, 11-9-10) 
Sec. 16-21. - Minimum qualifications for fire protection system installation, maintenance and repair professionals. 
    The installation, maintenance and repair of fire protection systems shall be performed by a competent professional with a current license (appropriate for the work being performed) issued by the Arizona Registrar of Contractors. 
(Ord. No. 2750, § 1, 11-9-10) 
Sec. 16-22-16-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPRINKLER SYSTEMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2750, § 2, adopted Nov. 9, 2010, repealed Ch. 16, Art. III, §§ 16-51-16-55, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Art. III pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Cross reference- Emergency fire sprinkler systems, § 33-25. 

Sec. 16-51. - Definitions. 
(a)  Terms defined in other codes; where words, terms and phrases not defined in this Code and are defined in other currently adopted Codes, such words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in those codes. 
(b)  In addition, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approval: Refers to approval by the Fire Code Official as the result of an official code interpretation or code modification request or pursuant to investigation and tests or by reason of accepted principles or tests by national authorities, technical or scientific organizations. 
    Approved: Acceptable to the Fire Code Official. 
    This Code: Refers to the current adopted International Fire Code, amendments and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2750, § 2, 11-9-10; Ord. No. O18-86, § 2, 12-11-18) 
Sec. 16-52. - General sprinkler system requirements. 
    In addition to the requirements of this Code, an approved automatic sprinkler system shall be required as follows: 
(a)  Throughout the entire building of all newly constructed commercial and residential structures. Exceptions: 
(1)  Where specifically omitted or otherwise not required in accordance with this Code. 
(2)  In one- and two-family dwellings regulated by the International Residential Code and in accordance with state law. 
(b)  Properties and/or structures for annexation shall comply with the investigation and evaluation process per the 2018 IEBC. 
(Ord. No. 2750, § 2, 11-9-10; Ord. No. O18-86, § 2, 12-11-18) 
Sec. 16-53. - Permissible sprinkler omissions. 
(a)  Sprinkler systems shall be designed on the basis of complete coverage with no unprotected areas. However, sprinkler coverage may be omitted from certain areas where the application of water may constitute a serious life or fire hazard. Additionally, sprinkler coverage may be omitted as provided for in NFPA 13, 13R and 13D with the approval of the Fire Code Official. 
(b)  Unless the use of the facility otherwise requires; automatic fire sprinklers shall not be required in the following areas: 
- Detached non-combustible Group U Occupancies that do not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
- Detached non-combustible canopies that do not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet and used exclusively for shade purposes. 
- Exterior roofs, overhangs or canopies of type I, II or III construction with no combustible storage beneath or those designed solely as pedestrian shade. 
Note: For the purpose of this section, "detached" is defined as "a separate single-story building or structure, without a basement or crawl space and located an approved distance from other structures." 
(c)  In addition to any automatic sprinkler system required by this Code, other approved automatic fire protection systems may be installed to protect special hazards. These additional systems shall not substitute for the required automatic sprinkler system without approval of the Fire Code Official. 
(Ord. No. 2750, § 2, 11-9-10; Ord. No. O18-86, § 2, 12-11-18) 
Sec. 16-54. - Fire department access. 
(a)  Where approved automatic sprinkler systems are installed throughout all areas and on every floor of exiting buildings hereafter moved into or within the jurisdiction, fire apparatus access roads need only be provided to within 200 feet (60,960 mm) of any point on the grade floor level exterior walls; when approved by the Fire Code Official. 
(b)  The fire apparatus access road distance required by this section shall be measured along approved pathways and corridors provided for pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2750, § 2, 11-9-10) 
Chapter 17 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Resolution No. 4742, § Exh. A, §§ 1-3, adopted Nov. 13, 2013, repealed Ch. 17, Arts. I-III, §§ 17-1-17-15, 17-26-17-29, 17-41-17-50, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Arts. I-III pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9; grading and drainage regulations, Ch. 18.5; landscaping, Ch. 19; mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, Ch. 23; planning and development, Ch. 28; subdivisions, Ch. 31; zoning, App. A. 
Note- A certain document entitled "Chapter 17, Floodplain Management," attached as Exhibit A, three copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, is herby declared to be a public record. Said copies are ordered to remain on file with the City Clerk for public use and inspection. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-l. - Short Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the Floodplain Management Ordinance of the City of Glendale with Rules and Regulations pursuant to the provisions of The Flood Disaster Protection Act and The National Flood Insurance Act, as amended. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 1(Exh. A),11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-2. - Statutory authorization. 
    Through A.R.S. § 48-3610, the Arizona State Legislature enabled the city to adopt regulations in conformance with A.R.S. § 48-3603 designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-3. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruptions of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise, from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-4. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to provide floodplain management regulations for all subdivision of land, construction of dwelling, commercial or industrial structures, or uses which may divert, retard or obstruct floodwater and threaten public health, safety or the general welfare, and provide for the establishment of minimum flood protection elevations and flood damage prevention requirements for uses, structures and facilities which are vulnerable to flood damage; provide for the coordination by the council with all other interested and affected political subdivisions and state agencies, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(6)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
(7)  To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; 
(8)  To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions; and, 
(9)  To maintain eligibility for state disaster relief. 
(b)  In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
(1)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
(4)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and, 
(5)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(6)  These regulations take precedence over any less restrictive conflicting local laws, ordinances and codes. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-5. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    Accessory Structure, low-cost and small: 
(1)  A structure that is solely for the parking of no more than two (2) cars; or limited storage (small, low cost sheds). 
(2)  One hundred twenty (120) square feet or less. 
    Administrative Appeals Board: A board authorized to hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. Any variance granted by the Administrative Appeals Board must be approved by the Floodplain Board. 
    Appeal: A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding: A designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent (l%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area is designated as zone A, AE, AO, AH, and A1-30 on the FIRM and other areas determined by the criteria adopted by the city's director of water resources (see "Special Flood Hazard Area"). 
    Base flood: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base Flood Elevation (BFE): The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, Al-30, VE and Vl-V30 that indicate the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement: Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade, i.e., below ground level on all sides. 
    Breakaway walls: Any type of wall, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the building and which is so designed as to breakaway, during the base flood, without damage to the structural integrity of the building on which it is used or any structure to which it might be carried by flood waters. 
    Building: See "Structure." 
    Critical feature: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Delineated floodplain: That area delineated and mapped as floodplain, as approved by the Federal Insurance Administration and as shown on the official flood insurance rate map of the city. 
    Development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard. 
    Encroachment: The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed before December 6, 1984. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets). 
    Financial assistance: Any form of loan, grant, guaranty, insurance, payment, rebate, subsidy, disaster assistance loan or grant, or any other form of direct or indirect federal assistance, other than general or special revenue sharing or formula grants made to states. 
    Flood or flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of flood waters; and/or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or 
(3)  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood Insurance Study (FIS): The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "flood or flooding." 
    Floodplain Administrator: The public works administrator or his designee who is assigned to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain Board: The City Council of the City of Glendale shall be the Floodplain Board. In the event the Floodplain Board must recuse itself from deciding a matter, the Board of Directors of the Flood Control District of Maricopa County shall hear such Floodplain disputes or variances to provide the appropriate enforcement of this ordinance. 
    Floodplain management regulations: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofed: Watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of restricting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
    Floodproofing: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Flood protection system: Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Flood-related erosion: The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
    Flood-related erosion area or Flood-related erosion-prone area: A land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage. 
    Flood-related erosion area management: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventative measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. Also referred to as "Regulatory Floodway." 
    Fraud and victimization: As related to Section 17-29 of this ordinance, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on, or victimization of, the public. In examining this requirement, the City Council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
    Functionally dependent use: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Governing body: The local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
    Hardship: As referenced in Section 17-29 of this ordinance, the definition of exceptional hardship is the hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The Floodplain Board requires that the variance be exceptional, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. The problems listed may be resolved, or may be required to be resolved, through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a difference use other than originally intended. 
    Highest adjacent grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic Structure: Any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter. 
    Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home'' also includes mobile homes, park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent. 
    Market value: Defined in the substantial damage and substantial improvement procedures. 
    Mean sea level: For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which Base Flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    New construction: For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial Flood Insurance Rate Map or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after December 6, 1984, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
    New manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed on or after December 6, 1984. 
    Obstruction: Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across, or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
    One-hundred-year flood or 100-year flood: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. See "Base flood". 
    Person: Any individual or his agent, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or the state of any agency or political subdivision thereof. 
    Program: The national flood insurance program authorized by 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001-4128, as amended. 
    Program deficiency: A defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations or of the NFIP standards. 
    Public safety and nuisance: As related to Section 17-12 of this ordinance, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
    Reach: The longitudinal segments of a stream, wash or watercourse which may include, but not be limited to, the segment of the flood hazard area where flood heights are primarily controlled by man-made or natural obstructions or constrictions. 
    Recreational vehicle. For purposes of this Article only, a recreational vehicle is defined as a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regulatory Flood Elevation (RFE): An elevation one (1) foot above the Base Flood Elevation for a watercourse for which the base flood elevation has been determined and shall be determined by the criteria developed by the Director of the Arizona Department of Water Resources for all other watercourses. 
    Remedy a violation: To bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
    Riverine: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Sheet flow area: See "Area of shallow flooding". 
    Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA): An area in the floodplain subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as zone A, AO, Al-30, AE, A99 or AH. 
    Start of construction: Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start date means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground; a manufactured home is a structure. 
    Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement: Any reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. However, the term does not include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing violations or to comply with state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance: A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
    Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Watercourse: Any lake, river, creek, stream, wash or other body of water having banks and beds through which waters flow at least periodically. The term may include specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
    Water Surface Elevation (WSE): The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NVGD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-6. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of Council direction and policy; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor expand any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-7. - Jurisdictional Applicability. 
    This ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the corporate limits of the City of Glendale. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-8. - Compliance. 
    All development of land, construction of residential, commercial or industrial structures, or future development within delineated floodplain areas is subject to the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-9. - Statutory Exceptions. 
(a)  In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3609(H), unless otherwise expressly provided, this and any regulation adopted pursuant to this article do not affect: 
(1)  Existing legal uses of property or the right to continuation of such legal use. However, if a nonconforming use of land or a building or structure is discontinued for twelve months, or destroyed to the extent of 50 percent of its value as determined by a competent real estate appraiser, any further use shall comply with this article and regulations of the City of Glendale; 
(2)  Reasonable repair or alteration of property for the purposes for which the property was legally used on August 3, 1984, or any regulations affecting such property takes effect, except that any alteration, addition or repair to a nonconforming building or structure which would result in increasing its flood damage potential by fifty percent (50%) or more shall be either floodproofed or elevated to or above the Regulatory Flood Elevation; 
(3)  Reasonable repair of structures constructed with the written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613, as amended; and 
(4)  Facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a Certificate of Environmental Compatibility issued under A.R.S. § 40-360 et seq., as amended. 
(b)  Before any authorized construction begins for the exceptions listed below, the responsible person must submit plans for the construction to the Floodplain Board, or its designee, for review and comment. In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3613, written authorization shall not be required, nor shall the Floodplain Board prohibit: 
(1)  The construction of bridges, culverts, dikes and other structures necessary to the construction of public highways, roads and streets intersecting or crossing a watercourse; 
(2)  The construction of storage dams for watering livestock or wildlife, structures on banks of a watercourse to prevent erosion of or damage to adjoining land if the structure will not divert, retard or obstruct the natural channel of the watercourse or dams for the conservation of floodwaters as permitted by A.R.S. § 45-1201 et seq., as amended; 
(3)  Construction of tailing dams and waste disposal areas for use in connection with mining and metallurgical operations. This paragraph does not exempt those sand and gravel operations that will divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse from complying with and acquiring authorization from the Floodplain Board pursuant to regulations adopted by the Floodplain Board under this article; 
(4)  Other construction upon determination by the Floodplain Board that written authorization is unnecessary; 
(5)  Any flood control district, county, city, town or other political subdivision from exercising powers granted to it under A.R.S. § 48-3601 et seq., as amended; 
(6)  The construction of streams, waterways, lakes and other auxiliary facilities in conjunction with development of public parks and recreation facilities by a public agency or political subdivision; or 
(7)  The construction and erection of poles, towers, foundations, support structures, guy wires and other facilities related to power transmission as constructed by any utility whether a public service corporation or a political subdivision. 
(c)  In addition to other penalties or remedies otherwise provided by law, this state, a political subdivision, or a person who may be damaged, or has been damaged as a result of the unauthorized diversion, retardation or obstruction of a watercourse, has the right to commence, maintain and prosecute any appropriate action or pursue any remedy to enjoin, abate or otherwise prevent any person from violating or continuing to violate this section or regulations adopted pursuant to this Article. If a person is found to be in violation of this Section, the court shall require the violator to either comply with this Section if authorized by the Floodplain Board, or remove the obstruction and restore the watercourse to its original state. The court may also award such monetary damages as are appropriate to the injured parties resulting from the violation, including reasonable costs and attorney fees. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-10. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific engineering report entitled The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Maricopa County, Arizona and Incorporated Areas, dated September 30, 2005, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS) dated September 30, 2005, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this ordinance and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this ordinance and which are recommended to the Floodplain Board by the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Board, within its area of jurisdiction, shall delineate (or may, by rule, require developers of land to delineate) areas where development is ongoing or imminent, and thereafter as development becomes imminent, delineate floodplains consistent with the criteria developed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Director of the Arizona Department of Water Resources. The FIS and FIRM panels are on file at the office of the city clerk and a copy is on file in the office of the city engineer. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-11. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
(a)  The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(b)  This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions, shall prevail. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-12. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
    All development located or maintained within any area of special flood hazard after August 8, 1973, in violation of this ordinance, is a public nuisance per se and may be abated, prevented or restrained by the city. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-13. - Abatement of violations. 
    Within thirty (30) days of discovery of a violation of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall submit a report to the Floodplain Board which shall include all information available to the Floodplain Administrator which is pertinent to said violation. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of this report, the Floodplain Board shall, after all administrative appeals are exhausted, either: 
(1)  Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of such violation; or 
(2)  Issue a variance to this chapter in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or 
(3)  Order the owner of the property upon which the violation exists to provide whatever additional information may be required for their determination. Such information must be provided to the Floodplain Administrator within thirty (30) days of such order, and he shall submit an amended report to the Floodplain Board within twenty (20) days. At its next regularly scheduled public meeting, the Floodplain Board shall either order the abatement of said violation or shall grant a variance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  Submit to the Floodplain Administrator of Federal Emergency Management Agency a declaration for denial of insurance, stating that the property is in violation of a state or local law, regulation or ordinance, under Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended; 
(5)  A party aggrieved by a final decision of the City Council acting as the Floodplain Board may appeal to the Superior Court. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-14. - Severability. 
    This chapter and the various sections hereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the sections so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Secs. 17-15-17-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 17-26. - Floodplain Administrator. 
(a)  The Floodplain Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
(b)  The duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Permit review: 
a.  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
b.  Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
c.  Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development adversely affects the flood carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point. 
d.  Determine that the site is reasonably safe from flooding. 
(2)  Use of other base flood data: 
a.  When Base Flood Elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 17-10, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably use any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer this chapter. Any such information shall be consistent with the requirements of the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Director of the Arizona Department of Water Resources and shall be submitted to the Floodplain Board for adoption. 
b.  Base Flood Elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with 44 CFR § 65.3. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data. 
(3)  Information to be obtained and maintained: The city shall obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed for flood insurance policies: 
a.  The certified Regulatory Flood Elevation required in Section 17-43; 
b.  The elevation certification required for additional development standards, including subdivisions, required in Section 17-43 and 17-46; 
c.  The floodproofing certification required in Section 17-43 and 17-46; 
d.  The certified elevation required in Section 17-43 and 17-46; 
e.  The flood vent certification required in Section 17-43; 
f.  The floodway encroachment certification required in Section 17-48; 
g.  A complete record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance; and, 
h.  A record of improvement calculations, as required in Section 17-26. 
(4)  Alteration of watercourses: 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the Arizona Department of Water Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
b.  Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
(5)  Interpretation of FIRM boundaries: Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 17-29; 
(6)  Abate violations: Take actions on violations of this chapter as required in Section 17-13; 
(7)  Notice to flood control district: 
a.  Advise in writing the County Flood Control District and any adjunct jurisdiction having responsibility for floodplain management and provide a copy of the development plans of all applications for floodplain use permits or variances to develop land in a floodplain or floodway within one mile of the corporate limits of the city. 
b.  Advise the County Flood Control District in writing and provide a copy of any development plan of any major development proposed within a floodplain or floodway which could affect floodplains, floodways or watercourses within the district's area of jurisdiction. 
c.  Written notice and a copy of the plan of development shall be sent to the County Flood Control District no later than three (3) working days after the city receives the plan. 
(8)  Changes in rate of flow: Within one hundred twenty (120) days after completion of construction of any flood control protective works which changes the rate of flow during the flood or the configuration of the floodplain upstream or downstream from or adjacent to the project, the person or agency responsible for installation of the project shall provide to the governing bodies of all jurisdictions affected by the project a new delineation of all floodplains affected by the project. The new delineation shall be done according to the criteria adopted by the director of water resources. 
(9)  Substantial improvement and substantial damage procedures: 
a.  Develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining "Market Value." 
b.  Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments and divisions and implemented by community staff. 
(10)  Corporate boundary changes: Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Arizona Department of Water Resources of acquisition by means of annexation, incorporation, or otherwise, of additional areas of jurisdiction. 
(11)  Biennial report: Complete and submit a Biennial Report to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-27. - Recommendations. 
    Hydrologic-related floodplain regulations and engineering matters pertaining to the administration and direction of these regulations shall be officially referred to the Administrative Appeals Board which shall be responsible for advice and recommendations to the Council. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-28. - Permits. 
(a)  The city shall require permits for all proposed construction and other development (including placement of prefabricated buildings and manufactured homes) on properties in any special flood hazard area. 
(b)  The city shall require that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law. 
(c)  A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 17-10. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited to; plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; in zone AO, elevation of existing highest adjacent natural grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; 
(2)  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structures will be floodproofed; 
(3)  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in Section 17-43; and 
(4)  Obtain a concise description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions), greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall: 
a.  Identify the area of the special flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood; and 
b.  Identify on the final plans the elevation(s) of the proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final lowest floor and grade elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-29. Variance Procedures; Nature of Variances; Appeals. 
(a)  Nature of Variances. The variance criteria set forth in this section of the ordinance are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this ordinance would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants or the property owners. 
(b)  It is the duty of the City of Glendale to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below the regulatory flood elevation are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this ordinance are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(c)  Administrative Appeals Board. 
(1)  The Administrative Appeals Board of the City of Glendale shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance. 
(2)  The Administrative Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. 
(3)  In passing upon such applications, the Administrative Appeals Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
f.  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use, which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
g.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
i.  The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and, 
k.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water system and streets and bridges. 
(4)  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 17-29(c) and the purposes of this ordinance, the Administrative Appeals Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance. 
(5)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
a.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage, and 
b.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property; and 
c.  The land upon which the variance is granted shall be ineligible for exchange of state land pursuant to the flood relocation and land exchange program provided by A.R.S. § 26-301 et seq., as amended. A copy of the notice shall be recorded in the office of the Maricopa County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
(6)  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(d)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood elevation, provided the procedures of Articles II and III of this ordinance have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(2)  Variances may be issued for the repair, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structures continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(3)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(4)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(5)  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
a.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; 
c.  Showing that the use cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This includes only facilities defined in Section 17-5 of this ordinance in the definition of "Functionally Dependent Use"; and, 
d.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
e.  Any variance granted must be recommended to, and approved by, the City Council acting as the Floodplain Board. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 2(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Secs. 17-30-17-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS AND STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 17-41. - Anchoring. 
(a)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; and 
(b)  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 17-47. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 3(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-42. - Construction materials and methods. 
(a)  Materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(b)  All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All new construction and substantial improvement and other proposed new development shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and, 
(d)  Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths shall be constructed around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 3(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-43. - Elevation and floodproofing. 
(a)  New construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in paragraph (c) below. Upon the completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the administrator. 
(b)  New construction and substantial improvement of any structure in zone AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, higher than the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot higher than the depth number on the FIRM, or at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in paragraph (c), below. Upon completion of the structure a registered professional engineer shall certify to the administrator that the elevation of the structure meets this standard. 
(c)  Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in conformance with paragraphs (a) or (b), above, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
(1)  Be floodproofed so that below the Regulatory Flood Elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
(2)  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
(3)  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(d)  For all new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  A minimum of two (2) openings, on different sides of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
(2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
(3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  If it is not feasible or desirable to meet the openings criteria stated above, a registered engineer or architect may design and certify the openings. 
(e)  Manufactured homes shall meet the above standards and also the standards in Section 17-47. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 3(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-44. - Standards for storage of materials and equipment. 
(a)  The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. 
(b)  Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to damage by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 3(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-45. - Standards for utilities. 
(a)  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from systems into flood waters. 
(b)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(c)  Waste disposal systems shall not be installed wholly or partially in a floodway. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 3(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-46. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions), greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall: 
(1)  Identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
(2)  Identify on the final plans the elevation(s) of the proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final lowest floor and grade elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator. 
(3)  Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(4)  Be reviewed to assure that adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 3(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-47. - Standards for manufactured homes. 
(a)  All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By providing an anchoring system designed to withstand horizontal forces of twenty-five (25) pounds per square foot and uplift forces of fifteen (15) pounds per square foot; 
(2)  By providing over the top and frame ties to ground anchors, specifically: 
a.  Over-the top ties be provided at each of the four (4) comers of the manufactured home, with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate locations, except that manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long require only one (1) additional tie per side; 
b.  Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points, except that manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long require only four (4) additional ties per side; and, 
c.  All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds. 
(b)  The following standards are required for all new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to manufactured homes: 
(1)  Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler shall be provided. 
(2)  All manufactured homes shall be placed on pads or lots elevated on compacted fill or piling so that the bottom of the structural frame or the lowest point of any attached appliances, whichever is lower, is at or above the regulatory flood elevation. If elevated on pilings: 
a.  The lots shall be large enough to permit steps; 
b.  The pilings shall be placed in stable soil no more than ten (10) feet apart; and 
c.  Reinforcement shall be provided for pilings more than six (6) feet above the ground level. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 3(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-48. - Regulatory floodways. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 17-10 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply to all adopted regulatory floodways: 
(1)  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If Section 17-48(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard provisions of this ordinance. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 3(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-49. - Areas of shallow flooding. 
    For areas designated as shallow flooding, the provisions of Section 17-43 shall apply. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 3(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-50. - Unlawful Acts. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to engage in any development or to divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in a watercourse if it creates a hazard to life or property without securing the written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613, as amended. Where the watercourse is a delineated floodplain, it is unlawful to engage in any development affecting the flow of waters without securing written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613, as amended. 
(b)  Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 3(Exh. A), 11-13-13; Ord. No. 2863, § 2, 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-51. - Garages and low cost accessory structures. 
(a)  Attached garages. 
(1)  A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the Regulatory Flood Elevation, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters. Areas of the garage below the Regulatory Flood Elevation must be constructed with flood resistant materials (Sections 17-42 and 17-43). 
(2)  A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. 
(b)  Detached garages and accessory structures. "Accessory structures" used solely for parking two (2)-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Section 17-5, may be constructed such that the floor is below the Regulatory Flood Elevation, provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage; 
(2)  The portions of the accessory structure located below the Regulatory Flood Elevation must be built using flood-resistant materials; 
(3)  The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement; 
(4)  Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the Regulatory Flood Elevation; 
(5)  The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in Section 17-48; and 
(6)  The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with Section 17-43. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 3(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Sec. 17-52. - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
    For purposes of this Article, all recreational vehicles placed on site shall: 
(1)  Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
(3)  Meets the permit requirements of 17-28 of this ordinance and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 17-47. 
(Res. No. 4742, § 3(Exh. A), 11-13-13) 
Chapter 18 - GARBAGE AND TRASH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), adopted June 28, 2016, amended Ch. 18, §§ 18-1-18-168, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter as set out herein. Former Ch. 18 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for historical derivations. 
Cross reference- Weeds, debris, etc., constituting a nuisance, § 25-21 et seq.; removal of construction debris, § 30-116 et seq.; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 33. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the city manager or his delegate. 
    Animal waste means waste from stables, kennels, pet pens, chicken coops, veterinary establishments and others of a similar nature and household pet waste. 
    Ashes means all solid residue from the burning of combustible waste. 
    Bin means a container that can hold one-half (0.5) to forty (40) cubic yards of refuse or recyclable material. 
    Bulk trash means solid waste that is too large to be contained in a bin. "Bulk trash" may include, but is not limited to, oversize or overweight refuse not capable of being disposed of in a bin or container, such as tree limbs, branches, palm fronds, hedge clippings, shrubs, scrap metal, pipes less than one (1) inch in diameter, appliances, furniture, cardboard boxes or other items exceeding five (5) feet in length, 
    Business establishment means any public or private place, building or structure utilized to conduct a business, commercial or industrial enterprise. Business establishments may include hotels, motels, motor inns, and other buildings or structures that provide lodging for travelers and long term care facility/nursing homes as defined in this chapter. "Business establishment" shall not include any "residential property" as defined elsewhere in this article. 
    Combustible waste means solid waste or refuse that is susceptible to catching fire or burns at ordinary incinerator operating temperatures. Combustible waste may also include the organic component of refuse. 
    Commercial solid waste service means refuse collection or recycling service provided to any business establishment. 
    Compactor bin means a metal container attached to a stationary refuse compaction unit. 
    Construction and demolition wastes means solid waste derived from the construction, repair, remodeling, destruction or demolition of buildings or other structures. 
    Customer account means the account established by the city to bill and collect fees for solid waste service. A customer may establish a residential or commercial account. 
    Dispose or disposal means discarding, abandoning, dumping, spilling, injecting, leaking, depositing, placing or discharging solid waste into or on land or water. 
    Garbage means all putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from preparation or handling of food, including discarded food stuff and food packaging material. 
    Generator means a person who, by virtue of ownership, management or control, is responsible for causing or allowing to be caused the creation of solid waste. 
    Hazardous waste means garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility, or other discarded materials, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations or from community activities which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment if improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed or any waste identified as hazardous pursuant to A.R.S. section 49-922. 
    Long term care facility/nursing home means any business establishment licensed by the State of Arizona as a long term care facility or nursing home to provide housing, assisted living and/or other long term medical treatment or personal care to elderly, sick or disabled residents. "Care" may include providing food, shelter, assistance with personal hygiene or other daily needs, and skilled nursing care. 
    Medical waste means any solid waste which is generated in the diagnosis, treatment or immunization of a human being or animal or in any research relating to that diagnosis, treatment or immunization, or in the production or testing of biologicals, and includes discarded drugs but does not include hazardous waste as defined in section 49-921 other than conditionally exempt small quantity generator waste. "Medical waste" may include human or animal tissue, any part of a human or animal body that has been removed by surgery, and any contaminated material such as facial tissues, bandages, and hypodermic needles. 
    Multi-family residential properties means any real property that has one or more structures and that contains five or more dwelling units for rent or lease that are subject to title 33, chapter 10 of the Arizona Revised Statutes. 
    Non-combustible waste means solid waste or refuse that is not susceptible to catching fire or otherwise does not burn at ordinary incinerator operating temperatures. Non-combustible waste may also include the inorganic component of refuse. 
    Non-hazardous liquid waste means all liquid waste not defined as a hazardous waste by state or federal statute, law or regulation. 
    Plastic bag means a disposable bag manufactured either from polyethylene or ethylene copolymer resin of an approved thickness, used for the purpose of containing household refuse. 
    Person means any public or private corporation, company, partnership, firm, association or society of persons, the federal government and any of its departments or agencies, this state or any of its agencies, departments, political subdivisions, counties, towns or municipal corporations, as well as a natural person. 
    Recycling means the process of collecting, separating, cleansing, treating and reconstituting post-consumer materials that would otherwise become solid or liquid waste and returning them to the economic stream in the form of raw material for reconstituted products which meet the quality standards required for use in the marketplace, but does not include incineration or other similar processes (A.R.S. § 49-831). 
    Recyclable material means both liquid and solid recyclable material. 
    Recyclable material (liquid) means any liquid refuse produced by a generator which can be reused through a recycling process. 
    Recyclable material (solid) means any solid refuse produced by a generator which can be reused through a recycling process. 
    Recycling container means a container, bin, can or box approved by the Administrator that can be used in a recycling or waste reduction program on public or private property within the City of Glendale. 
    Refuse means all solid waste produced by a generator, including putrescible and non-putrescible wastes, organic and inorganic wastes, combustible and noncombustible wastes, recyclable material being discarded by the producer, and liquid nonhazardous wastes, but does not include hazardous waste, medical waste or human body waste from sources other than septic tanks or chemical toilets. 
    Refuse container means a bin, can, mechanized collection container, bag, or cardboard box as specified herein. 
    Residential property means any property used as a non-transient residential dwelling unit or units, including any single-family dwelling, duplex, triplex, four-plex, condominium, cooperative, townhouse, mobile home park, trailer park, rooming house, or boarding house. Residential property excludes any "multi-family residential properties" as defined elsewhere in this article and any building or structure defined elsewhere in this article as a "business establishment." 
    Residential solid waste service means refuse collection or recyclable material collection service provided to all residential properties. 
    Solid waste fee means a fee or service charge assessed for any solid waste services provided. 
    Solid waste inspector means a city employee or authorized representative who has been assigned responsibility for the inspection of public and private properties so that compliance with the provisions, rules and regulations of this chapter may be assured. 
    Solid waste service means refuse collection or recyclable material collection service provided to residential properties or business establishments. 
    Solid waste management means the systematic administration of activities that provide for the collection, source separation, storage, transportation, transfer, processing, treatment or disposal of solid waste in a manner that protects public health, public safety and the environment and prevents environmental nuisances, as defined in A.R.S. § 49-701. 
    Store or Storage means the holding of a solid waste for a temporary period at the end of which the waste is treated, disposed of or stored elsewhere. 
    Third party commercial solid waste service means refuse collection or recyclable material collection service provided by a person other than the city. 
    Trash means all non-putrescible wastes consisting of both combustible and non-combustible solid waste material, excluding ashes. 
    Treat or Treatment means any method, technique or process used to change the physical, chemical or biological character of solid waste so as to render that waste safer for transport, amenable for processing, amenable for storage or reduced in volume 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-2. - Purpose; interpretation. 
    The Council for the City of Glendale hereby determines that the regulations contained in this chapter are necessary and appropriate to achieve the stated purposes and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Glendale. 
(a)  The purposes of this article are: 
(1)  To preserve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Glendale by providing minimum standards for the safe and sanitary collection, storage, transportation and disposal of garbage, trash, refuse and other solid wastes generated within the city. Whenever this chapter conflicts with any other portion of this Code, this chapter shall prevail with respect to any matters relating to solid waste management and solid waste; and 
(2)  To promote competition in the delivery and availability of recycling services and commercial or industrial waste management services within the City of Glendale consistent with A.R.S. § 49-746. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter is intended or shall be construed to supersede or interfere with the authority of the county health department, state department of environmental quality, the United States Environmental Protection Agency or any other public agency that may have jurisdiction over the subject matter of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-3. - Powers and duties of administrator. 
(a)  In order to protect the health and safety of the people of the City, the Administrator, is authorized and directed to adopt any reasonably necessary ordinance, resolution, rule, procedure, policy or practice to establish, implement and ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter to control the storage, collection, disposal and salvaging of solid waste and recyclable material within the City. The Administrator is further authorized to provide disposal sites for refuse originating within the City and to provide and/or approve of recyclable material collection sites, so that refuse and recyclable materials may be safely and expeditiously collected, managed, treated, stored, disposed of and/or recycled. The Administrator is also authorized to regulate the development, construction, maintenance, and operation and closure of such sites. 
(b)  The Administrator may adopt rules for the collection, management, treatment, storage, recycling and disposal processes, such as determining types of wastes that may be disposed of, routing of traffic and designating time and location that dumping may occur in landfills. Additionally, the Administrator may prescribe rules for the delivery of recycling services and commercial or industrial solid waste management services, to promote the availability of such services, and to provide competition in the delivery of such services within the City in accordance with A.R.S. § 49-746. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-4. - Additional authorities; environmental nuisances. 
(a)  The City shall have the authority to adopt any reasonably necessary ordinance, resolution, rule, procedure, policy or practice to establish, implement and ensure compliance with minimum standards for storing, collecting, transporting, disposing and reclaiming solid waste, including garbage, trash, rubbish, manure and other objectionable wastes. These provisions shall provide for inspecting premises, containers, processes, equipment and vehicles, and for abating as environmental nuisances any premises, containers, processes, equipment or vehicles that do not comply with the minimum standards of these provisions. 
(b)  The City may adopt any reasonably necessary ordinance or resolution or the Administrator may implement any rule, procedure, policy or practice to prevent, mitigate or take action to abate any environmental nuisance and to ensure it does not recur. As used in this section, an "environmental nuisance" is the creation or maintenance of a condition in the soil, air or water that causes or threatens to cause harm to the public health or the environment and that is not otherwise subject to regulation under the City Code or this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the following conditions may constitute environmental nuisances: 
(1)  A condition or place in populated areas which constitutes a breeding place for flies, rodents, mosquitoes and other insects which are capable of carrying and transmitting disease-causing organisms to any person or persons. 
(2)  A place, condition or building which is controlled or operated by any governmental agency, state or local, and which is not maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(3)  Sewage, human excreta, wastewater, garbage or other organic wastes deposited, stored, discharged or exposed so as to be a potential instrument or medium in the transmission of disease to or between any person or persons. 
(4)  A vehicle or container which is used in the transportation of garbage or human excreta and which is defective and allows leakage or spillage of contents. 
(5)  The maintenance of an overflowing septic tank or cesspool, the contents of which may be accessible to flies. 
(6)  The pollution or contamination of any domestic waters. 
(7)  The use of the contents of privies, cesspools, or septic tanks or the use of sewage or sewage plant effluents for fertilizing or irrigation purposes for crops or gardens except by specific approval of the department of health services or the department of environmental quality. 
(8)  The storage, collection, transportation, disposal and reclamation of garbage, trash, rubbish, manure and other objectionable wastes other than as provided and authorized by law and rule. 
(9)  Water, other than that used by irrigation, industrial or similar systems for non-potable purposes, which is sold to the public, distributed to the public or used in production, processing, storing, handling, servicing or transportation of food and drink and which is unwholesome, poisonous or contains deleterious or foreign substances or filth or disease-causing substances or organisms. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-5. - Modification, suspension, revocation or termination of permits. 
(a)  In addition to any penalties or relief in section 18-7, the city may modify, suspend, revoke or terminate any permit authorized or required by this chapter, or suspend, revoke or terminate any solid waste management services provided by the city, or suspend, revoke or terminate any license or permit of any person providing third party commercial solid waste service within the city's jurisdictional boundaries, whenever a person commits a serious or repeated violation of this chapter or any ordinance, resolution, rule, procedure, policy or practice promulgated hereunder. 
(b)  Any person who violates this chapter or any ordinance, resolution, rule, procedure, policy or practice promulgated consistent with it may also be required to fully reimburse the City for any costs incurred to remedy any violation of this chapter or to prevent, mitigate or take action to abate any environmental nuisance and to ensure it does not recur. 
(c)  Any person whose permit is revoked or terminated for a violation of this chapter may not re-apply for a permit under this chapter for thirty-six (36) months after the effective date of the revocation or termination. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-6. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person whose permit is modified suspended, revoked, or terminated by a determination by the Administrator made in accordance with Section 18-5 of this chapter shall have the right to appeal such action to the City Manager. 
(b)  The City Manager has the authority to confirm, modify, or reject the Administrator's determination. An appeal of the action taken pursuant to Section 18-5 must be submitted in writing to the City Manager within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of the notice from the Administrator. The decision of the City Manager shall be final. 
(c)  The permittee may continue collecting, transporting, and/or disposing of refuse or other wastes until the City Manager has rendered his decision, unless the Administrator has determined that such continuance would cause the City to violate a federal or state law, regulation or permit or cause or continue a public or environmental nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-7. - Violations. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and be punishable as a misdemeanor. The fine for each occurrence shall not be less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first offense and less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for any subsequent offense. 
(b)  Any police officer, code enforcement officer or designated solid waste official who observed a violation of any provision of this chapter is empowered to issue a citation or seek a complaint. Prior to issuing a citation or seeking a complaint, the officer or official may, in his sole, unreviewable discretion, issue a written notice of violation allowing the violator seven (7) days to remedy the violation. If the violation is not remedied in seven (7) days, a citation or complaint will be issued. 
(c)  No person may place any bin or recycling container on public or private property within the City by without first obtaining a valid permit to service customers or the public at large from the City. Any violation of this provision may result in the bin or container being seized by the City and the assessment of a one hundred dollar ($100.00) return fee. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-8. - Compliance responsibility. 
    The owner, operator and occupant of property on which solid waste or recyclable materials are kept, accumulated, stored, salvaged, managed, treated, processed recycled or disposed of shall be jointly and severally responsible for ensuring the material is properly managed in accordance with federal and state law and all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-9. - Unauthorized accumulation or disposal; violators liable for cost of removal. 
(a)  No owner, operator, or occupant of property shall allow garbage, trash, refuse, other solid waste, or recyclable material to accumulate or remain on its property, including any street, sidewalk, alley, right-of-way, unless such material is managed in in accordance all applicable health codes, ordinances, and rules and regulations of the Administrator, City, county, state and federal government. However, leaves, grass, clippings and similar organic yard waste may be accumulated and stored for the purpose of composting under such circumstances, conditions and/or rules as may be established by the Administrator. A property being used as a multi-material recycling center, sorting facility, composting facility, materials recovery facility, or for a similar recycling purpose is exempt from this subsection provided all recyclable materials are properly managed on the property, the property and business operations are properly zoned, and property or business establishment has obtained and is in compliance with all permits required by the City, county, state or federal government. 
(b)  In addition to being subject to any penalties for a violation of this chapter as provided in Section 18-7, any person who fails to remedy the violation within twenty-four (24) hours after a citation has been issued to him pursuant to Section 18-7(c) may be charged double the rate for commercial bulk trash collection established by resolution of the City Council. If the violator has a customer account with the City, such penalties shall be charged to that account. 
(c)  Nothing in this Section prohibits the City from remedying the violation itself or ordering the violator to abate an environmental nuisance in accordance with Section 18-4. The City may remedy any violation of this chapter without first giving the violator notice and an opportunity to cure or remedy the violation. If the City remedies any violation of this chapter, the City may charge the violator double the rate for commercial bulk trash collection established by resolution of the City Council. If the violator has a customer account with City, such costs shall be charged to that account. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
State Law reference- Authority of City to prevent the throwing of offensive materials on streets, A.R.S. § 9-276(A)(7). 
Sec. 18-10. - Avoiding solid waste fees and regulations. 
    No person shall place any of his own garbage, refuse, trash, recyclable material, or any other solid wastes with that of any other person, residential property or business establishment, for the purpose of avoiding payment of solid waste, recycling or landfill fees or service charges, or for the purpose of evading any regulation or limitation on collection, disposal or recycling service, or for any other reason. Customers receiving residential solid waste services shall not place out for collection any garbage, refuse, trash, or other solid waste or recyclable material that originated from a business establishment. Customers receiving commercial solid waste service may share bins upon approval by the city or the third party commercial solid waste service provider. The city reserves the right to determine the source of any refuse, solid waste or recyclable material, or any other wastes, so the city can accept or reject such wastes for collection, management or disposal, and charge the appropriate fees in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 23, 2018, amended § 18-10 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Avoiding sanitation fees and regulations" to "Avoiding solid waste fees and regulations," as set out herein. 
Sec. 18-11. - Refuse containment in transit. 
(a)  No person shall collect, transport or receive any garbage, trash, refuse, or any other solid or liquid waste or recyclable material, within the City, except in containers or vehicles that are leak-proof or constructed so that no garbage, refuse, trash, or any other solid or liquid waste or recyclable material, can be released or emitted from such container or vehicle. 
(b)  Any person collecting or transporting any garbage, trash, refuse, or any other solid or liquid waste or recyclable material, shall immediately collect all garbage, trash, refuse, or any other solid or liquid waste or recyclable material, which escapes or is released or emitted from the collecting or transporting container or vehicle, and take such as actions as the City deems appropriate to remedy such a release. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-12. - Landfills and recycling facilities. 
(a)  No person other than the City shall establish, maintain, or operate any dump or disposal grounds or facility in the City for the keeping, accumulation, or disposal of any garbage, trash, refuse, or any other solid or liquid waste or recyclable material unless so authorized by a permit of the county, state or the federal government and approved by the City. 
(b)  Payment of any dumping, annual licenses or permit fees is subject to the conditions of this chapter, and the schedule of fees as established herein and approved by the City Council. 
(c)  Persons who own, operate or occupy residential property within the city may either: 
(1)  Use the city's curbside solid waste services for the collection and disposal of garbage, trash, refuse or other solid waste and the collection and processing recyclable material, provided they pay all applicable fees, as set by the city council; or 
(2)  If special arrangements are made with the city by formal agreement, collect, manage and dispose of their own garbage, trash, refuse or other solid waste and collect and manage their recyclable material themselves. 
(d)  Persons receiving service in accordance with subsection (c) above may deliver and dispose of garbage, trash, refuse or other solid waste generated at the residential property at the city's landfill at no charge, once per month, provided the net weight of a load of such material does not exceed two thousand (2,000) pounds and provided their account is paid in full and not in arrears. Any material in excess of two thousand (2,000) pounds may be disposed of by such persons upon payment of applicable disposal fees. Persons seeking a waiver of the applicable disposal fees in accordance with this section will be required to display a driver's license, current utility bill, or other documentation acceptable to the administrator to verify they are eligible for the fee waiver. Failure to prove eligibility will result in denial of the fee waiver. 
(e)  Business establishments may: 
(1)  Use the city's commercial solid waste service for the collection and disposal of garbage, trash, refuse or other solid waste and the collection and recycling of recyclable material, provided these customers pay all applicable fees, as set by the city council; or 
(2)  Collect, transport and dispose of garbage, trash, refuse or other solid waste themselves, provided they pay all applicable fees, as set by the city council, and such self-collection, management and disposal does not violate any provision of this chapter; or 
(3)  Use a duly-permitted third party commercial solid waste service. 
(f)  All business establishments that use the city's solid waste services or collect, transport and dispose of their garbage, trash, refuse or other solid waste themselves must pay all applicable solid waste and landfill fees with cash or establish a customer account. Business establishments that wish to establish a customer account for landfill usage shall submit a payment guaranty deposit to the city upon establishment of an account. The permit fee may be pro-rated. At the end of each permit year thereafter, a customer account shall remain active only if the user maintains a deposit equal to the average monthly billing of the previous year. Deposits shall not be interest earning. If any business establishment fails to pay the landfill fees by the last day of the billing month, the administrator may: 
(1)  Consider the account delinquent; 
(2)  Decline to extend credit; 
(3)  Prohibit the business establishment from accruing any additional landfill fees; and/or 
(4)  Deduct all delinquent fees from the payment guaranty deposit. 
(g)  The administrator may require any user to return to the scales for verification of the tare weight of any vehicle. Loads may be estimated with a known tare weight when the scales are inoperative. 
(h)  All bulk disposal loads of liquid waste are prohibited except with the express written approval of the administrator. The city shall have the right to take samples of any bulk liquid waste loads for the purpose of lab testing to determine if hazardous waste is present in the bulk liquid waste. 
(i)  Surcharges are added to the schedule of the disposal fees for "hard to handle" waste materials. Surcharge shall be charged for wire and tires and other hard to bury materials which are defined as "hard to handle" wastes at the prevailing market rate. 
(j)  The schedule of disposal fees, guaranty deposit and "hard to handle" waste surcharge fee shall be established by resolution of the council. 
(k)  Bills shall become due and payable when a statement is generated by the City and shall become delinquent twenty (20) days after it is transmitted to the customer account holder. Any delinquent balance contained in a bill may be subject to interest, a penalty and late fees, as provided in the fee schedule approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-13. - Burning of refuse. 
    All burning of garbage, trash, refuse or other solid or liquid waste or recyclable material is prohibited except as may be permitted by the City, the County, the State and the federal government. Any burning of garbage, trash, refuse or other solid or liquid waste or recyclable material must comply with any and all applicable laws, statutes, rules and regulations of the City, County, State and federal government, including those administered by the Maricopa County Environmental Services Department, the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-14. - Ownership of recyclable material. 
    Any person who sets out any recyclable material for collection by the City agrees that the ownership of the recyclable material shall transfer upon its actual collection by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-15. - Solid waste collection fund-Created. 
    A fund is hereby established for the funding and payment of expenses associated with solid waste services provided by the city. The fund shall be known as the "Solid Waste Collection fund." 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-16. - Solid waste collection fund-Purpose. 
    The purpose of the solid waste collection fund is to accumulate all revenues and earnings received for solid waste services, to accumulate all interest earnings thereon, pay all administrative, operational and maintenance expenses, direct or indirect, of solid waste services, and accumulate contingency funds as an operational fund reserve to the solid waste fund. The solid waste fund shall be a separate and protected fund, to be used for no other purpose than expenses associated with solid waste services. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-17. - Solid waste collection fund-Procedure. 
    Commencing on the effective date of this section, all revenues derived from solid waste services shall be deposited within the solid waste collection fund. All revenues in excess of the projected annual expenditures, for administrative, operational and maintenance expenses, direct or indirect, for the solid waste services, shall be placed in an operational fund reserve within the solid waste collection fund. The funds placed in the operational fund reserve shall be maintained in one or more interest bearing accounts pursuant to the city's investment policy. All interest earned thereon shall be accumulated with the principal sum. The operational fund reserve shall only be used for those purposes set forth in section 18-16. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-18. - Landfill enterprise fund-Created. 
    An enterprise fund is hereby established for the funding and payment of expenses associated with the disposal of solid wastes. The enterprise fund shall be known as the "Landfill Enterprise Fund." 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1440, § 1, adopted July 22, 1986, added new provisions designated as §§ 18-15-18-17. In order to avoid duplication of section numbers assigned by Ord. No. 1451, these provisions have been re-designated as §§ 18-18-18-20, at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 18-19. - Landfill enterprise fund-Purpose. 
    The purpose of the landfill enterprise fund is to accumulate all revenues and interest earnings associated with the City landfill, to pay all administrative, operational and maintenance expenses, direct or indirect, of same, and to accumulate a contingency reserve for future solid waste disposal related improvements in a solid waste facility account within the landfill enterprise fund. The landfill enterprise fund shall be a separate and protected fund, to be used for no other purpose than for expenses associated with solid waste disposal. The solid waste facility account within the landfill enterprise fund shall be a separate and protected account to be used for no other purposes than for capital improvements associated with the establishment, improvement, or closure of City landfills or other solid waste handling facilities, and the acquisition of land therefor, major equipment purchases for which funds are required in excess of the landfill operation funding and emergency purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 18-18. 
Sec. 18-20. - Landfill enterprise fund-Procedure. 
    Commencing July 1, 1986, all revenues derived from the city landfill shall be deposited within the landfill enterprise fund. All revenues in excess of the projected annual expenditures plus an operational fund reserve, to be determined annually with the city budget process, shall be placed in the solid waste facility account within the landfill enterprise fund. Such funds, including interest earnings, shall be used for such purposes as stated in section 18-19; except that revenues received as a result of providing commercial solid waste services or intergovernmental agreements may be placed in the city's general fund if the costs of providing such solid waste services to those customers do not significantly increase the city's overall administrative, operational and maintenance expenses of providing solid waste services. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 18-18. 
Secs. 18-21-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONTAINERS AND PRE-COLLECTION PRACTICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-31. - Rules and regulations. 
    The Administrator shall have the authority to establish and enforce rules and regulations requiring garbage, ashes, trash, refuse and recyclable material to be placed and maintained in separate containers. 
(Ord. No. 2944, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-32. - Containers generally. 
(a)  For customers with city solid waste service: 
(1)  All residential properties within the city shall only use the city's curbside solid waste services for the collection and disposal of garbage, trash, refuse or other solid waste and for collection of recyclable material unless special arrangements have been made with the city by formal agreement in accordance with section 18-12(c)(2). Residential properties within the city shall not use any third party commercial solid waste service for solid waste management or recyclable material services. 
(2)  All residential properties within the city shall be provided with refuse and recycling containers used for the residential solid waste service. These containers shall only be provided by the city and shall be used for no other purpose than the collection of refuse and recyclable material. Any containers provided by the city for residential solid waste service shall remain the property of the city. The city shall replace any container that is damaged beyond use, lost or stolen. Additional containers may be obtained only from the city if the customer pays a delivery fee and an additional monthly service fee to the city for each additional container. The city shall maintain city-owned containers in good condition, except for cleaning. 
(3)  The customer shall be responsible for maintaining the containers in a safe and clean manner. If the administrator determines the container is not being maintained in a safe and clean manner, he may order the residential property owner or occupant to clean the container or the administrator may replace it. Any cleaning or replacement that is caused by the failure or neglect of the residential customer may result in the city imposing a fee on the customer account. The administrator or his designee shall determine the size and number of containers issued to a residential property or customer, and the location where the containers will be placed. Containers not obtained from the city will not be serviced by the city. 
(b)  For customers using third party commercial solid waste service: 
(1)  Business establishments shall have sufficient containers to collect, store, accumulate or otherwise contain refuse awaiting transport and disposal to an appropriate waste management facility, and to maintain a clean and sanitary condition on the premises. All containers or bins shall have a lid and be equipped with suitable handles, plates, or sleeves. Containers or bins shall be kept in good repair and shall be repaired or replaced when no longer serviceable. Containers or bins shall be cleaned at least once per year or more frequently if so ordered by the administrator. 
(2)  Containers or bins determined by the administrator to be unsafe, unserviceable or in an unsanitary condition, shall be removed from further use. The city may periodically inspect business establishments to ensure compliance with requirements relative to refuse containers and the sanitary containment of refuse. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-33. - Special handling of certain items placed for collection; items City will not collect. 
    Various types of refuse shall be contained and placed for collection as follows: 
(a)  Ashes or sawdust. No hot ashes, hot cinders or any burning matter shall be placed or kept in a refuse container. Ashes shall be soaked with water and placed in a plastic bag before being placed in a container used for refuse. Sawdust shall be placed in a closed bag before placement in a container used for refuse. 
(b)  All boxes, cartons and crates shall be collapsed or cut up prior to placement in containers. 
(c)  Yard waste, such as grass clippings, weeds and leaves shall be cut to lengths of 5 feet or less, be no more than 12 inches in diameter, and be bagged and placed in containers as directed by the City. Uncontained yard waste shall not be collected. 
(d)  Cactus plants and/or trimmings or pruning from shrubs, bushes, trees (including palm trees), cut to lengths greater than 5 feet or having a diameter greater than 12 inches shall be separated from all other refuse and be collected as bulk trash. 
(e)  Medical waste shall be contained and disposed of in a manner approved by the Administrator and the state department of health services. 
(f)  Wastes from small animals or pets shall be placed in a refuse bag, securely tied and then placed in the regular containers used for garbage. Dead animals may not buried on private property within the city and may not be placed in containers used for refuse or recycling collection. Dead animals must be disposed of properly by the customer. Small animals or pets may be disposed of in the city landfill in accordance with section 18-12(d) or collected and disposed of by third party commercial solid waste service provider for a fee. 
(g)  Highly inflammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in containers for regular collection but shall be disposed of as directed by the Administrator or public safety authorities at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof. 
(h)  Acids, caustics, rapid oxidizers, or any hazardous waste shall not be disposed of in refuse containers. Residents shall contact the state department of health services for instructions to dispose of such materials. 
(i)  Construction and demolition waste-special arrangements shall be made for the collection of construction and demolition wastes, and they shall not be placed with other refuse for collection. The builder, permittee, or owner, shall insure that all such wastes are removed promptly, and not be stored in any location where they may be blown about or otherwise dispersed beyond the construction site. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-34. - Placement in containers. 
    No refuse shall be so compacted, placed or accumulated in any container in a manner which does not allow the contents of the container to fall out, by its own weight, upon the container being lifted and turned upside down. All refuse before being deposited for collection shall be drained of liquids. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-35. - Inspection of containers; notice of violation. 
    The city may conduct regular inspections to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. Notification of violations shall be given by the administrator or designee, to the owner or occupants of the property upon which such violations occur. Notification may consist of affixing a tag, sticker or other label to the container that presents a health or safety hazard or serving a notice in person or by certified mail to the owner or occupant of the property. The Administrator or designee shall have the right to enter commercial, industrial and institutional establishments for inspection purposes, after proving the owner or occupant with reasonable notice. If violation is not corrected within three days after receipt of notification, the administrator or designee shall have the right to remove the container, to discontinue solid waste service, and to collect from any costs and expenses the city incurs in addressing the violation, in addition to any penalty which may be imposed pursuant to city code for a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-36. - Container repair. 
    Any expense to the City for the repair or replacement of damaged, stolen, or misused refuse containers or bins, shall be charged against and collected from the person or persons who caused the expense. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-37. - Recycling containers for public use. 
(a)  All recycling containers shall not be placed within the City for use by the general public without the express approval of the Administrator. 
(b)  All recycling containers in use shall be maintained in a clean, neat and sanitary manner at all times. The recycling container shall have the name and current telephone number of the servicing contractor as well as the owner of the container identified legibly thereon. 
(c)  Owners of recycling containers shall obtain a permit from the Administrator prior to locating any recycling container within the City. General public use recycling permit regulations are established by the Administrator. Recycling permit fees are established by the Council by resolution. 
(d)  Locations for recycling containers shall be subject to the approval of the Administrator upon submission of a permit request. No recycling container shall be placed on City right-of-way. If placed on private property, written permission from the property owner must be submitted to the Administrator. 
(e)  Recycling containers placed within the City shall be serviced regularly to prevent an environmental nuisance as defined in this chapter, including, but not limited to, overflowing and the subsequent discharge of recyclable materials and other wastes upon any street, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other City property, or any private property. Service schedules of providers shall be provided to the Administrator upon demand. If containers are not serviced at a frequency to prevent an environmental nuisance, the Administrator shall have the authority to suspend or revoke a recycling permit, and remove such recycling containers. If the City removes the recycling containers for such a violation, the owner must reclaim the containers within ten (10) days, or such containers may be disposed of by the City at the owner's expense. 
(f)  Violations of this section may subject the owner of the recycling containers to the revocation of a permit as well as removal of such containers. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Secs. 18-38-18-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES 

Sec. 18-51. - Scope. 
    This division shall apply to residential properties as defined in Section 18-1. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-52. - Container storage. 
    All moveable refuse containers shall be located on private property except on collection day, when they may be placed upon the edge of the alley or street for collection. Following collection, they shall be returned to private property within 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-53. - Container service location. 
(a)  Containers may be placed out for collection after 6:00 p.m. on the day before collection, but no later than 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection, and shall be returned to private property by 6:00 a.m. of the day after collection. 
(b)  Containers shall remain at the edge of the alley at locations designated by the Administrator. 
(c)  Containers shall be placed in the street in front of the house to which containers are assigned with the wheels against the curb, and the lid opening facing the street. In locations where there is no curb, the container should be placed at the edge of the property within two (2) feet of the street or improved surface. Containers must not be placed within ten (10) feet of a vehicle, mailbox, or other obstruction as may be determined by the Administrator. Containers must not be placed on arterial streets for service; rather, they should be placed on the property at the edge of the curb with the lid opening facing the street or in a location selected by the Administrator. Containers should not block or impede access to the sidewalk. 
(d)  When it is not possible to place a container on a street, the container should be placed on the driveway adjacent to the sidewalk unless otherwise directed by the Administrator. 
(e)  Refuse and recycling containers that are placed out for service must be at least three (3) feet apart to allow proper service. Lids for containers must be entirely closed. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Secs. 18-54-18-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS SERVED BY CITY 

Sec. 18-66. - Scope; service contracts. 
(a)  This division shall apply to business establishments as defined in section 18-1 which are serviced by the city. 
(b)  The administrator or his designee is hereby authorized to execute any contracts for providing commercial solid waste service to business establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-67. - Bin placement. 
    Each bin shall be placed on the property of the business establishment at a location approved by the administrator. This requirement may be waived by the administrator if necessary for the provision of commercial solid waste service, however, in no case shall the placement of such bin interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-68. - Enclosures. 
    All enclosures shall conform to City specifications and shall be subject to approval by the Administrator. Enclosures shall not be constructed, stationed, or maintained upon any public right-of-way. City collection service may be suspended, a citation issued, and the provisions of section 18-9(c) may be initiated, if the enclosure area is not maintained in such a manner as to prevent the uncontained accumulation of refuse. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-69. - Accessibility of bins. 
    If a bin is inaccessible to a collection vehicle, the owner, operator or occupant of the business establishment shall move the bin to an accessible and approved location so that it can be accessed by the collection vehicle. Bins shall be placed at the approved location no later than 6:00 a.m. of the day of the collection. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
DIVISION 4. - BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS SERVICED BY THIRD PARTY COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE SERVICE PROVIDERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O18-86, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 23, 2018, amended Div. 4 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Business Establishments Serviced by Third Party Commercial Sanitation Service Providers" to "Business Establishments Serviced by Third Party Commercial Solid Waste Service Providers," as set out herein. 

Sec. 18-70. - Scope. 
    Each bin, compactor bin or container used to collect the refuse of a business establishment shall be placed on the property of the business establishment at a location approved by the administrator. This requirement may be waived by the administrator if necessary for the provision of commercial solid waste service; however, in no case shall the placement of such bin interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-71. - Bin placement. 
(a)  Containers, bins or compactor bins supplied by a third party commercial solid waste service provider, or used by an owner, operator or occupant of a business establishment to collect the refuse of the business establishment, are subject to approval by the administrator. 
(b)  Business establishments being serviced by a third party commercial solid waste service provider may have standard refuse containers, roll-off bodies, bins and/or compactor bins supplied by the third party solid waste service provider. All containers, roll-off bodies, bins and compactor bins shall be painted and maintained in a clean, neat and sanitary manner at all times and shall have the name of the third party solid waste service provider identified legibly thereon. 
(c)  The third party commercial solid waste service provider and the owner, operator or occupant of the business establishment shall be jointly and severally responsible for keeping and maintaining a sufficient number of bins and containers, as may be determined by the administrator, to accommodate the accumulation and collection needs of the business establishment. 
(d)  All refuse generated by a business establishment shall be placed in approved containers, bins or compactor bins in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-72. - Enclosures. 
    All enclosures used to house bins for the collection of the refuse of a business establishment shall conform to City specifications and shall be subject to approval by the Administrator. Enclosures shall not be constructed, stationed or maintained upon any public right-of-way. If the enclosure area is not maintained in such a manner as to prevent the uncontained accumulation of refuse, the owner, operator or occupant of the business establishment may be subject to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, section 18-9(c). Bins shall be placed and maintained within the enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-73. - Bins. 
(a)  Containers, bins or compactor bins supplied by a third party commercial solid waste service provider, or used by an owner, operator or occupant of a business establishment to collect the refuse of the business establishment, are subject to approval by the administrator. 
(b)  Business establishments being serviced by a third party commercial solid waste service provider may have standard refuse containers, roll-off bodies, bins and/or compactor bins supplied by the third party solid waste service provider. All containers, roll-off bodies, bins and compactor bins shall be painted and maintained in a clean, neat and sanitary manner at all times and shall have the name of the third party solid waste service provider identified legibly thereon. 
(c)  The third party commercial solid waste service provider and the owner, operator or occupant of the business establishment shall be jointly and severally responsible for keeping and maintaining a sufficient number of bins and containers, as may be determined by the administrator, to accommodate the accumulation and collection needs of the business establishment. 
(d)  All refuse generated by a business establishment shall be placed in approved containers, bins or compactor bins in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Secs. 18-74-18-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-101. - Necessity. 
    The orderly and regular collection of refuse, including garbage, trash, and other solid and liquid wastes, is necessary to prevent the spread of disease, the creation of health menaces and fire and other public safety hazards and public nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-102. - Frequency of contained refuse collection; hours. 
(a)  The frequency of contained refuse collection shall at a minimum be in accordance with state and/or county regulations, but in no case shall be less than once per week for bins ten (10) cubic yards or less in size. 
(b)  Hours of collection from business establishments shall be regulated by the Administrator. However, refuse or recyclable materials shall not be removed from any bin or recycling container located at a business establishment or at any recycling location, when the bin or recycling container is located within two hundred (200) feet of the property line of residential property, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-103. - Obstructions prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle which obstructs access to a refuse or recyclable material container or bin placed out for collection service or to obstruct the refuse collection or recycling operations in any other manner. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-104. - Authorized refuse and recyclable material collectors; permits. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person, other than the City shall conduct any solid waste management or recycling services for residential properties within the City. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person, other than the city or a duly-permitted third party commercial solid waste services provider shall conduct any solid waste management or recycling services for any business establishment within the city. 
(c)  All third party commercial solid waste services providers must obtain applicable permits(s) from the administrator prior to conducting or providing any solid waste management or recycling services for business establishments within the city. 
(d)  This chapter shall not prohibit the generators of refuse, or the owners of premises upon which refuse has accumulated, from personally salvaging, collecting, conveying and disposing of such refuse without a permit, provided such persons comply with the provisions of this chapter and with any other governing law or ordinances. 
(e)  Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit any person from hauling refuse over city streets, provided such persons obtain any applicable permits and comply with the provisions of such permits, this chapter and with any other governing law or ordinances. 
(f)  All contracts for service executed by a third party commercial solid waste service provider shall contain a clause subjecting the contract to cancellation by the customer in the event the provider does not have a valid permit to service customers within the city. 
(g)  Third party commercial solid waste service providers may contract with business establishments to collect solid and liquid recyclable materials from the business establishment after obtaining a permit required by sections 18-40 and 18-113, provided the recyclable materials are source separated and are not mixed with non-recyclables or other refuse or solid waste. Such providers shall not be permitted to collect, remove, salvage, transport or dispose of any recyclable material, medical waste or hazardous waste from residential properties. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-105. - Types of solid waste services. 
(a)  Refuse collection services will be provided to residential properties at the frequency proscribed in section 18-102, on the schedule set by the administrator. The city shall service two containers per residential property unless arrangements are made for service of additional containers in accordance with section 18-32. 
(b)  Business establishments are provided with refuse collection service as required by state, county and city regulations and, if served by city solid waste service, as agreed upon with the city. The city owns and provides all bins used in the city's solid waste collection service. If the business establishment is serviced by a third party commercial solid waste service provider, the service schedule shall be set by the provider, subject to approval by the administrator, and provided such schedule does not interfere with the city's solid waste service or otherwise cause or contribute to any public or environmental nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 23, 2018, amended § 18-105, and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Types of sanitation services" to "Types of solid waste services," as set out herein. 
Sec. 18-106. - Volume required for roll-off service. 
    When a combined volume of refuse at one (1) site exceeds twenty (20) cubic yards per week, roll-off bin service may be required whenever practicable. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-107. - Disposal of dead animals. 
    No person shall place the body of any dead animal in any street, park or in any refuse container or bin. The bodies of dead animals shall be removed or collected as provided in Section 18-33 of this chapter or as otherwise directed by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-108. - Bulk trash collection. 
(a)  Bulk trash collection shall be offered in accordance with a schedule and level of service approved by City Council. 
(b)  Owners or occupants of residential properties shall place bulk trash in neat stacks and in a location parallel to the street or alley adjacent to their property line. No object placed out for collection shall exceed five (5) feet in length, except for bulk trash and palm fronds. The Administrator shall determine whether street or alley service shall be provided. Bulk trash shall not be placed within two (2) feet of City-owned containers or bins, water meters, cable television, or telephone boxes, etc., or in any manner that interferes with or poses a safety hazard to pedestrians, bicyclists, equestrians or motorists. The owner of occupant of the residential property shall transport and disposed of any refuse that does not meet the City's criteria for collection at the City landfill or other appropriate facility. 
(c)  No owner or occupant of a residential property shall place bulk trash out for collection earlier than Thursday of the week preceding the scheduled pick up week. 
(d)  Any owner or occupant of a residential property who violates section 18-108(c) must remove the bulk trash from the street or alley adjacent to his property within 24 hours of a notice of violation issued by the City. Any violator who does not remove the bulk trash within the twenty-four (24) hour period may be subject to a reasonable charge for the City's cost of removing the bulk trash. If the owner or occupant of the residential property has a customer account with the City, such costs shall be charged to that account. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-109. - Inability of City to provide service. 
    Where it is impossible or impracticable for City trucks to operate due to impassable terrain or other conditions, the Administrator or designee may substitute another means of collection or require the person to seek service from another source. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-110. - Collection and fees for areas outside City. 
(a)  Refuse services may be rendered by the City to areas beyond the jurisdictional boundaries of the City, at the option of the City, and subject to termination at any time. 
(b)  The fees for collection beyond the jurisdictional boundaries the City shall be charged a premium above the fee for similar service rendered within the City. Such premium shall be established based on the current market rate and approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-111. - Business establishment refuse collection permit. 
    Permits for collection of refuse or other waste from business establishments within the City shall be issued by the City under the following conditions: 
(a)  Third party commercial solid waste service provider must supply evidence satisfactory to the administrator that the provider possesses the necessary equipment and qualifications to provide commercial solid waste services in a manner satisfactory to the city and in conformity with all applicable federal, state, county and city laws, rules and regulations. 
(b)  The third party commercial solid waste service provider application shall include the name, business addresses and telephone numbers of all owners, partners, general managers and principal officer, as well as emergency telephone numbers, business references and such other information as deemed necessary. 
(c)  The third party commercial solid waste service provider must submit an application, on a form provided by the city, to the city with a cash permit surety of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). This surety shall be conditioned upon the payment of any charges incurred by the city in correcting any failure by the contractor to perform in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. An annual per-vehicle license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each vehicle to be used to provide commercial solid waste services within the city shall also be paid to the city prior to the issuance of the permit and commencement of commercial solid waste service. 
(d)  Once the permit is approved and issued by the city, the third party commercial solid waste service provider shall inform the city of any changes in the number of vehicles it has providing commercial solid waste services within the city. If the provider fails to report any such change, or any applicable fee is not paid for any vehicle performing such services for the provider within the city, the city may suspend the third party commercial solid waste service provider's permit to conduct commercial solid waste services within the city until such fees are paid in full or cause the cash permit surety held by the city to be forfeited in whole or in part. 
(e)  Unless otherwise approved by the administrator or his designee, the third party commercial solid waste service provider shall provide the city with written notice of intent to service any business establishment at least thirty (30) days before commencing service. Such notice shall include the name and address of the establishment, number and size of standard refuse containers, roll-off bodies, bins or compactor bins, and the proposed schedule for collection. The third party commercial solid waste service provider shall also provide the city and the business establishment thirty (30) days' written notice prior to any discontinuance of or material change in service. The administrator may waive the notice requirements in this paragraph, in his discretion, to facilitate transfer of service. 
(f)  Permits issued pursuant to this section shall be non-transferable. The permits shall be issued for one (1) year commencing July 1 and ending June 30. Applications for renewal shall be made at least forty-five (45) days prior to expiration of current permit. Applicable fees may be pro-rated monthly on permits issued during the fiscal year. 
(g)  All third party commercial solid waste service providers must obtain, keep in force and maintain public liability and property damage insurance in the sum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury or death to any one (1) person, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injuries or death sustained by all persons in any one (1) accident and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage arising from any single occurrence, arising from any error, omission or act, negligent or intentional, by the provider or its employees or agent in collection, hauling and/or disposal activities within the city. The city shall be named a co-insured. A certificate of insurance shall be furnished to the city at the time of permit application, and at any time during a permit year when requested by the city. The form and coverage shall be subject to city approval. 
(h)  The permit fee, sureties and insurance requirements of this section may be waived by the administrator for any charitable or philanthropic organization engaged in salvaging or recycling; provided, no part of the revenue from the operation inures to the personal benefit of any person. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-112. - Reserved. 
Sec. 18-113. - Vehicle requirements. 
    All vehicles use for the collection, hauling or transportation of any refuse, recyclable materials or other wastes by a third party commercial solid waste service provider within the city must be inspected at the time of initial permit application and at the time of each permit renewal, be approved by the city and meet the following requirements: 
(a)  All vehicles must be in good condition and repair. 
(b)  Vehicles shall be maintained and operated in a clean and neat manner so as to prevent refuse from spilling, leaking and blowing from the vehicle. 
(c)  Each licensed vehicle operating within the City of Glendale shall display two (2) decals, provided by the City, affixed permanently and clearly visible on the driver's side and on the rear of the vehicle. 
(d)  The name and telephone number of the third party commercial solid waste service provider operating the vehicle must be clearly visible of the exterior of each vehicle. 
(e)  Any open-top roll-off container being transported on the vehicle must have a cover which prevents refuse or recyclable materials from spilling, flowing or otherwise being emitted into the air or onto the roadway. 
(f)  When driven and operated by one (1) person, front loading refuse packers shall be equipped with an approved backup protection device. Audible backup alarms do not meet this requirement. 
(g)  No vehicle shall be painted or identified in such a manner which may lead an ordinarily observant person to confuse such equipment with equipment of any City department or division. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Secs. 18-114-18-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SALVAGE, TRANSFER AND HANDLING 

Sec. 18-126. - Transfer station. 
    The city or a third party commercial solid waste service provider with a permit issued pursuant to this chapter may, in conjunction with its solid waste service operations, transfer refuse or recyclable material from collection to disposal vehicles through the use of a transfer station. Transfer of refuse by private persons shall be permitted. A transfer station shall not be established unless approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-127. - Tampering with containers prohibited. 
    No person, other than the owner, operator or other authorized representative thereof, or an employee or authorized representative of the City, shall tamper with any refuse, trash or recycling container or bin, or the contents thereof, or remove the contents of any refuse, trash or recycling container or bin, or remove any such refuse, trash or recycling container or bin from the location where same has been placed. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Secs. 18-128, 18-129. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1562, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 1988, deleted §§ 18-128 and 18-129, concerning salvage or scavenging permits and collection fees, as derived from Ord. No. 1325, § 1(13-39), adopted Dec. 4, 1984, and Ord. No. 1479, § 2, adopted Feb. 3, 1987. 
Secs. 18-130-18-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- User fees for solid waste collection activities authorized, A.R.S. § 49-742. 

Sec. 18-141. - Necessity. 
    A schedule of services and fees shall be established by resolution by the city council for the city providing solid waste services to residential properties and business establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-142. - Liability for fees. 
    The owner of residential property and the owner of real property on which a business establishment is located shall have ultimate liability for all fees and charges incurred under this chapter, including any penalties or fines, assessed by the city for violations. Nothing in this section is intended to prevent such owner from making any arrangement or entering into any contractual agreement under which payments for solid waste service may be made by an operator, occupant or other authorized agent assumes such payment obligations. The city may agree to establish a customer account in the name of someone other than the owner of the property based on such arrangements or agreements. Any such arrangement shall not affect the owner's ultimate payment obligation as provided herein. If any delinquency occurs under such an arrangement, the city may, but is not required to, bill the owner of the residential property or owner of the real property on which business establishment is located directly. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Sec. 18-143. - Roll-off service. 
    A minimum charge equivalent to one servicing fee will be billed to all customers utilizing roll-off bin service. The minimum charge shall be for one servicing fee per billing period, regardless whether the customer requested or received the collection service. Customers receiving roll-off bin service more than once during each billing period shall be charged for the actual costs associated with providing such service. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Secs. 18-144-18-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HAZARDOUS AND MEDICAL WASTES 

Sec. 18-151. - Disposal. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit the disposal of hazardous wastes or medical wastes within the City, except as provided hereunder. 
(b)  Medical wastes may include: 
(1)  Sickroom waste: Sickroom waste shall include facial tissues, bandages and other contaminated material, except hypodermic needles and other sharp objects. Residential sickroom waste shall be placed in plastic bags, tied securely, and disposed of in the same manner as regular refuse. Pathogenic sickroom waste from hospitals, doctor offices, clinics, and nursing homes shall be placed in plastic bags, tied securely and disposed of in a pathogenic waste incinerator approved by the Arizona Department of Health Services or autoclaved and disposed of in the same manner as regular refuse. 
(2)  Surgical waste: Surgical waste shall include human or animal tissue, any part of a human or animal body that has been removed, bandages and other contaminated material. Surgical refuse shall be placed in plastic bags, tied securely and disposed of in a pathogenic waste incinerator approved by the Arizona Department of Health Services. 
(3)  Institutional pathogenic waste: Institutional pathogenic or infectious waste shall include facial tissues, bandages and other contaminated material, except hypodermic needles and other sharp objects, that is generated by hospital, clinic and doctor office activities. Pathogenic or infectious waste shall be placed in plastic bags or wet-strength bags, tied securely and disposed of in a pathogenic waste incinerator approved by the Arizona Department of Health Services. 
(4)  Sharps: Shall include any waste capable of producing injury, but not limited to, needles, syringes, scalpels, and disposal instruments. All sharps from sickrooms, hospitals, doctors' offices, clinics, veterinarians' offices or animal hospitals shall be contained in the original or similar container, placed in plastic or wet-strength paper bag, tied securely, and disposed of in pathogenic waste incinerator approved by the Arizona Department of Health Services. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-152. - Storage. 
    No person shall store hazardous or medical waste within or upon any property or place within the City unless such storage complies with any applicable federal or state law, including, but not limited to, the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. §6901 et seq., Arizona Revised Statutes Title 36, chapter 28, section 36-2821 et seq., and Title 49, chapter 5, section 49-901 et. seq. and any applicable statutes and rules and regulations promulgated by the department of health services of Maricopa County. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-153. - Removal by City; violators liable for costs. 
(a)  The City may remove any hazardous or medical waste which has been disposed of generated, stored or transported in violation of this article without prior notification to the violator. 
(b)  Any person who generates, handles, stores, transports, treats or disposes of or contracts for the same in violation of this article shall be liable for all costs incurred by the City to properly manage, remove or clean up such hazardous or medical waste 1, in addition to being subject to the suspension or revocation of collection or disposal services as provided for in article I, section 18-5. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-154. - Hazardous and medical waste providers. 
    Any person providing collection and/or disposal services of hazardous or medical wastes shall submit an application for a hazardous/medical wastes permit in accordance with requirements for a refuse permit together with an annual per vehicle license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each vehicle used in the collection of hazardous or medical wastes within the City of Glendale. Vehicles licensed under this section must be used and operated within the City solely for the collection, transportation, and disposal of hazardous and/or medical wastes. No sureties are required for providers who conduct only collection and/or disposal services of hazardous or medical wastes. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Secs. 18-155-18-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESIDENTIAL AND BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT RECYCLING PROGRAMS 
DIVISION 1. - RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES 

Sec. 18-160. - Collection of residential recyclable materials. 
(a)  The collection of recyclable materials from residential properties by any person other than the City is prohibited unless special arrangements have been made with the City by formal agreement in accordance with Section 18-12(c)(2). 
(b)  Participation in the City's recycling program is optional. The recycling program costs shall be paid by all residential customers whether participating in the recycling program or not. 
(c)  For residential properties wishing to participate in the City's recycling program, the City will provide residential customers one or more recycling containers in which to place specified residential recyclable materials. The containers will be clearly marked as "recycling containers" remain the property of the City. 
(d)  The recyclable materials that can be placed in these containers and collected as part of the City's recycling program may change from time to time. Changes in the recyclable materials collected by the City will only occur after notification has been given to all residential customers and such changes have been approved by the City Council. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited, in any recycling container, anything other than the approved recyclable materials. 
(e)  Residential recyclable materials placed inside a recycling container shall not be bagged or contained and should conform to all residential recycling program guidelines developed consistent with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-161. - Frequency of recyclable material collection; hours. 
(a)  The frequency of contained refuse collection shall at a minimum be in accordance with state and/or county regulations, but in no case shall be less than once per week. 
(b)  Hours of collection of recyclable material shall be regulated by the Administrator. The Administrator will designate specific collection days each week, including holidays. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-162. - Recycling program nonparticipants. 
(a)  A residential customer who chooses not to participate in the City's recycling program shall not receive nor retain any recycling containers. Instead, such customer may receive additional or more frequent refuse collection and a fee in addition to the regular monthly service fee may be charged to those residential customers for the additional or more frequent refuse collection service. The City will assess this additional fee on a monthly basis. 
(b)  Residential customers who fail to comply with the requirements of this article will be notified in writing by the City of their non-compliance. After a minimum of two (2) such notifications have been given to the residential customer, the recycling container will be retrieved by the City and the additional charges identified in Section 18-162 may be assessed. 
(1)  The City may make such notification based upon a determination that a violation of this article has occurred, including any of the following actions: 
i.  Placing anything other than the approved residential recyclable materials into a recycling container. 
ii.  Placing dangerous or hazardous waste in a recycling container. 
iii.  Depositing approved residential recyclable materials into a refuse container. 
(2)  The Administrator or designee may furnish twice-per-week collection to any residential customer, subject to the appropriate additional monthly service fee, if in the Administrator's judgment a health hazard or public or environmental nuisance exists or is threatened. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-163. - Resumption of residential recycling service. 
(a)  Residential customers whose recycling program participation was terminated due to non-compliance with the programs' requirements as provided in Section 18-163 may petition the City for reinstatement as a recycling program participant. Reinstatement may occur no earlier than three (3) months after being designated by the City as non-compliant. The Administrator may waive this three (3) month period upon a determination that special circumstances exist and that it would be in the best interest of the City to allow reinstatement sooner. 
(b)  The City also may requirement payment of a fee to recover any costs associated with distributing recycling containers and information by City personnel to residents being reinstated to the recycling program. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16) 
Sec. 18-164. - Appeal process. 
    Any person whom the administrator has been determined has violated the requirements of the recycling program may file a written request to appeal such determination. The request for an appeal must be filed with the administrator within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of notice from the city of such determination. The appeal shall contain the name and address of the person, and a brief statement as to why such determination should be reversed. The decision of the administrator is subject to the appeal process per section 18-6. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Secs. 18-165-18-167. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 18-168. - Business recycling program. 
    The city may provide recycling services to business establishments as part of its commercial solid waste services, subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  The size, color and type of City-owned recycling containers provided to business establishments shall be determined by the Administrator. 
(b)  Participants in the business recycling program shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth by the Administrator, consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The fees associated with the business recycling program shall be based on the cost to the City of providing the service, and shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2994, § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-16; Ord. No. O18-76, § 1(Exh. A), 10-23-18) 
Chapter 18.5 - GRADING AND DRAINAGE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1701, adopted Oct. 29, 1991, repealed Ch. 18.5 in its entirety. Formerly, Ch. 18.5 consisted of §§ 18.5-1-18.5-7, which pertained to grading and drainage regulations and derived from § 1 of Ord. No. 1460, adopted Nov. 10, 1986. Section 1 of Ord. No. 1701 further enacted a new Chapter 18.5 as herein set out. 
Cross reference- Floodplain management, Ch. 17; landscaping, Ch. 19; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 30; subdivisions, Ch. 31; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 33; zoning, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18.5-1. - Short Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Grading and Drainage Regulations" of the City of Glendale. 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
Sec. 18.5-2. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, limb, property, and the general public welfare by establishing minimum requirements for regulating grading and drainage and establishing procedures by which requirements may be enforced by the city. No provisions of this Chapter are intended to govern, amend or affect civil liability except those civil enforcement actions authorized herein. 
(b)  This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control earthwork construction, including excavation, embankments, and drainage on properties; establishes the administrative procedures for issuance of permits; and provides for approval of plans and specifications, and inspection of such construction. 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
Sec. 18.5-3. - Rules of construction. 
    For the purposes of carrying out the intent of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows: 
(1)  All words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; all words used in the singular shall include the plural; and all words used in the plural shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(2)  The word "shall" is mandatory; and the word "may" is permissive. 
(3)  The word "person" shall include an individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, the federal and state government, county, district, or any other group or combination acting as an entity. 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
Sec. 18.5-4. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, and any word, term or phrase not specifically defined in this section, shall be as defined by reference to state law, city ordinance, or other persuasive authority: 
    Bedrock: The solid, non-granular, undisturbed earth material in place either at the ground surface or beneath surface deposits of gravel, sand or soil. 
    Borrow: Earth material acquired from an offsite location for use in grading on a site. 
    City: City of Glendale, Maricopa County, Arizona. 
    City council: The city council of the City of Glendale, Arizona. 
    City engineer: The city engineer of the city or his authorized representative(s). 
    Compaction: The process whereby the in-place density of any earth material is increased by mechanical equipment, hydraulic means or other approved method. 
    Drainage: Runoff which flows over land as a result of precipitation to include flows which may concentrate in local drainage systems with or without defined channels. 
    Drywell: A well constructed in such a manner as to allow surface water to flow readily to an underlying porous strata that will allow for natural percolation. 
    Earth material: Any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof. 
    Erosion: The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind or water or a combination thereof. 
    Excavation: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, manmade obstruction or other earthen material is cut into, dug, uncovered, displaced or relocated and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
    Existing grade: The grade or elevation of the existing ground surface prior to grading. 
    Fifty-year storm: A rainstorm of intensity and duration such that it may be expected to occur or be exceeded not more often than once in fifty (50) years. This event has a two (2) percent statistical probability of being equalled or exceeded during any year. 
    Fill: Deposits of soil, rock or other materials placed by man. 
    Finish grade: The final grade or elevation of the ground surface after grading is completed. 
    Grading: Any excavating, filling, compaction or combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from any such operation(s). 
    Nuisance water: The ponding or drainage of water whether from precipitation or other water source in areas other than designated retention basins, detention basins or drainage ways which causes an inconvenience or health and safety hazard to the general public. 
    Onsite retention: The temporary storage of storm water volume that falls on the site for a given design frequency and duration storm, said storage area being exclusive of public streets, alleys or other lands specifically designated as drainage-ways. 
    One hundred-year storm: A rainstorm of intensity and duration such that it may be expected to occur or be exceeded not more often than once in one hundred (100) years. This event has a one (1) percent statistical probability of being equalled or exceeded during any year. 
    Outfall of site: The lowest point of a site (when final grading and improvements are complete) that will provide for continuity of storm water disposal to the street, alley, drainage channel, drainage easement, or acceptable underground storm drain system. 
    Rough grade: An approximate elevation of the ground surface conforming to the proposed design. 
    Site: Any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted. 
    Slope: An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to a unit change of elevation. The slope is normally expressed as a ratio of horizontal:vertical, e.g. 4:1. 
    Soil: All earth material of whatever origin that overlies bedrock. 
    Ten-year storm: A rainstorm of intensity and duration such that it may be expected to occur or be exceeded not more often than once in ten (10) years. This event has a ten (10) percent statistical probability of being equalled or exceeded during any year. 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
ARTICLE II. - GRADING AND DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 18.5-5. - Permits. 
(a)  All grading and drainage permit requirements, limitations, conditions and fees shall be in accordance with the current edition of the city's "Design Guidelines for Site Development and Infrastructure Construction," which document has been adopted by the city and is on file in the office of the city clerk. Grading plans and permits are required in all cases to include the stockpiling of earth materials for future operations and the temporary storage of earth materials for operations at other locations. The purpose of requiring plans and permits for these storage operations is to protect the general public welfare. 
(b)  When grading operations or other construction disturbs or affects an area of over five (5) acres, a national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit may be required by the federal environmental protection agency (EPA) in addition to permits required by the city. 
(c)  A grading plan and permit are required in all cases except: 
(1)  Grading operations involving the movement of less than fifty (50) cubic yards of earth material. 
(2)  Excavation of earth material for the purpose of installing a decorative pool or swimming pool on a single-family lot. Any excess earth material generated by pool excavation shall be disposed of in a manner consistent with the City Code. 
(3)  Trenching for the purpose of installing underground utilities. 
(4)  Other movement of earth material that may be exempted by the city engineer. 
(d)  Penalties for failure to obtain a grading permit are given in section 18.5-15, penalties for violations, this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
Sec. 18.5-6. - Design standards for cuts and fills. 
    All cuts and fills will be performed in accordance with the currently adopted edition of the Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
Sec. 18.5-7. - Design standards for setbacks. 
(a)  Cuts and fills shall be set back from property lines and buildings shall be set back from cut or fill slopes in accordance with the currently adopted edition of the Uniform Building Code. 
(b)  Setbacks may be increased by the city if considered necessary for safety or stability or to prevent possible damage from water, soil or debris. Setbacks may also be increased by the city for pedestrian or vehicle safety, aesthetic or other design considerations. The permittee may appeal a decision to increase the setback in accordance with section 18.5-17, appeals, of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
Sec. 18.5-8. - Minimum finished floor elevations. 
(a)  No habitable structure shall be constructed with a finished first floor elevation less than one (1) foot above the top of the curb of the adjacent street or the crown of the street where no curbs exist or curbs are of a "ribbon" type, measured from the curb (or crown) elevation adjacent to the lowest point of the lot frontage. In cases where construction includes the provision of a basement, the finished basement floor elevation may be below the curb, or crown where no curb exists, of the adjacent street provided adequate flood-proofing is provided to protect the structure and property contained therein. Floodproofing measures, where required, must be designed in accordance with criteria published by the federal emergency management agency (FEMA) and installation certified by a civil engineer licensed to practice in the State of Arizona and shall be approved by the city engineer. All structures, as a requirement for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or in the case of a single-family residence, a utility clearance, must have an elevation certificate on file with the city. Required certification shall be provided on FEMA form 81-31 as may hereafter be modified. For structures which are not located in a defined flood hazard, this certification may be signed by a licensed engineer, licensed architect, property owner or the property owner's representative. 
(b)  For structures determined to be located in a defined flood hazard area, floodway or floodplain, see chapter 17 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
Sec. 18.5-9. - Design standards for drainage. 
(a)  Existing drainage facilities. No person shall alter any natural drainage course or existing drainage facility in such a way as to damage or endanger by flooding, erosion, nuisance water or any other means, any public or private property or improvements. This includes altering surface sheet flow by the erection of fences, berms, curbs, or any other excavation, fill or structure, if such alteration will increase flow in any existing drainage course or facility without specific approval of the city engineer. 
(b)  Disposal. All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry surface waters to the nearest practical street, storm drain, or natural watercourse approved by the city engineer and any other governmental agency having jurisdiction, as a safe place to deposit such waters, except as provided for in section 18.5-10, onsite retention. 
(c)  Erosion prevention. Adequate provision shall be made to prevent precipitation, surface waters or wind from damaging the face of an excavation or fill. In order to retain a natural appearance, landscaping should be used for erosion protection of finished slopes wherever possible. 
(d)  Terrace drains. All swales or ditches on drainage terraces shall be graded to provide suitable drainage and designed to prevent erosion and provide durability. 
(e)  Nuisance water. The creation of nuisance water should be avoided whenever possible and shall be addressed in a manner which will mitigate or minimize any negative impact(s). 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
Sec. 18.5-10. - Onsite retention. 
    Onsite retention of stormwater shall be required for all developments unless the site is served by a storm sewer, channel or natural drainageway having an adequate outlet capacity from the development to a major drainage outfall such as but not limited to, a storm drain or natural watercourse approved by the city engineer as a safe place to deposit such waters. It should be kept in mind that the city's master stormwater management plan is based on the requirement that development is designed to retain or detain stormwater onsite from a one hundred-year, two-hour storm. For the purpose of determining the volume required, the project area shall be considered as the gross site area to extend to the centerline of all existing and/or future streets on the exterior project boundaries and to include all interior streets and other rights-of-way within the project. The design engineer shall insure that the retention basin(s) will drain to a fully-improved street in case of overflow. In addition, all retention areas shall be designed to insure that the "post-development" flow from the site will not exceed the flow that would have occurred had no development taken place. It is the intent of the city that retention basins present an aesthetically pleasing appearance. The design engineer shall contour the sides and bottoms of the basins to enhance appearance through varied and naturally appearing slopes. Individual parcels of land having a gross site area of one-half acre or less may be exempted from onsite retention if approved by the city engineer. 
(1)  Residential subdivisions: 
a.  All stormwater which falls within the gross area of the subdivision from a one-hundred-year storm of two (2) hour duration must be retained within the boundaries of that subdivision. An exception to retention, or a portion of the retention, may be granted by the city engineer if the site is served by a storm sewer, channel or natural drainageway having an adequate outlet capacity from the development to a major drainage outfall such as but not limited to, a storm drain or natural watercourse approved by the city engineer as a safe place to deposit such waters. 
b.  Retention basins shall be located such that they can intercept the flows from the entire site. If the basin is located other than at the lowest point of the subdivision, additional basins may be required. In case multiple basins are required, the design engineer shall prepare a drainage map which clearly designates drainage areas for each basin and supporting calculations to insure that basins are properly sized to accommodate their respective drainage areas. 
c.  Retention basins shall be protected from further development by a recorded drainage easement and must be fully improved with landscaping, irrigation systems (if required by landscaping), lighting and such other aesthetic and recreational improvements as may be required by the city. Retention areas of five (5) acres net (excluding public rights-of-way) or larger may be dedicated to the city for use as neighborhood parks to be maintained by the city once all improvements have been installed by the developer and accepted by the city. Any basin which is accepted by the city for maintenance shall be deemed public property and shall be dedicated to the city free of charge in fee simple title. Proposed retention areas smaller than five (5) acres net shall not be dedicated to the city as a park unless the planning commission finds in its evaluation of the preliminary subdivision plat that the public benefit is best served by its dedication to the public. In its evaluation of the "public benefit served," the commission shall consider such items as the proximity of existing neighborhood parks, project density, and additional park improvements offered by the developer beyond the minimum retention area improvements; including, but not limited to, playground equipment, benches, barbecues, shade structures, and additional landscaping. The city shall not accept any retention site dedication for any area smaller than three (3) net acres. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to establish a system acceptable to the city to provide perpetual maintenance of all retention areas not dedicated to the city. This maintenance system may be the formation of a homeowners' association or some other type of financial guarantee acceptable to the city. 
d.  Subject to city approval, two (2) or more developers may join together to provide a larger retention facility to accommodate the runoff for more than one (1) subdivision if all other criteria are met. 
e.  If individual lots are graded for flood irrigation and water users' irrigation is provided and maintained, stormwater which falls on the lots may be considered to be retained thereon. A retention area shall be provided for the street runoff and runoff from any other areas not considered to be part of residential lots. The total subdivision retention must in all cases be equal to or exceed that volume expected from a one hundred-year storm of two (2) hours duration. Such flood irrigation and on-lot retention provisions are subject to review and approval by the city engineer. 
f.  Within a subdivision, individual lot retention, except as provided in paragraph (e) above, is specifically prohibited. 
(2)  Commercial, industrial and multifamily: 
a.  All stormwater from a one hundred-year storm of two-hour duration must be retained on site. 
b.  For multifamily developments, all stormwater retention shall be in landscaped areas with no retention allowed on paved parking or driveway areas. 
c.  For commercial developments, a maximum of seventy-five (75) percent of the retention volume may be stored on paved areas with the balance being stored in landscaped areas. The maximum water storage depth in paved areas shall not exceed sixty-seven-one-hundredths (0.67) feet. If paved areas are designed to store water at a depth greater than sixty-seven-one-hundredths (0.67) feet, the developer shall post conspicuous warning signs in these areas advising that flooding may occur and vehicles may be subject to inundation. 
d.  The property owner(s) or a cooperative owners' association shall be responsible for the maintenance of all retention areas and any associated drywells. 
e.  In all developments, provisions shall be made to insure that all fire equipment access routes are outside of all retention areas. 
(3)  The requirement for onsite retention may be waived by the city engineer if it is determined that said retention is impractical because of but not limited to steep terrain, poor percolation, or incompatibility with existing or surrounding improvements. The city engineer may require additional drainage studies or reports in such cases to determine if a drainage problem will be created on adjacent or downstream properties. 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
Sec. 18.5-11. - Street drainage criteria. 
    All streets, as well as other drainage conveyances such as pipes and channels, shall be designed using Manning's equation. Runoff should normally be calculated using the "rational method." All calculations shall be in accordance with the current edition of the city's "Design Guidelines for Site Development and Infrastructure Construction" which document has been adopted by the city and is on file in the office of the city clerk. Streets shall be designed according to the following criteria using storm durations intensities applicable to the runoff basin being drained: 
(1)  The basis for the design of local streets shall be the flow from a ten-year storm, which must be contained between the street curbs. Local streets shall carry the fifty-year storm within the public right-of-way. 
(2)  Other streets shall be designed to carry the following minimum flows: 
a.  Major arterial and arterial streets shall carry flows as determined by the city's master stormwater management plan. 
b.  Collector streets shall be designed to carry flows from ten-year storms between the curbs and flows from fifty-year storms within the public right-of-way. 
c.  In cases where the peak flows from the design storm exceed the above capacities, underground pipes with suitable discharge points approved by the city engineer shall be designed and installed along with all appurtenances necessary. 
d.  Concrete valley gutters (MAG Std. Det. 240, as may be amended hereafter) shall be constructed at all intersections where the drainage pattern requires them. Valley gutters are not allowed to cross major arterial or arterial streets. All valley gutters not located at intersections shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in width. Asphalt valley gutters are not allowed on any public street or alley. 
e.  The design flows must consider all potential flows from all possible contributing areas even though these flows may originate from areas removed from the immediate site. 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
Sec. 18.5-12. - Plans and specifications. 
    All plans and specifications shall be prepared in accordance with the current edition of the city's "Design Guidelines for Site Development and Infrastructure Construction" which document has been adopted and is on file in the office of the city clerk. It shall be the responsibility of the engineer who prepares the grading plan to incorporate all recommendations from the soil engineering reports in the grading plan. 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
Sec. 18.5-13. - Inspection. 
(a)  All grading and drainage operations shall be subject to inspection by the city. 
(b)  Prior to obtaining a permit to perform grading and drainage operations, the permittee shall provide proof that an engineer, licensed by the State of Arizona, has accepted the responsibility for the inspection and approval of the grading operation. The engineer shall act as the coordinating agent in the event the need arises for liaison between the permittee and the city. This responsibility shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, inspection and approval as to the establishment of line, compaction, grade and drainage of the development area. The engineer shall also be responsible for the preparation of revised plans and the submission of as-built grading plans and pad elevation certification, upon completion of the work. The developer shall insure that construction and landscaping which follow final pad and site grading do not alter engineered drainage patterns until occupied by the homeowner. 
(c)  If at any stage of the work the city inspector determines by inspection that further grading as authorized will endanger any property or result in the deposition of debris on any public way or interfere with any existing drainage course, the city may require, as a condition to allowing the work to be completed, that safety precautions be taken to avoid said damage. Notice to comply shall be submitted to the permittee in writing. After a notice to comply is written, a period of ten days shall be allowed for the contractor to begin to make the corrections unless the city inspector determines that the safety of the public may be in jeopardy, in which case the corrective work shall begin immediately. 
(d)  If the city inspector finds any existing conditions not as stated on the grading permit or approved plans, the inspector may refuse to approve further work until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan which will conform to the existing condition(s). 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
Sec. 18.5-14. - Compliance. 
    All grading shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, but shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other laws which prescribe more restrictive limitation, nor shall the provisions of this chapter be presumed to waive any limitations imposed by other statutes or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
Sec. 18.5-15. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor. Every such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during which, or any portion of which, such violation continues and shall be punishable therefor as herein provided. 
(b)  In addition to, or independent of, the penalties provided above, the city may bring a civil proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce compliance with the terms of the chapter or to prevent, restrain or abate any violation of the terms of the chapter. Any violation of the terms of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and, instead of or in addition to any other criminal or civil enforcement measure authorized by this section, may be abated by the city as other nuisances are abated under authority of the City Charter and applicable State law. 
(c)  Neither this section, nor any other provision of this chapter, is intended to create a private right of action by or against any person or entity. This chapter is regulatory in nature, under the police power of the city, and may be enforced only by the city, through the means identified in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 18.5-16. - Deviations. 
    During the process of plan review and approval, the city engineer may grant, on a case-by-case basis, minor deviations to this chapter's provisions and amendments relating thereto when there exists an unnecessary hardship substantially limiting the preservation and enjoyment of property rights and resulting from a literal interpretation of this chapter's provisions and amendments relating thereto. Deviations shall not be granted unless the city engineer determines that: 
(1)  Special circumstances or conditions apply to the property in question; 
(2)  Granting of a deviation is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights; 
(3)  Granting of a deviation will not be materially detrimental to the persons residing or working in the vicinity, to adjacent property, to the neighborhood or to the public welfare in general; and 
(4)  Granting of a deviation will be in harmony with the purposes sought to be attained by the chapter's provisions and amendments relating thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
Sec. 18.5-17. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city engineer under this chapter may appeal the decision to the city council. The appeal shall be initiated by delivery to the city clerk a letter and supporting documentation requesting city council review of the city engineer's decision. Requests for appeal should address specific areas of disagreement with the city engineer. The city clerk shall forward the appeal request to the city engineer for the preparation of necessary documentation to place the appeal on a council agenda. 
(b)  The decision of the city engineer may be reversed or modified by the city council upon considering the following factors along with any other pertinent considerations: 
(1)  The true intent of this chapter would not be affected by the decision; 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter do not fully apply to the circumstances; or 
(3)  That a manifest injustice would be done by the decision. 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
ARTICLE IV. - INTERPRETATION 

Sec. 18.5-18. - Interpretation. 
    It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinances, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of the regulations of this chapter, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to grading and drainage and likewise not in conflict with this chapter; nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenants, or other agreements between parties, except that if this chapter imposes a greater restriction, this chapter shall regulate. It is not the intention of this chapter to legalize any violation of prior ordinances or state law. Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards in grading and drainage regulations, the more restrictive standard shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1701, § 1, 10-29-91) 
Chapter 19 - LANDSCAPING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9; floodplain management, Ch. 17; grading and drainage regulations, Ch. 18.5; mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, Ch. 23; planning and development, Ch. 28; fences, trees and hedges, § 30-61 et seq.; subdivisions, Ch. 31; zoning, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Short Title. 
    This chapter may be cited as the "Landscape Ordinance of the City of Glendale." 
(Code 1963, § 30-1; Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Director: The planning director within the community development department, or his designated representative. 
    Landscape materials: Any materials used for the purpose of landscape improvement which may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: trees, shrubs, groundcovers, turfs, vines, walkways, berms, stone groundcover materials, sculptures, foundations, irrigation equipment, street furniture, outdoor lighting, fences and walls. 
    Landscape plan: A graphic representation of the development site indicating the location of all existing and proposed landscape improvements to be present on the site at the completion of the construction of the project. Such landscaping plan shall consist of preliminary and final plans as set forth herein. 
    Landscaping: An exterior improvement of property in accordance with an approved landscape plan and utilizing approved landscape materials. 
    Screening wall: A solid wall designed and constructed so as to conceal areas used for refuse, mechanical equipment, parking, and service and loading bays from street and public view, and to separate potential incompatible land uses. 
    Turf-related facility: A school, park, cemetery, golf course or common area of a housing development that applies water from any source, including effluent, to a water-intensive landscaped area of ten (10) acres or more. 
    Water-intensive landscaped area: An area of land that is watered with a permanent water application system and planted primarily with plants not listed on the Arizona Department of Water Resources, Phoenix Active Management Area Low Water Using Plant List and the total surface area of all bodies of water filled or refilled with water from any source, including effluent, that are an integral part of the landscaped area. Bodies of water used primarily for swimming purposes are not an integral part of a landscaped area. 
(Code 1963, § 30-3; Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 1907, § 1, 11-26-96) 
Sec. 19-3. - Purpose and intent; regulations authorized. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and requirements for the installation of landscaping and screening walls for all new and expanded development within the city in order to promote the general welfare of the community; to effectuate attractive and logical development; to aid in the enhancement of property values; to create an attractive appearance along city streets; to compliment the visual effect of buildings; to provide appropriate buffers between incompatible land uses and protection from intense activities; and to aid in conserving water by encouraging the use of varieties of plants, trees and shrubs indigenous to arid regions which are characterized by low-water consumption. The standards and regulations of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements necessary for the promotion of the foregoing objectives of this chapter. In those instances where the minimum standards and requirements are not sufficient to achieve the purpose and objectives of this chapter, the director may impose such other reasonable requirements as may be deemed appropriate. 
(Code 1963, § 30-2; Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-4. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development or construction, all building remodeling, alterations, additions, or expansions, and to all changes of occupancy in the use or development of land which requires the approval of a development site plan or subdivision plat by the city. Agricultural uses and single-family and two-family residences and their accessories shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, § 30-4(A); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-5. - Compliance. 
    For all development projects included in section 19-4, preliminary and final landscape plans shall be prepared in accordance with the standards and requirements set forth in this chapter, and shall be submitted and approved in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1963, § 30-4(B); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-6. - Variances. 
    Where, in the opinion of the director, there exists extraordinary conditions of topography, land ownership, site boundaries and dimensions, adjacent development characteristics or other circumstances not provided for in this chapter, the director may modify or vary the strict provisions of this chapter in such a manner and to such an extent as is deemed appropriate to the public interest, provided that the purpose and intent of this chapter is maintained with such modification or variance. 
(Code 1963, § 30-4(F); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-7. - Enforcement and notice of violations. 
    This chapter shall be enforced by the director or his duly authorized representative. The director shall have the authority to enter upon the premises, or any part thereof, at any and all reasonable times, for the purposes of performing his official duties. It is unlawful to refuse the director entry upon such premises. When any condition which would constitute a violation of the provisions of this ordinance comes to the director's attention, he shall cause a notice thereof to be served upon the owner, lessee or other person in control of the premises. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation and shall order the responsible party to correct the violation within thirty (30) days. 
(Code 1963, § 30-14; Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 1507, § 1, 8-25-87) 
Sec. 19-8. - Penalties. 
    Any person in control of any premises who fails to correct a violation of this chapter within thirty (30) days after notice thereof by the director shall be liable to the city for a civil fine in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each and every day beyond such thirty-day period for which the violation remains uncorrected. The city attorney shall collect such fines by complaint filed in the city court pursuant to the procedures prescribed in the city charter. 
(Code 1963, § 30-15; Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-9. - Landscape inspections. 
(a)  All projects required by this chapter to be landscaped shall pass a landscape inspection prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued by the city. Such inspections shall be requested by the applicant at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to being performed. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to refuse to pass any project not meeting the provisions of this chapter. The city shall also have the right to reject landscape materials as being substandard as to size, condition or appearance including a pre-inspection of materials at the supplier if deemed necessary. 
(Code 1963, § 30-11; Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-10. - Required landscape maintenance. 
(a)  With respect to every lot, parcel, or tract of land within the city containing a use for which the provisions of this chapter apply, every owner, lessee, or any other person having the lawful right to possession and control of such premise shall: 
(1)  Maintain all landscape materials and landscaped areas in accordance with the approved landscape plan, including the frontage street right-of-way landscaping required in section 19-63. Such landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, debris, weeds, and dead plant material, and shall in all respects be maintained in a neat and clean fashion. 
(2)  Replace all dead or removed plants with plants of the same variety, and in the size and quality as those removed. 
(b)  The city shall accept responsibility for the maintenance and operation of all landscaping and appurtenances installed in accordance with the provisions of section 19-81 for reverse street frontage landscaping or any landscaping and appurtenances installed within other street rights-of-way, which rights-of-way are described by one of the following categories: 
(1)  Arterial and/or secondary street rights-of-way adjacent to single-family residential areas that back onto the arterial and/or secondary street, and have a screening wall constructed on the rear property line. 
(2)  Arterial street rights-of-way adjacent to single-family residential areas that side onto the arterial street, and which have a screening wall constructed on the side property line. 
(3)  Bridle trails, bicycle paths and multi-use recreational facilities within city limits. 
(4)  Median islands on arterial and secondary public streets within the city. 
(5)  All alleys within city limits. 
(6)  Street rights-of-way abutting municipal public facilities. 
(7)  Street landscaping within districts specially approved or created by city council. 
(8)  Flood control facilities which have been accepted for operation and maintenance by the city. 
(c)  Prior to the city accepting for maintenance any reverse street frontage landscaping or other street right-of-way landscaping described in the foregoing subparagraph (b), the following conditions shall have been satisfied: 
(1)  The landscaping shall be inspected and approved by the city for compliance with the approved landscape plan. 
(2)  The subsequent completion of a sixty-day maintenance period wherein the developer shall be responsible for all watering, weeding, and replacement of all dead or dying plant materials. 
(3)  A final inspection called by the developer or his representative at the completion of the sixty-day maintenance period resulting in final approval and acceptance by the city. 
(Code 1963, § 30-12; Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 1507, § 2, 8-25-87) 
Secs. 19-11-19-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LANDSCAPE PLAN 

Sec. 19-26. - Generally. 
(a)  A landscape plan consisting of a preliminary plan and a final plan shall be prepared, submitted, and approved for all applicable development projects in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in this article. 
(b)  All changes in landscape plans before, during, or after preliminary or final landscape plan approval shall be approved by the director prior to the installation of any such landscape change. 
(c)  All changes in the landscaping of a site before, during or after final landscape plan approval and landscape installation shall be approved by the director as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1963, §§ 30-4(E), 30-8; Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-27. - Preliminary landscape plan. 
(a)  Two (2) copies of a preliminary landscape plan shall be submitted along with the required development site plan for review by the director. The preliminary landscape plan may be shown on the development site plan drawings. The preliminary landscape plan shall be a conceptual plan and shall include the following information in generalized form: 
(1)  The location and identification of all proposed landscape area (on-site, street right-of-way, parking area, landscape buffers and others.) 
(2)  Preliminary data pertaining to the amount of net site area, the ground floor areas of all proposed industrial buildings, the number of required and proposed parking spaces, and the amount of all proposed landscaped areas, required and provided. 
(3)  The approximate location of all proposed trees, shrubs, and other landscape materials and improvements. 
(4)  Notes or graphical representations adequately showing the intent of the proposed plans and materials and indicating how those plans will comply with this chapter. 
(5)  The location, height, type, and general design and finish of all proposed screening walls. 
(6)  The location of all proposed stormwater retention areas. 
(b)  The preliminary landscape plan shall be reviewed and approved by the director as part of the development site plan review, and may be approved with stipulated changes or additions. 
(Code 1963, § 30-9; Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-28. - Final landscape plan. 
(a)  Two (2) copies of a final landscape plan shall be submitted along with all other required site improvement and building plans at the time of application for a building permit. The final landscape plan shall contain the final calculations, data, and specific details and information of all proposed landscaped areas, landscape materials, screening walls, irrigation system, and other items that were required and identified in conceptual form on the preliminary landscape plan. The final landscape plan shall contain a specific schedule of all trees and shrubs identified by common and botanical name, and shall clearly indicate the quantity and size of each tree and shrub to be installed. 
(b)  The final landscape plan shall be in conformance with the approved preliminary plan and any stipulated changes or additions, and shall be approved by the director prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Code 1963, § 30-10; Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Secs. 19-29-19-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 19-41. - Installation of landscape improvements prerequisite to certificate of occupancy; bond to secure installation. 
    All landscape improvements (landscape materials, irrigation system, screening walls, et.) shall be installed by the developer on the site in accordance with the approved final landscape plan prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building or use. When considered advisable, upon presentation of a cash bond, cash deposit, or assured letter of credit in an amount sufficient to guarantee installation of the landscaping and irrigation system, the director may approve a delay in the immediate installation of the required landscape improvements for a period of time not to exceed six (6) months. In those instances where the director approves a delay in the installation of the required landscape improvements, a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the building or use conditioned upon the satisfactory installation of the required landscape improvements within the time period approved by the director. 
(Code 1963, § 30-4(C); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-42. - Minimum size of trees, shrubs, etc., and substitution of cover for shrubs. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified herein, all required trees shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) gallons in size and at least fifty (50) percent of those trees must be twenty-four (24) inch box or larger size. All shrubs shall be a minimum of five (5) gallon in size. All fifteen-gallon trees must be a minimum of eight (8) feet in height, four (4) feet in spread and one and one-quarter-inches trunk caliper at the ground level. All twenty-four-inch box and larger trees shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in height, six (6) feet in spread and two-inch trunk caliper at the ground level. Upon approval of the director, the installation of twenty (20) square feet of vegetative groundcover in any landscaped area shall substitute for one (1) required shrub, up to a maximum of thirty (30) percent of the required shrubs in any particular landscaped area. 
(b)  All Mexican Fan Palms (Washington Robusta), California Fan Palms (Washingtonia Filifera), and Queen Palms (Cocos Plumosa) shall have a minimum five-foot trunk height measured from the base of the trunk to the base of the fronds when located within the public right-of-way or within fifty (50) feet of the street property line. 
(Code 1963, § 30-7(A), (B); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-43. - Natural topping of landscaped areas. 
    All landscaped areas shall be finished with a natural topping material which may include, but not limited to, the following: turf, groundcover, planting, decomposed granite (two (2) inches minimum depth), river run rock, expanded shale, or bark. A pre-emergent herbicide shall be applied to the ground prior to the placement of natural surface materials (decomposed granite, river run rock, etc.) in any landscaped area to prevent weed growth. 
(Code 1963, § 30-7(C); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 1507, § 3, 8-25-87) 
Sec. 19-44. - Landscaped area along street frontage. 
    Landscaped areas along street frontages shall be contoured or bermed to provide variations in grade, visual relief, parking lot screening, and a more pleasing aesthetic value. All on-site parking areas shall be screened from street view by a landscaped berm or decorative wall not less than four (4) feet in height. The required height of the berm or wall shall be measured from the highest finished grade of the adjacent on-site parking area or adjacent finished grade of the street, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1963, § 30-7(D); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 1507, § 4, 8-25-87) 
Sec. 19-45. - Irrigation standards. 
    All landscaped areas shall be supported by an automatic irrigation system which may be a spray, flood, soaker, or drip type system. A pressure-type vacuum breaker shall be required with the installation of all sprinkler systems. All irrigation systems and landscaped areas shall be designed, constructed, and maintained so as to promote water conservation and prevent water overflow or seepage into the street, sidewalk, or parking areas. 
(Code 1963, § 30-7(E); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-46. - Obstructions to visibility on public right-of-way. 
    All landscaping and landscaping materials installed on public right-of-way or on private property in proximity to a driveway or street intersection shall be installed and maintained in compliance with the sight visibility requirements set forth in Chapter 30 of this Code and the City of Glendale Design Guidelines for Site Development and Infrastructure Construction, Standard Details G-147 and G-148. 
(Code 1963, § 30-7(F); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 1654, § 1, 10-30-90) 
Sec. 19-47. - Protection of landscaped areas from vehicular damage. 
    Permanent containment barriers (concrete curbs or bumper guards) shall be installed and properly secured within or adjacent to all proposed parking areas and along all driveways and vehicular access ways to prevent the destruction of landscape materials by vehicles. 
(Code 1963, § 30-7(G); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31 84) 
Sec. 19-48. - Compliance with street landscape master plan. 
    All street right-of-way landscaping shall conform to the city's street landscape master plan, and shall contain plant materials listed in that master plan. 
(Code 1963, § '30-7(H); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-49. - Screening walls. 
(a)  A screening wall constructed to a minimum height of six (6) feet from the finished grade of the site and designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be required along all property lines of a site developed for multiple-family residential, commercial, or industrial uses when such property lines are contiguous with or separated only by an alley from a residential development or a residential zoning district; except that no such screening wall shall be required for multiple-family residential contiguous with other multiple-family development or a multiple-family residential zoning district. 
(b)  All outdoor storage areas for materials, refuse containers, mechanical equipment, or vehicles, and all loading/unloading areas or service bays shall be screened from street view by a screening wall constructed to a minimum height of six (6) feet and designed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  All screening walls located along streets in accordance with sections 19-44 and 19-81 shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(d)  All screening walls required by the provisions of this article shall be designed and constructed: 
(1)  Of brick, slump block, or masonry with a stucco finish of a suitable color and design as approved by the director; 
(2)  To break up the lineal expanse of such walls with a staggered centerline, pilasters, three-wall enclosures, varying heights, the installation of extra plant materials, or varying the landscaped area contours to improve the visual impact of the wall; and 
(3)  In accordance with the height, location, and sight visibility at street intersection requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance and Chapter 30 of the City Code. 
(Code 1963, § 30-13, Art. V; Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 1507, § 5, 8-25-87) 
Cross reference- Height of hedges, shrubs, etc., at intersections, § 30-65; trees at intersections to be trimmed, § 30-66; certain trees prohibited at intersections, § 30-67; limitation on location of new trees, § 30-68; zoning, App. A. 
Secs. 19-50-19-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REQUIRED LANDSCAPED AREAS 

Sec. 19-61. - Use of landscape areas for other purposes. 
    No part of any landscape area shall be used for any other use such as parking, signs, or display; except for required on-site retention areas or when such use is shown on the approved final landscape plan. 
(Code 1963, § 30-4(E); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-62. - On-site landscaped areas. 
    All development projects covered by section 19-4 hereof shall provide on-site landscaped areas located in accordance with the following standards and requirements: 
(1)  For all development within the industrial zoning districts, landscaped areas shall be provided on the site in an amount equal to or greater than ten (10) percent of the ground floor area of all buildings, or five (5) percent of the net site area, whichever is greater. 
(2)  For all developments within the multi-family residential zoning district, landscaped areas shall be provided on the site in an amount equal to or greater than twenty (20) percent of the net site area; and shall be increased by ten (10) percent for each additional floor over one story high to a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the net site area. 
(3)  For all development within all other zoning districts, landscaped areas shall be provided on the site in an amount equal to or greater than twenty (20) percent of the net site area. 
(4)  A landscaped area not less than an average width of twenty (20) feet throughout a particular street frontage in width shall be established and maintained along all street frontages between any building, on-site parking area or outdoor storage area and the nearest point of the existing or future required street/sidewalk improvements (the back of an existing sidewalk, the line equal to the back of a future required sidewalk, or the back of the street curb where no sidewalk is required). However, for reverse street frontage the landscape widths shall be in accordance with adopted street cross-section designs. The area of this landscape strip may be used to satisfy, to the extent provided, the on-site landscaped area and street right-of-way landscaping area requirements set forth in this section. 
(5)  All portions of a development site not occupied by buildings, structures, vehicle access and parking areas, loading/unloading areas, and approved storage areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of division 3 of this article. Future building pads within a phased development shall be improved with temporary landscaping, or otherwise maintained weed-free in such a manner as may be approved by the director. 
(Code 1963, § 30-5(A); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 1507, § 6, 8-25-87) 
Sec. 19-63. - Street right-of-way landscaping. 
    The landscaping of all street rights-of-way contiguous with the proposed development site not used for street pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, or driveways shall be required in addition to the on-site landscaped areas required in section 19-62 hereof. 
(Code 1963, § 30-5(B); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-64. - Landscape buffers. 
    A minimum ten-foot-wide landscape buffer shall be required along those property lines of a site developed for multiple-family residential, commercial, or industrial uses when such property lines are contiguous with, or are separated only by an alley, from any residential development or residential zoning district; except that no such landscape buffers shall be required for multiple-family residential contiguous with other multiple-family development or a multiple-family zoning district. The area of this landscape buffer shall not be used to satisfy the landscape area requirements of section 19-62. 
(Code 1963, § 30-5(C); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 1507, § 7, 8-25-87) 
Sec. 19-65. - Parking area landscaping. 
    On-site parking areas for all applicable development projects shall contain at least one (1) landscaped planter, not less than two hundred (200) square feet in area and with a minimum width of five (5) feet measured from back of curb to back of curb, for every ten (10) parking spaces provided on the site. No shrubs within a planter island of an on-site parking area shall be maintained to a height in excess of three (3) feet, and all trees within such planters shall maintain a minimum clearance of five (5) feet from the lowest branch to the adjacent grade elevation. The required number of landscape planters shall be distributed or located within the parking areas to enhance the proposed development project. The landscaped area within these planters may be used to satisfy, to the extent provided, the landscaped area requirements set forth in section 19-62. 
(Code 1963, § 30-5(D); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 1507, § 8, 8-25-87) 
Sec. 19-66. - Non-residential landscaping. 
(a)  The amount of water-intensive landscaped area in new non-residential facilities, other than schools, parks, cemeteries or golf courses shall be limited to no more than twenty percent (20%) of the landscaped area in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet for facilities other than hotels and motels, and to no more than twenty percent (20%) of the landscaped area in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for hotels and motels. This requirement is waived if the new non-residential facility applies water which is one hundred percent (100%) effluent to the landscaped area. 
(b)  All turf-related facilities that apply water from any source, including effluent, to a water-intensive landscaped area of ten (10) acres or more are subject to the water conservation requirements of the second management plan for the Phoenix Active Management Area administered by the Arizona Department of Water Resources. 
(Ord. No. 1907, § 2, 11-26-96) 
Secs. 19-67-19-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REQUIRED LANDSCAPE IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 19-76. - Street frontages. 
(a)  The installation of street trees, shrubs, and vegetative groundcover shall be required for all applicable projects in an amount equal to or greater than one (1) tree and three (3) shrubs for each thirty (30) feet of street frontage, and vegetative groundcover occupying a minimum of sixty (60) percent of the total street frontage landscaped area. This minimum quantity of trees, shrubs, and vegetative groundcover shall be located in the street right-of-way landscaped area required in section 19-63 hereof, or within the front twenty-five (25) feet of the on-site landscaped areas required in section 19-62 hereof, and shall be designed and located to enhance the proposed development project and the streetscape. 
(b)  All street frontage landscaping located adjacent to driveway exits and street intersections shall be designed, installed, and maintained in accordance with the height, location, and sight visibility at street intersection requirements as set forth in Chapter 30, Article III of the City Code. 
(Code 1963, § 30-6(A); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 1507, § 9, 8-25-87; Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 10-30-90) 
Sec. 19-77. - Multiple-family residential developments. 
    All multiple-family residential developments shall contain a minimum of one (1) tree and two (2) shrubs for each dwelling unit. For two-story buildings and above, seventy-five (75) percent of all required trees shall be twenty-four (24) box or larger in size. In addition to the foregoing requirement, one (1) tree and two (2) shrubs shall be required within each planter island established within an open parking area as required by section 19-65. 
(Code 1963, § 30-6(B); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-78. - Industrial developments. 
    All development within the industrial zoning districts shall contain a minimum of one (1) tree and three (3) shrubs for every five (5) parking spaces provided on the site. 
(Code 1963, § 30-6(C); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-79. - Commercial and other developments. 
    All developments within the commercial zoning districts and all other applicable development projects not specified in sections 19-77 and 19-78 hereof shall contain a minimum of two (2) trees and five (5) shrubs for every three (3) parking spaces provided on the site. 
(Code 1963, § 30-6(D); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Sec. 19-80. - Landscape buffers. 
    The landscape buffer areas required in section 19-64 hereof shall be improved with a minimum of one (1) screening tree spaced at each fifteen-foot interval of the property boundary being screened. 
(Code 1963, § 30-6(E); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 1507, § 10, 8-25-87) 
Sec. 19-81. - Reverse street frontage landscaping. 
    All developments that back or side onto a street and which have a six-foot screening wall constructed on the property line shall install within the street right-of-way contiguous with the property three (3) water conserving variety shrub and one (1) water conserving variety tree for every thirty (30) feet of such reverse street frontage. All such trees and shrubs shall be provided with an automatic drip or soaker irrigation system. Ground cover shall be one-quarter inch minus decomposed golden granite without plastic liners. A pre-emergent herbicide shall be applied to the ground prior to and after the placement of natural surface materials (decompose granite, river run rock, etc.) in any landscaped area to prevent weed growth. The foregoing requirement shall apply in lieu of the street frontage landscape improvements required in section 19-76 for those applicable street frontages. 
(Code 1963, § 30-6(F); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 1507, § 11, 8-25-87) 
Sec. 19-82. - Cumulative totals. 
    Quantities of plants required by each of the sections 19-76 through 19-81 which apply to that project submitted to the city for landscape approval shall be added together to calculate the minimum total quantity of plant materials required for that particular project. 
(Code 1963, § 30-6(G); Ord. No. 1295, § 1, 7-31-84) 
Secs. 19-83-19-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - URBAN FORESTRY 

Sec. 19-90. - Findings. 
    Trees provide a benefit to the community by assisting in the abatement of particulates and other air pollutants, enhancing the visual image of the community and abating noise pollution. 
(Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 12-9-97) 
Sec. 19-91. - Purpose. 
    This article is intended to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing guidelines for the protection, maintenance and management of tree resources within the City of Glendale. 
(Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 12-9-97) 
Sec. 19-92. - Administration. 
    This article shall be administered by the deputy city manager of public works with the assistance and advice of the city's interdepartmental urban forestry committee. 
(Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 12-9-97) 
Sec. 19-93. - Applicability. 
    This article provides authority for the maintenance of trees located within the rights-of-way, parks, and public places of the city, and trees located on private property which constitute a hazard or threat as described herein. 
(Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 12-9-97) 
Sec. 19-94. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator: The deputy city manager for public works of the City of Glendale. 
    Committee: The City of Glendale interdepartmental urban forestry committee which shall be comprised of city staff members appointed by the city manager. 
    Park trees: Trees in public parks, or areas to which the public has free access as a park, and all other areas owned by the city other than right-of-way. 
    Street trees: Trees on public lands lying within the rights-of-way of all streets, avenues, boulevards, roads or ways within the city. 
    Urban forestry plan: The City of Glendale community urban forestry plan adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 12-9-97) 
Sec. 19-95. - Urban forestry plan. 
    The committee shall develop and submit to the administrator an urban forestry plan. The administrator shall forward the urban forestry plan to the city council for review and adoption by resolution. The urban forestry plan shall not conflict, or be inconsistent, with other ordinances of the city and shall contain the following: 
(a)  International Society of Arboriculture specifications for street trees and park trees. 
(b)  The type and kind of trees which may be planted within city rights-of-way and parks. 
(c)  Requirements for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of street trees and park trees. 
(d)  Guidelines for the location and spacing of street trees and park trees. 
(e)  A plan for fostering community support for the urban forestry plan and encourage good tree management on privately-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 12-9-97) 
Sec. 19-96. - Maintenance-Street trees and park trees. 
    The city shall have the right to plant, prune, replace and maintain all street trees and park trees as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of public grounds. The administrator may remove or order to be removed, on city-owned property, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which is injurious to sewers, sidewalks, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is infected with any injurious insect, pest or disease. 
(Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 12-9-97) 
Sec. 19-97. - Planting, removing or cutting trees on public property. 
    No person shall plant, remove, cut above the ground, or disturb any tree within any city right-of-way, park or other public place without first obtaining a permit from the administrator. The person obtaining the permit shall abide by the standards set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 12-9-97) 
Sec. 19-98. - Posting of signs, letters, reflectors or other items. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to nail, or affix by stapling, gluing, or any other manner, any sign, letter, reflector, number or other item to, or on, any street tree or park tree within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 12-9-97) 
Sec. 19-99. - Pruning of trees on private property. 
    Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such tree shall not obstruct the view of any street intersection or interfere with persons utilizing the sidewalk or street. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees or broken or decaying limbs which the administrator determines constitutes a hazard or danger to the safety of the public. If the owner fails to remove such trees or limbs within the time period provided in the notice by the city, or if an immediate hazard exists by virtue of such tree or limbs, the city shall have the right, at the expense of the property owner, to prune or remove any tree or shrub upon private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light, interferes with the visibility of any traffic control device or sign, or otherwise poses a threat to the public safety as determined by the administrator. The costs of pruning or removing such hazardous tree or limbs from the public property or right-of-way shall be assessed against the property owner and shall constitute a lien on the property until paid. 
(Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 12-9-97) 
Sec. 19-100. - Penalties. 
    Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment not to exceed the maximum set for class one misdemeanors by the Arizona Legislators in Title 13 of the Arizona Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 12-9-97) 
Sec. 19-101. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article or any part of the Code adopted herein by reference is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1977, § 1, 12-9-97) 
Chapter 20 - LIBRARY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, Ch. 27. 
State Law reference- Municipal public libraries, A.R.S. § 9-411 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Library director. 
    The public library shall be administered by the library director, who shall be appointed by the city manager. The library director shall administer the library, its staff, reading rooms, branches and stations and for the purpose may make such rules or regulations as may be necessary and expedient and not inconsistent with the laws of the city and the general laws of the state, together with a schedule of fines and penalties for the violation thereof, for the operation of the library. 
(Code 1963, § 26-3.7; Ord. No. 1097, § 2, 11-13-79) 
Sec. 20-2. - Mutilation of books and library property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to mar, deface, mutilate or in any way injure any book, paper, periodical, or newspaper, the property of or contained in any public library, or to mar, deface, mutilate or in any way injure any property, real or personal, or any furniture or fixtures contained in any public library of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 21-44) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, A.R.S. § 13-1602. 
Sec. 20-3. - Failure to return library property; fines and penalties. 
(a)  Any person, who retains, or fails to return, any property belonging in or to, or on deposit with, the Glendale City Library or any branch operated in connection therewith, for a period exceeding the grace period, as established by resolution of the city council, after the date such item was due shall be subject to a daily fine established by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  It is a violation of this chapter for any person to retain, or fail to return, any item described in subsection (a) above for a period exceeding fourteen (14) days after final notification of delinquency is sent by U.S. mail to the borrower's address on file with the library. A violation of this subsection shall be a civil infraction and is subject to a penalty established by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section, the person accepting responsibility for the library card which was used to check out the item or items, shall be prima facie responsible for the violation of any provision of this section and shall be responsible for any fines or penalties therefor. 
(Code 1963, § 21-45; Ord. No. 1571, § 1, 11-22-88; Ord. No. 2070, § 1, 3-9-99) 
Sec. 20-4. - Nonresident usage; fee. 
    Nonresidents of the City of Glendale shall be permitted to utilize the services of the Glendale Public Library after paying a quarterly fee established by resolution of the city council, to cover the additional costs to the city of providing library services to nonresidents. The library director may establish written guidelines, subject to the approval of the library advisory board, setting forth the circumstances when such fee may be waived. 
(Ord. No. 1571, § 2, 11-22-88; Ord. No. 2070, § 1, 3-9-99) 
Sec. 20-5. - Usage fees. 
    Fees for the usage of certain materials and services of the library shall be defined and established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2070, § 1, 3-9-99) 
Secs. 20-6-20-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Appointive boards and commissions, Art. V. 

Sec. 20-16. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a library advisory board for the city. 
(Code 1963, § 2-36; Ord. No. 1097, § 2, 11-13-79) 
Charter reference- Authority to create boards, commissions, etc., Art. V, § 1. 
Sec. 20-17. - Members. 
(a)  The library advisory board shall have nine (9) members, who shall reside within the corporate limits of the city. Such members shall be appointed by the city council. Two (2) of the nine (9) members of the library advisory board shall be students attending high school at the time of their appointment by the city council. The student members of the board shall be full voting members of the board. 
(b)  The mayor, city manager and library director shall be ex-officio members of the library advisory board, and shall have no vote in the matters to come before the board. 
(c)  The student members of the board shall be appointed for one-year terms and may be re-appointed for a second one-year term. The non-student members of the board shall be appointed for a two-year term. All members shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1963, §§ 2-36, 2-36.1-2-36.3; Ord. No. 1097, § 2, 11-13-79; Ord. No. 1644, § 1(6), 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1849, § 5, 7-25-95; Ord. No. 2158, § 1, 7-25-00) 
Charter reference- Ex officio members, Art. V, § 2. 
Sec. 20-18. - Meetings, rules, etc. 
    The library advisory board shall: 
(1)  Establish such rules and regulations as it deems necessary for its government and for the faithful performance of its duties; 
(2)  By vote set a time for regular meetings, which shall be held at least once each month if there is business to transact; 
(3)  Establish a manner in which special meetings may be held and the notice to be given thereof; 
(4)  Require attendance of the members at regular meetings. 
(Code 1963, § 2-36.6(a), (b); Ord. No. 1097, § 2(2-36.6), 11-13-79) 
Sec. 20-19. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the library advisory board shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of a majority of the board members present at a meeting shall be required to take action. 
(Code 1963, § 2-36.4; Ord. No. 1097, § 2, 11-13-79; Ord. No. 2158, § 1, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 20-20. - Officers. 
    The chairperson of the board shall be appointed by the city council. The members of the board shall select a vice-chairman and a secretary. The chairman, vice-chairman and secretary shall serve terms of one year. The library director, or his duly authorized representative, may act as secretary of the board if requested by the secretary so to do. 
(Code 1963, § 2-36.6; Ord. No. 1097, § 2, 11-13-79; Ord. No. 1644, § 2(5), 5-22-90) 
Sec. 20-21. - Powers and duties. 
    The library advisory board shall: 
(1)  Advise and consult, through the chairman of the board with the library director as to the times to be included on the agenda of meetings of the board prior to preparation and distribution of the agenda by the library director. The library director if requested by any board member, shall include on the agenda any item requested by such board member; 
(2)  Review and approve the official minutes of all board meetings prior to transmittal of such minutes to the city council; 
(3)  Monitor and evaluate progress toward established goals; 
(4)  Recommend changes required to strengthen programs or reduce service levels; 
(5)  Identify desirable contacts and relationships with other governmental entities and cultivate cooperative or joint programs for agencies' mutual benefit; 
(6)  Recommend, assist and advise the city manager and the library director in establishing priorities at budget time for those items, other than administrative functions, relating to library policy. 
(7)  Submit, at least annually, to the city council through the city manager, a report which shall inform the council on matters of public interest and need in relation to the resources and services of the library system. This report shall include an overall evaluation of the library system. 
(Code 1963 §, 2-36.5(c)-(i); Ord. No. 1097, § 2(2-36.6) 11-13-79) 
Chapter 21 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Taxes, fees, assessments saved from real, § 1-2(7), (10); financial affairs generally, § 2-121 et seq.; alarm systems, Ch. 3; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; amusements, Ch. 5; dog licenses, § 6-4; bicycle licenses, § 8-21 et seq.; charitable solicitations, Ch. 12; garbage and trash, Ch. 18; massage parlors, masseuses, etc., Ch. 22; mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, Ch. 23; sale of goods on street or near schools, § 26-4; vending operations within city parks and downtown redevelopment area, § 27-111 et seq.; residential development tax, § 28-81 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - SPECIAL REGULATORY LICENSES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1919, § 1, 12-10-96, amended Art. I; added §§ 21-41.01-21-41.03; § 2 of Ord. No. 1919 repealed §§ 21-43-21-49; added new §§ 21-43-21-44 and renumbered §§ 21-50 to be 21-45 and 21-51 to be 21-46. 

DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antique dealer: Any person engaged in the retail business of selling merchandise made in, or typical of, a previous era. Typical merchandise includes, but is not limited to, furniture, silverware, glassware and other collectibles. An antique dealer shall not be deemed to be a secondhand dealer solely by virtue of his or her dealings concerning merchandise made in, or typical of, a previous era, but such dealer shall also be deemed to be a secondhand dealer if he or she deals in secondhand merchandise which is not made in, or typical of, a previous era. An antique dealer shall not be deemed to be a consignment dealer solely by virtue of his or her dealings concerning merchandise made in, or typical of, a previous era, but such dealer shall also be deemed to be a consignment dealer if he or she sells merchandise on consignment which is not made in, or typical of, a previous era. 
    Auctioneer: Any person who runs a public sale where tangible personal property is sold to the highest bidder. 
    Consignment dealer: Any person engaged in the business of acting as an agent for the sale or trade of another person's property, except for antique dealers. 
    Fair market value: The fair market value is determined by the amount the pawnshop or secondhand dealer plans to list the item for resale. 
    Fortuneteller: Any person who is advertised as or represented to be a clairvoyant, astrologer, soothsayer, seer, palmist or spiritualist. 
    Herb dealer or herb doctor: Any person engaged in the occupation of selling herbs, other than merchants or druggists having permanent places of business. 
    Junk dealer: Any person who collects or buys junk, including such items as rags, bottles, scrap metal, paper and such other material as is usually collected for salvage purposes and where such person holds it for storage or offers it for sale. Junk dealers include the owners or operators of salvage or wrecking yards but do not include any persons engaged solely in recycling metal cans, paper, cardboard or glass. 
    Pawnshop: An establishment in which any business holding a pawn broker's license is conducted and pursuant to A.R.S. § 44-1627, as may be amended, in which is carried on the business of pawn brokerage, or the business of loaning money for himself or herself or for another person, receiving as security for payment thereof pawns or pledges of property, or the business of purchasing personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell, trade, or exchange such articles to vendors, their personal representatives, or their assignees at a price agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase, whether such business be the principal or sole business so carried on or be merely incidental to, in connection with, or a branch or a department of some other business. 
    Peddler or solicitor: Any person who: 
(a)  Travels by foot, wagon, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance from place to place carrying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise of any nature and offering the same for sale; or 
(b)  Sells or offers to sell goods, wares or merchandise of any nature from a wagon, motor vehicle, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance; or 
(c)  Travels by foot, wagon, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance from place to place taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise of any nature for future delivery, or for any services to be furnished or performed immediately or in the future, regardless of whether such person carries or exposes for sale a sample of such goods, wares or merchandise or whether such person collects advance payments on such sales; or 
(d)  For himself or herself or for another person hires, leases, uses or occupies any lot, building, structure, tent, railroad car, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the purpose of conducting a temporary or transient business of retail sales. 
    Any person conducting activities otherwise deemed to be those of a peddler or solicitor only under the following circumstances shall not be deemed to be a peddler or solicitor for purposes of this chapter: 
(a)  Persons acting solely on behalf of a governmental entity or a non-profit entity which has tax-exempt status under section 501(c) (3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended; or 
(b)  Persons who are participants at an open-air market or park-and-swap operation licensed under article V of this chapter; or 
(c)  Persons who have met the requirements of section 7.503, (seasonal sales and special events) of the zoning ordinance of the City of Glendale, Arizona. 
    Peddler or solicitor business: Any owner or operator of a business which directly or indirectly employs or directs any peddler or solicitor, including through a contractor or subcontractor relationship. 
    Photographer: Any person who engages in the business of, or solicits, the taking, coloring, finishing, processing, enlarging or selling finished, still or motion picture photographs for profit; provided, that the term shall not include newspaper photographers, persons selling photographs to newspapers or periodicals and photo developing stations located in drug stores, grocery stores, five and ten cent stores or variety stores, where the service is only incidental to such business and where no advance deposit for photo service is charged. 
    Private towing carrier: Any person who offers services for a fee or charge to tow, transport or impound motor vehicles from private property without the prior permission of the owner or operator of such vehicle by means or use of a truck or other vehicle designed for or adapted to that purpose. 
    Secondhand dealer: Any owner or operator of a business which buys, sells, trades, exchanges, takes consignments or otherwise deals in secondhand goods, wares or merchandise, whether such business be the principal or sole business so carried on or be merely incidental to, in connection with, or a branch or a department of some other business; provided, that the following persons shall not be considered secondhand dealers, other than owners or operators who deal in precious items, as defined in A.R.S. § 44-1601: 
(a)  Dealers who accept, sell or dispose of used motor vehicle tires or parts, farm implement parts, farm machinery parts, road equipment parts or mining equipment parts which are taken in part payment for new or reconditioned motor vehicle tires or parts, farm implement parts, farm machinery parts, road equipment parts or mining equipment parts; 
(b)  Antique dealers; 
(c)  Dealers in goods, merchandise or property the transfer of title to which is required by state law to be evidenced by written instrument and to be recorded in an office of the state or county government; 
(d)  Persons licensed for occasional sales under article IV of this chapter; or 
(e)  Participants at a park-and-swap operation or an open-air market, if the operator of the park-and-swap operation or open-air market is licensed pursuant to article V of this chapter. 
    Special regulatory license: Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article to persons engaging in any of the business activities defined in this section. 
    Tax and license manager: The person designated by the city to act as tax and license manager, regardless of such person's official title with the city. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 1, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2112, § 1, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 2354, § 2, 11-25-03; Ord. No. 2604, § 1, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 2727, § 1, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 21-2. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business activity as an auctioneer, consignment dealer, fortune teller, herb dealer or herb doctor, junk dealer, pawnshop operator, peddler or solicitor, peddler or solicitor business, private towing carrier or second-hand dealer within the city without first having obtained a special regulatory license pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 1, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2604, § 1, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 21-3. - Issuance standards. 
(a)  No natural person shall be licensed under this article if such person: 
(1)  Knowingly makes any false or misleading statement in the course of applying for or renewing a special regulatory license; 
(2)  Has been convicted of any felony involving dishonesty, deceit, theft, assaultive conduct or sexual misconduct within five (5) years from the date that the application is submitted; 
(3)  Lacks good moral character as set forth in section 21-4; 
(4)  Is under the age of eighteen (18) years; or 
(5)  Has been denied a license required by this article, or had such a license revoked, for a period of six (6) months following the final denial or revocation decision. 
(b)  No applicant which is not a natural person shall be licensed under this article if any of the following persons would be disqualified from being licensed under subsection (a): 
(1)  The president of an applicant which is a corporation, if he or she is an Arizona resident; 
(2)  Each general partner of an applicant which is a partnership; 
(3)  The managing officer or agent for the in-state operations of the applicant; 
(4)  For a corporate applicant, any person who is the beneficial owner of at least fifty percent (50%) of the shares of such corporation; 
(5)  For a noncorporate applicant, any person who shares in, directly or indirectly, at least fifty percent (50%) of any financial gain attributable to the applicant's business as an owner, proprietor or otherwise; or 
(6)  Each managing member of a limited liability company, or if there are no designated managing members, all members; 
(7)  Each trustee of an applicant which is a trust. 
(c)  No special regulatory license shall be issued to an applicant if the chief of police determines that, due to the nature and location of the applicant's proposed business, the operation of such business is likely to create unreasonably unsafe conditions or to unreasonably increase existing, unsafe conditions in the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 1, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2077, § 4, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21-4. - Definition and determination of good moral character. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person or entity applying for or holding an adult business license pursuant to chapter 21.2 of this Code. 
(b)  The term "good moral character" shall mean the ability and propensity of a person to serve the public in a fair, honest, open and safe manner. 
(c)  The chief of police or such other city employees as he or she may designate shall investigate and determine the moral character of any person applying for a special regulatory license or required to have good moral character by any other provisions of this code. Each investigation shall include a criminal history check of the applicant, and each applicant shall be fingerprinted and photographed as a part of such investigation; provided, that any natural person who has been fingerprinted by the city for any licensing purposes within one year of the date of application for another license requiring a background check shall not be required to be fingerprinted a second time. The chief of police or his or her designee may inspect the applicant's proposed business premises and request additional information from the applicant related to the applicant's moral character as a part of such investigation. 
(d)  The following records may be used as evidence in determining that a person lacks good moral character: 
(1)  Convictions for misdemeanors involving dishonesty, deceit, theft, assaultive conduct or sexual misconduct; 
(2)  Convictions for felonies or misdemeanors involving dishonesty, deceit, theft, assaultive conduct or sexual misconduct taking place more than five (5) years prior to the date that an application is submitted; 
(3)  Convictions which have been reversed or vacated for reasons unrelated to the person's actual guilt or innocence; 
(4)  Judgments in civil actions involving dishonesty, deceit, theft, assaultive conduct or sexual misconduct; 
(5)  Any other reliable records or information which reflects on the applicant's moral character. 
(e)  When a person is found to be unqualified for a license under section 21-3 or this section, the person shall be furnished by the city with a written statement to that effect. The statement shall contain a summary of the reasons for the denial. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1758, § 1, 3-9-93; Ord. No. 1919, § 1, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2077, § 4, 5-11-99) 
Secs. 21-5-21-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ISSUANCE; RENEWAL; REVOCATION 

Sec. 21-21. - Application. 
    An application for a special regulatory license shall be made on forms furnished by the city. Each application shall be accompanied by the required application fee. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92) 
Sec. 21-22. - Fees. 
(a)  The application and license fees for special regulatory licenses shall be set by resolution. The city may set different application and license fees for an applicant who has not previously been issued a special regulatory license for the calendar year in which he or she submits an application and an applicant who has been issued a special regulatory license for the calendar year in which he or she submits an application and who is required to obtain a new special regulatory license due to a change in the location of his or her business. 
(b)  Each applicant for a special regulatory license shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the City of Glendale for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law (PL) 92-544. The department of safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. In addition to any other fees imposed under this article, an applicant for a special regulatory license shall pay an amount necessary to cover the costs of federal fingerprint processing or federal criminal history record information checks. The specific amount of such additional fee shall be set by administrative order based upon information received from the Department of Public Safety as to the costs of fingerprint processing and record information checks. The additional fees collected pursuant to this subsection shall be transmitted to the Department of Public Safety as required by Arizona Revised Statutes section 41-1750, as amended. 
(c)  No application fee or fingerprinting fee paid pursuant to this article shall be returned to an applicant if his or her application is withdrawn or denied. No license fee paid pursuant to this article shall be returned to a licensee if his or her license is suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 2273, § 4, 7-23-02) 
Sec. 21-23. - Issuance; expiration; renewal. 
(a)  Any special regulatory license shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued. Each such special regulatory license expires on December 31 of each year and must be renewed on or before January 31 of the following year by filing an application for renewal, paying the applicable renewal fee and submitting any additional documentation required by this article. The application, payment for renewal and additional required documentation must be received by the tax and license manager by January 31 to be deemed timely filed. 
(b)  Any person who fails to renew a special regulatory license by January 31 of any year and who conducts any activity covered by such license after such date, shall be deemed to be operating without a license, shall be subject to all penalties imposed under this article against persons unlawfully operating without a special regulatory license, and shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual license fee which would have been imposed on the date on which the special regulatory license expired in addition to payment of the applicable license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a new special regulatory license is issued to such person. 
(c)  Any person who is required to obtain a special regulatory license and fails to do so prior to conducting any activity covered by such license shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual license fee which would have been imposed on the date on which such activities commenced in addition to payment of the applicable license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a special regulatory license is issued to such person. 
(d)  No special regulatory license shall be renewed unless the licensee is in compliance with all provisions of this article at the time of renewal. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 1, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-24. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  The tax and license manager may suspend any special regulatory license issued for a specified period not to exceed sixty (60) days, or revoke such license, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to maintain good moral character; 
(2)  Conviction of any felony involving dishonesty, deceit, theft, assaultive conduct or sexual misconduct; 
(3)  When the licensee has knowingly made any false or misleading statement in any report or record required to be made or kept under this article; 
(4)  Any other violation of this article. 
(b)  The city shall give written notice of the revocation or suspension to the licensee, which notice shall contain the reasons for the revocation or suspension and, if applicable, the length of the suspension. Such notice shall either be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
(c)  The licensee may request an informal hearing on such revocation or suspension by submitting a written request to the tax and license manager within ten (10) days after the notice of revocation or suspension is given. An informal hearing before the tax and license manager shall be held within fifteen (15) days after the request for the same is received by the city. If the licensee does not request a hearing within said ten (10) day period, the revocation or suspension shall take effect on the eleventh day after service of the notice of revocation or suspension. If a hearing is requested, the revocation or suspension shall not take effect until after the informal hearing and the service of a new notice from the tax and license manager on the licensee setting forth the tax and license manager's final decision. Such notice shall be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 1, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-25. - Appeal from denial, revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  A person who has been denied a special regulatory license or whose special regulatory license has been revoked or suspended after an informal hearing with the tax and license manager may appeal such decision to a hearing officer. The appeal shall be requested within ten (10) days from the date on which such person is given notice of the determination from which the appeal is taken. The request shall be in writing, shall be filed with the city manager and shall set forth specifically the grounds for the appeal. 
(b)  The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct a hearing in accordance with this section. The hearing officer shall not be a member of the tax and license division. The hearing officer may, in his or her discretion, stay any revocation or suspension pending final determination of the appeal. 
(c)  The burden of proof at the hearing shall be on the applicant or licensee to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he or she meets all of the requirements for holding a special regulatory license. The hearing officer shall hear such testimony and consider such evidence as is relevant to the determination of such issues. The hearing officer shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence or procedure in conducting the hearing. 
(d)  The hearing officer shall render a written decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing is concluded based on the evidence presented by the city and the applicant or licensee. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92) 
Sec. 21-26. - Nontransferability. 
    No special regulatory license shall be transferable between persons or locations. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92) 
Sec. 21-27. - Display. 
    A licensee who maintains a regular place of business within the city shall at all times display his or her special regulatory license in a conspicuous place at such place of business. A licensee who does not maintain a regular place of business within the city shall carry the special regulatory license on his or her person at all times during which he or she is engaging in such licensed business activities within the city and shall display the special regulatory license upon request to any person considering doing business with the licensee or to any police officer, law enforcement official or city official whose duties are related to licensing. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92) 
Sec. 21-28. - Exempt facilities and activities. 
(a)  Facilities and the activities held at facilities owned by city, county, state or federal governments or quasi-governmental agencies that would normally be licensed under this chapter are exempt from the requirements of articles I and V of this chapter. This exemption does not apply to city parks. 
(b)  Activities sponsored by non-profit organizations that would normally be licensed under this chapter are exempt from the requirements of articles I and V of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person or entity that holds an event exempt under this section is required to comply with the provisions of article II of this chapter and chapter 21.1, the model city privilege tax code. 
(Ord. No. 2354, § 3, 11-25-03) 
Secs. 21-29-21-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 

Sec. 21-41. - Auctioneers, consignment dealers, junk dealers, pawnshop operators and secondhand dealers; general operating requirements. 
(a)  No auctioneer, consignment dealer, junk dealer, pawnshop operator or secondhand dealer shall accept any goods or articles on or by consignment, deposit, pawn, pledge, trade or purchase without first requiring the person providing such goods or articles to produce an unexpired, unaltered identification card which has been issued by any state or by the federal government and which contains a photograph of such person. No auctioneer, consignment dealer, junk dealer, pawnshop operator or secondhand dealer shall accept any goods or articles on or by consignment, deposit, pawn, pledge, trade or purchase from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian who provides an identification card pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Whenever goods or articles, as described below, are obtained from a particular person by a pawnshop or secondhand dealer, whether by consignment, deposit, pawn, pledge, trade or purchase, such licensee shall be required to deliver to the chief of police, or his designee, within two (2) business days after receipt, a true and complete report of all such goods or articles received by such licensee. Such report shall include the date and time when such goods or articles were received, a detailed description of such goods or articles, the amount loaned or paid for such goods or articles, the number of such goods or articles received, the number of the pawn ticket (if applicable), the printed name and address of the person supplying such goods or articles, the number and type of identification document of the supplier required under paragraph (a) of this section, a fingerprint of such supplier, the signature of such supplier, and a description of such supplier, including such person's address, sex, approximate height, age, race, and color of hair . The report shall be on a form prescribed by the chief of police and shall be considered as filed only when the accuracy of the form has been attested to, by signature on the form, by the pawnshop operator or secondhand dealer, or its authorized agent and has been received by the chief of police, or his designee. The licensee shall keep a copy of each report for at least two (2) years after delivering such report to the chief of police, or his designee. 
(c)  No goods or articles shall be sold, exchanged, altered or removed from the licensee's premises by any pawnshop operator or secondhand dealer until the same shall have been in custody of such licensee for at least twenty (20) days after delivery to the chief of police of the report required by subsection (b). 
(d)  Whenever the fair market value of the goods or articles sold to a particular person by an auctioneer, consignment dealer, junk dealer, pawnshop operator or secondhand dealer is greater than one hundred dollars ($100.00), such licensee shall be required to record the name and address of such purchaser and a detailed description of the goods or articles sold to such purchaser. The licensee shall keep a record of such sales for at least six (6) months after each such sale is made. 
(e)  Every auctioneer, consignment dealer, junk dealer, pawnshop operator or secondhand dealer shall allow his or her premises, along with his or her transaction records and stock of goods and articles, to be open at reasonable hours for reasonable inspections by representatives of the police department. 
(f)  Every auctioneer, consignment dealer, junk dealer, pawnshop operator or secondhand dealer shall at all times display an easily readable copy of sections 21-41, 21-41.01, 21-41.02 and 21-41.03 of this Code in a conspicuous place, open to the public, on such licensee's business premises. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 1, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2727, § 2, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 21-41.01. - Antique dealers, auctioneers, consignment dealers, junk dealers, pawnshop operators and secondhand dealers; property holds and uncontested releases. 
(a)  Whenever any peace officer has probable cause to believe that any property in the possession of an antique dealer, auctioneer, consignment dealer, junk dealer, pawnshop operator or secondhand dealer is stolen property, the peace officer may place a hold on the property for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. The hold shall be effective immediately upon oral or written notice to such licensee. If oral notice of a hold is given, the peace officer shall also give a written notice of such hold to such licensee within two (2) business days. The written notice shall accurately describe the property subject to a hold, including the article's brand name and serial number. During the hold period, the licensee shall not sell, exchange, alter or dispose of the property except pursuant to a court order, an order from an administrative hearing officer or written authorization from a peace officer. Upon receipt of the written notice of hold, the licensee shall tag and mark the property placed on hold with the date and time of the hold, the name of the law enforcement agency placing the hold and the law enforcement report number. No interest upon held property which has been pawned or pledged shall accrue from the time that a hold is placed on such property until the time that the hold is released or all claimants' rights to possession of such property are determined. 
(b)  Whenever property that is in possession of an antique dealer, auctioneer, consignment dealer, junk dealer, pawnshop operator or secondhand dealer is subject to a hold and such property is requested by the law enforcement agency placing the hold for use in criminal proceedings, such licensee shall, upon reasonable notice, deliver such property to a peace officer working for such agency. The peace officer to whom the property is delivered shall provide a written receipt for the property, which shall include an accurate description of the property, the brand name and serial number for the property, the reason for the seizure, the name of the licensee from whom the property is received and the name of the peace officer receiving the property. 
(c)  Whenever the law enforcement agency which placed a hold on property no longer requires the hold for criminal proceedings and such agency has no actual knowledge that a person other than the licensee claims the right to possession of the property, the agency shall provide the licensee with a written release of the hold. Every property hold shall automatically terminate ninety (90) days after it is placed if the law enforcement agency which placed the hold has not given the licensee a written release of the hold by the end of such ninety-day period. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 1, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-41.02. - Property holds by non-city agencies; contested claims; releases. 
    Whenever a law enforcement agency other than the city's police department has placed a hold on property and such agency has actual knowledge that a person other than the licensee claims the right to possession of the held property, the following procedures shall govern the release of the hold and/or the property: 
(a)  If the agency takes custody of the held property after placing the hold, then the property hold shall automatically terminate at such time as the agency takes custody of the property. The agency shall then determine its own procedures concerning any subsequent release of the property, and the hearing procedures set forth in section 21-41.03 shall not apply. 
(b)  If the agency does not take custody of the held property after placing the hold, the agency shall determine its own procedures for releasing the property hold; provided, that every property hold shall automatically terminate ninety (90) days after it is placed if the agency has not otherwise released the hold by the end of such ninety-day period. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 1, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-41.03. - Property holds by city; contested claims; possessory-interest hearings; releases. 
(a)  Whenever the city's police department has placed a hold on property, the police department has not taken custody of the held property, the police department no longer requires the property hold for criminal proceedings, and the police department has actual knowledge that a person other than the licensee claims the right to possession of the held property, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  The police department shall send a written notice to any person claiming the right to possession of the held property that the property is in the possession of the specified licensee, that the police department is releasing the property hold, that the release of the property hold is not a judicial determination as to whether the licensee or the claimant is entitled to possession of the property, and that the claimant may exercise any available civil remedies that the claimant has concerning possession of the property. Such notice shall be personally served on the claimant or sent by first-class mail to the claimant's last known address. 
(2)  A copy of such notice, with the claimant's address deleted, shall be served on or sent by first-class mail to the licensee. 
(b)  Whenever the city's police department has placed a hold on property, the police department has taken custody of the held property, the police department no longer requires the property for criminal proceedings, and the police department has actual knowledge that a person other than the licensee claims the right to possession of the held property, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  The police department shall send a written notice to any person claiming the right to possession of the property that the property is in the possession of the police department and that the police department will release the property to the specified licensee if the claimant does not request a possessory-interest hearing before the city's hearing officer within thirty (30) days. Such notice shall be personally served on the claimant or sent by first-class mail to the claimant's last known address. 
(2)  A copy of such notice, with the claimant's address deleted, shall be served on or sent by first-class mail to the licensee. 
(3)  The claimant may request a possessory-interest hearing within thirty (30) days from the date on which the claimant is given the notice required by subsection (b) (1). The request shall be in writing, shall be filed with the city manager and shall set forth the basis for the claimant's right to possession of the property. 
(4)  If a timely request for a hearing is filed, a hearing shall be conducted pursuant to subsections (c) and (d) at a time and place set by the hearing officer. Such hearing shall be in the nature of an interpleader action. 
(5)  The hearing procedures set forth in this section shall not preclude either the licensee or the claimant from exercising any other civil remedies available to such parties. At any time that the hearing officer determines that the right to possession of the held property is subject to a pending court proceeding, the hearing officer shall enter an order releasing the property hold and shall abstain from any further proceedings under this section. 
(c)  The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct hearings required by this section. The hearing officer shall not be a member of the city's police department. The only issue to be decided by the hearing officer is whether the licensee or the claimant has a right to immediate possession of the property upon its release from the police department. The hearing officer shall hear such testimony and consider such evidence as is relevant to the determination of such issue. The hearing officer shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence or procedure in conducting the hearing. 
(d)  The hearing officer shall render a written decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing based on the evidence presented by the parties. A copy of the hearing officer's decision shall be sent to the police department. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and subject to appeal to the superior court pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes title 12, chapter 7, article 6. If no appeal is filed and served on the city within the time limits specified by law, the property shall be released in accordance with the hearing officer's decision. If the hearing officer's decision is timely appealed and served, the property shall continue to be held by the police department pending court order. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 1, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-42. - Peddlers and solicitors. 
(a)  The tax and license manager shall issue to each peddler or solicitor an identification card containing a current photograph of such licensee. Each identification card shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued, and the peddler or solicitor shall obtain a new identification card by January 31 of the following year by presenting himself or herself to the tax and license division for photographing. At all times that a licensee is acting as a peddler or solicitor, he or she shall carry on his or her person a valid peddler or solicitor identification card. A peddler or solicitor shall display his or her identification card upon request to any person considering doing business with such person or to any police officer, law enforcement official or city official whose duties are related to licensing. 
(b)  Every applicant for a peddler's or solicitor's license who as a part of his or her business activities will handle any unpackaged meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden produce, farm produce or other food products shall file with his or her application a current food handler's health certificate from the Maricopa County health department and any other similar certificate or permit required by law for food handling. 
(c)  Every applicant for a peddler's or solicitor's license who will use a vehicle in conducting the activities of a peddler or solicitor shall provide a photograph of such vehicle to the tax and license division. 
(d)  Every applicant for a stationary peddler's or solicitor's license shall provide a copy of a current contract with the owner of the premises on which the peddler or solicitor will operate, or such other documentation as will prove that the peddler or solicitor is authorized to operate from such premises, to the tax and license division. 
(e)  No peddler or solicitor shall operate in any city park or city property within the downtown redevelopment area without first obtaining a park vending permit pursuant to chapter 27, article V of this code. 
(f)  No peddler's or solicitor's operations shall interfere with pedestrian access ways, fire lanes, required parking spaces under the zoning ordinance, driveways or landscaped areas, or otherwise obstruct a driver's vision of a roadway or driveway. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 1, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-43. - Peddler or solicitor businesses; duty to ensure compliance. 
(a)  A peddler or solicitor business shall not allow any of its employees to work as a peddler or solicitor until such person has displayed to the peddler or solicitor business a valid peddler or solicitor license and identification card. A peddler or solicitor business shall require that all persons employed as peddlers or solicitors maintain current licenses and identification cards at all times that such persons work for the peddler or solicitor business. On or before January 31 of each year, the peddler or solicitor business shall verify with each peddler or solicitor that such person has renewed his or her license and identification card. 
(b)  A peddler or solicitor business shall not allow any person who contracts with such business to perform, on behalf of such business, any services for which a peddler or solicitor license is required until such person has displayed to the peddler or solicitor business a valid peddler or solicitor license and identification card. A peddler or solicitor business shall require that all persons so contracting with such business maintain current licenses and identification cards at all times that such persons perform services for which a peddler or solicitor license is required on behalf of the peddler or solicitor business. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 2, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-44. - Prohibited sales. 
    No person who is required to obtain a special regulatory license shall at any time display, sell, trade or otherwise distribute any of the following items within the city: 
(1)  Hazardous or flammable chemicals or materials; 
(2)  Knives; 
(3)  Starter or blank guns; 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Any chemicals or materials for which the primary purpose is to cause odors that would be offensive to a person of reasonable sensibilities. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 2, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2801, § 2, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 017-18, § 2, 5-9-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 017-18, § 2, adopted May 9, 2017 amended § 21-44 to ensure consistency and compliance with Arizona State Law regulating fireworks. 
Sec. 21-45. - Compliance with other laws. 
    The issuance of a special regulatory license shall not be construed as authority to engage in any activity which is in violation of any other law or regulation to which such activity is subject, or to conduct activities on any property in violation of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 2, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-46. - Compliance with administrative regulations. 
    The chief of police and the tax and license manager may adopt such rules and regulations as they deem necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of this article; provided, that such rules and regulations are consistent with this article. All such administrative rules and regulations are subject to the approval of the city manager. All persons who are required to be licensed under this article shall comply with all rules and regulations so adopted. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 2, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-47. - Registration with city tax and license division. 
(a)  In addition to the privilege license required by Chapter 21.1, Article III of this Code, all private towing carriers who operate a vehicle storage lot or who tow any vehicle within the city limits must submit to the Tax and License Division, all storage lot locations. No person shall tow, transport or store a vehicle without the prior permission of the owner or operator of such vehicle for a charge or fee unless such person is a licensed and registered private towing carrier in accordance with this article. 
(b)  All such private towing carrier licenses shall expire and must be renewed as specified in Section 21-23 of this Code. 
(c)  A private towing carrier who operates within the city shall be presumed to have knowledge of Chapter 21, Article I (Special Regulatory Licenses) and Chapter 24, Article XVI (Towing Carriers and Towing and Storage Charges), and shall be subject to all the rules and regulations pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2604, § 2, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 21-48. - Pawnshop and secondhand dealer report fee; violations. 
(a)  Each pawnshop operator and secondhand dealer shall pay to the city a fee for each report, if that report contains any of the following items: 
(1)  A firearm; 
(2)  Jewelry; 
(3)  Any item which has inscribed, attached or added a personal identifying mark or serial number, or 
(4)  Any item having a fair market value equal or greater than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(b)  The amount of such fee shall be established or amended by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  The fee shall be due and payable in advance when the blank reports are obtained from the police department. 
(d)  Any pawnshop operator or secondhand dealer who willfully fails to comply with any provision of this section shall be subject to a civil sanction of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per violation. 
(e)  Violations of any provision of this section are hereby declared to be civil code infractions which may be adjudicated and enforced by the city court under Chapter 13, Article II of this Code, as an additional enforcement alternative to other remedies and procedures provided for specifically in this Code or any city ordinance. Use of the civil code infraction alternative is not mandatory and shall be at the discretion of the chief of police undertaking enforcement action on an alleged violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2727, § 3, 6-22-10) 
Secs. 21-49-21-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVILEGE AND EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 21-101. - City tax code; adopted. 
(a)  That certain document known as "The City Tax Code of the City of Glendale, Arizona," three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the City of Glendale, Arizona, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, the provisions thereof to become effective the first day of April, 1987. 
(b)  Violators shall be subject to civil and criminal penalties contained in the following sections of the tax code: 
Sec. 21.1-330. Operating without a license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who is required by this chapter to obtain a privilege license to engage in or continue in business within the city without a license. The tax collector shall assess any delinquencies in tax, interest, and penalties which may apply against such person upon any transactions subject to the taxes imposed by this chapter. 
Sec. 21.1-540. Interest and civil penalties. 
(a)  Any taxpayer who failed to pay any of the taxes imposed by this chapter which were due or found to be due before the delinquency date shall be subject to and shall pay interest upon such tax at the rate of one percent (1%) per month, until paid. Fractions of a month shall be considered to constitute a full month for the purpose of computing interest. Said interest may be neither waived by the tax collector nor abated by the hearing officer except as it might relate to a tax abated as provided by Section 21.1-570. 
(b)  In addition to any interest assessed under subsection (a) above, any taxpayer who failed to pay any of the taxes imposed by this chapter which were due or found to be due before the delinquency date shall be subject to and shall pay any or all of the following civil penalties, in addition to any other penalties prescribed by this chapter: 
(1)  A taxpayer who fails to file a return for a tax imposed by this chapter shall pay a penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax for each month or fraction of a month elapsing between the delinquency date of the return and the date on which it is filed, unless the taxpayer shows that the failure is due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect. This penalty shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the tax due. 
(2)  A taxpayer who fails to pay the tax within the time prescribed shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid tax, unless the taxpayer shows that the failure is due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect. If the taxpayer is also subject to a penalty under subsection (b)(1) above for the same tax period, the total penalties under subsection (b)(1) and this subsection shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%). 
(3)  A taxpayer who fails or refuses to file a return on notice and demand by the tax collector shall pay a penalty of twenty-five percent (25%) of the tax, unless the taxpayer shows that the failure is due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect. 
(4)  If the cause of a tax deficiency is determined by the tax collector to be due to negligence, but without regard for intent to defraud, the taxpayer shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the deficiency. 
(5)  If the cause of a tax deficiency is determined by the tax collector to be due to civil fraud or evasion of the tax, the taxpayer shall pay a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the amount of deficiency. 
(c)  Penalties and interest imposed by this section are due and payable upon notice by the tax collector. 
(d)  The assessment of the penalties prescribed by subsections (b)(3) through (b)(5) above must be approved on a case-by-case basis by the tax collector prior to such assessment. 
(e)  The tax collector may waive or adjust penalties imposed by subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) above upon a finding that: 
(1)  In the past, the taxpayer has consistently filed and paid the taxes imposed by this chapter in a timely manner; or 
(2)  The amount of the penalty is greatly disproportionate to the amount of the tax; or 
(3)  The failure of a taxpayer to file a return and/or pay any tax by the delinquency date was caused by any of the following circumstances which must occur prior to the delinquency date of the return in question: 
(A)  The return was timely filed but was inadvertently forwarded to another taxing jurisdiction. 
(B)  Erroneous or insufficient information was furnished the taxpayer by the tax collector or his employee or agent. 
(C)  Death or serious illness of the taxpayer, member of his immediately family, or the preparer of the reports immediately prior to the due date. 
(D)  Unavoidable absence of the taxpayer immediately prior to the due date. 
(E)  Destruction, by fire for other casualty, of the taxpayer's place of business or records. 
(F)  Prior to the due date, the taxpayer made application for proper forms which could not be furnished in sufficient time to permit a timely filing. 
A taxpayer may also request a waiver or adjustment of penalty for a reason thought to be equally substantive to those reasons itemized above. All requests for waiver or adjustment of penalty must be in writing and shall contain all pertinent facts and other reliable and substantive evidence to support the request. In all cases, the burden of proof is upon the taxpayer. 
(f)  No request for waiver of penalty under subsection (e) above may be granted unless written request for waiver is received by the tax collector within forty-five (45) days following the imposition of penalty. Any taxpayer aggrieved by the refusal to grant a waiver under subsection (e) above may appeal under the provisions of Section 21.1-570 provided that such petition of appeal is received by the tax collector within forty-five (45) days of the taxpayer's receipt of notice by the city that waiver has been denied. 
(g)  For the purpose of this section, "reasonable cause" shall mean a reasonable basis for the taxpayer to believe that the tax did not apply to the business activity or the storage or use of the taxpayer's tangible personal property in this city. 
Sec. 21.1-580. Criminal Penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully: 
(1)  Fail or refuse to make any return required by this chapter. 
(2)  Fail to remit as and when due the full amount of any tax or additional tax or penalty and interest thereon. 
(3)  Make or cause to be made a false or fraudulent return. 
(4)  Make or cause to be made a false or fraudulent statement in a return, in written support of a return, or to demonstrate or support entitlement to a deduction, exclusion, or credit or to entitle the person to an allocation or apportionment or receipts subject to tax. 
(5)  Fail or refuse to permit any lawful examination of any book, account, record, or other memorandum by the tax collector. 
(6)  Fail or refuse to remit any tax collected by such person from his customer to the tax collector before the delinquency date next following such collection. 
(7)  Advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that any tax imposed by this chapter, as provided in this chapter, is not considered as an element in the price to the consumer. 
(8)  Fail or refuse to obtain a privilege license or to aid or abet another in any attempt to intentionally refuse to obtain such a license or evade the license fee. 
(9)  Reproduce, forge, falsify, fraudulently obtain or secure, or aid or abet another in any attempt to reproduce, forge, falsify, or fraudulently obtain or secure, an exemption from taxes imposed by this chapter. 
(b)  The violation of any provision of subsection (a) above shall constitute a class one misdemeanor. 
(c)  In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who shall knowingly swear to or verify any false or fraudulent statement, with the intent aforesaid, shall be guilty of the offense of perjury and on conviction thereof shall be punished in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1746, § 1, 12-22-92) 
Sec. 21-102. - City tax code; amendments. 
(a)  That certain document known as "The 1995 Amendments to the City Tax Code of the City of Glendale, Arizona," three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the city is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section. 
(b)  The provisions of this section and the public record adopted herein are effective from and after February 28, 1995 with the exception of the deletion of the definition of "manufacturing" in section 1; section 2; section 14; subsection (u) of sections 15 and 20; section 21; section 22 and section 30 which shall be effective from and after June 30, 1995. 
(c)  Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of these amendments to the tax code shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1832, § 1, 2-14-95) 
Secs. 21-103-21-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY BUSINESS LICENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2990, § 1, adopted May 24, 2016, amended chapter 21, Art. III, §§ 21-131-21-138, in effect repealing and reenacting said article as set out herein. Former Article III pertained to occupational licenses and miscellaneous business regulations and derived from Ord. No. 1724, § 1, adopted June 2, 1992; Ord. No. 1837, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 11, 1995; and Ord. No. 1919, § 3, adopted Dec. 10, 1996. 

Sec. 21-131. - Definitions. 
    Business: All activities or acts, either personal or on behalf of a corporate entity, engaged in and caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, either direct or indirect, but not including casual activities or sales. 
    Engaged in business: The commencing, conducting, operating, managing or carrying on of a business and the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, whether done as owner, or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee, servant, or otherwise, whether operating from a fixed location in the city or entering the city from an outside location to engage in such activities, or storing or using tangible personal property in this municipality. 
    Person: An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, broker, the Federal Government, the State, or any political subdivision or agency of the State. For the purpose of this chapter, a person shall be considered a distinct and separate person from any general or limited partnership or joint venture or other association with which such person is affiliated. A subsidiary corporation shall be considered a separate person from its parent corporation for purposes of taxation of transactions with its parent corporation. 
    Shall: The words "shall," "will," and "must" all refer to mandatory actions. 
    Tax Collector: Means the city manager or his designee or agent for all purposes under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2990, § 1, 5-24-16, effective 1-1-17) 
Sec. 21-132. - City business licenses; required. 
(a)  A person before engaging in any business within the city must make application to the Tax Collector for a City Business License and pay the applicable license fee. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in any business for which a City Business License is required without having first obtained such license. 
(c)  A separate City Business License and applicable fees are required for each location of a business, occupation or professional licensed under this article and for each type of business, occupation or profession carried on at a particular location by a licensee. 
(d)  Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described. 
(Ord. No. 2990, § 1, 5-24-16, effective 1-1-17) 
Sec. 21-132.1. - City business licenses; special requirements. 
(a)  Partnerships . Application for a City Business License for a partnership engaging or continuing in business in the city shall provide, as a minimum, the federal identification numbers, names and addresses of all general partners. 
(b)  Corporations . Application for a City Business License for a corporation engaging or continuing in business in the city shall provide, as a minimum, the corporation federal identification number, the names and addresses of both the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer of the corporation. 
(c)  Applications for City Business Licenses may contain other requirements as defined by the Tax Collector. 
(Ord. No. 2990, § 1, 5-24-16, effective 1-1-17) 
Sec. 21-133. - License required; exemptions. 
(a)  The following persons, when engaging in activities subject to the following licensing provisions, shall not be required to obtain a City Business License: 
(1)  Any person licensed pursuant to Chapter 21, Article I - Special Regulatory Licenses; Article IV - Occasional Sales; and Article V - Open-Air Markets and Park-and-Swap Operations; 
(2)  Any person licensed by the state pursuant to title 20, Arizona Revised Statues, as amended; 
(3)  Any participant at an open-air market or park-and-swap operation, if the operator of such market or operation is licensed pursuant to article V of this chapter; 
(4)  Any person who engages in a business, occupation or profession for which a city license is required only as an employee of or as an independent contractor for another person or entity which holds a city license for such business, occupation or profession; 
(5)  Any person who engages in the business activity of leasing, renting or licensing residential real property located within the city; 
(6)  Any other business, occupation or professional exempted by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2990, § 1, 5-24-16, effective 1-1-17) 
Sec. 21-134. - Application; nonprofit entities. 
(a)  An application for a City Business License shall be made on forms furnished by the city. 
(b)  Any nonprofit entity which has tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(3), as certified by the Internal Revenue Service, and which is not exempt from obtaining a City Business License under subsection 21-132(b) is required to obtain a City Business License. Such nonprofit entity shall furnish a copy of its tax-exempt certification with its application, and such entity shall not be charged a license fee. 
(Ord. No. 2990, § 1, 5-24-16, effective 1-1-17) 
Sec. 21-135. - Fees. 
    The fee to obtain a City Business License is twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and the fee is non-refundable. The City Business License fee is valid only for the location identified on the application for the calendar year in which it is issued, unless the license is renewed each year by filing the appropriate application for license renewal and paying an annual license renewal fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each license. 
(Ord. No. 2990, § 1, 5-24-16, effective 1-1-17) 
Sec. 21-136. - Issuance; expiration; renewal. 
(a)  Any City Business License shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued. Each such City Business License expires on December 31 of each year and must be renewed on or before January 31 of the following year by paying the applicable renewal fee. The renewal fee must be received by the Tax and License Manager by January 31 to be deemed timely paid. 
(b)  Any person who fails to renew a City Business License by January 31 of any year and who conducts any activity covered by such license after such date shall be deemed to be operating without a City Business License, shall be subject to all penalties imposed under this article against persons unlawfully operating without a City Business License, and shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual license fee which would have been imposed on the date on which the City Business License expired in addition to payment of the applicable license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a new City Business License is issued to such person. License fee penalties may be waived by the Tax and License Manager subject to the same terms as the waiver of tax penalties as provided for in Chapter 21.1-540. 
(c)  Any person who is required to obtain a City Business License and fails to do so prior to conducting any activity covered by such license shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual license fee which would have been imposed on the date on which such activities commenced in addition to payment of the applicable license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a new City Business License is issued to such person. License fee penalties may be waived by the Tax and License Manager subject to the same terms as the waiver of tax penalties as provided for in Chapter 21.1-540. 
(d)  Any licensee who needs a copy of the City Business License which is still in effect shall be charged the current license fee for each reissuance of a license. 
(Ord. No. 2990, § 1, 5-24-16, effective 1-1-17) 
Sec. 21-137. - Nontransferability. 
    No City Business License shall be transferable between persons or locations. 
(Ord. No. 2990, § 1, 5-24-16, effective 1-1-17) 
Sec. 21-138. - Display. 
    The holder of a City Business License shall at all times display his or her license in a conspicuous place at his or her regular place of business within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2990, § 1, 5-24-16, effective 1-1-17) 
Sec. 21-139. - Compliance with other laws. 
    The issuance of a City Business License by the City shall not be construed as authority to engage in any activity which is in violation of any other law or regulation to which such activity is subject, or to conduct activities on any property in violation of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2990, § 1, 5-24-16, effective 1-1-17) 
Sec. 21-140. - City business licenses; cancellation. 
(a)  Falsification of information contained on an application will result in the cancellation of the business license. 
(b)  Failure to submit the required transaction privilege tax reports or to pay the required tax, penalty, and interest will result in the cancellation of the business license. 
(c)  Failure to pay amounts owed to the city for fees, charges, penalties, interest, or any amounts owed to the city for any reason will result in cancellation of the business license. 
(d)  Failure to comply with any statute, regulation, or ordinance, will result in cancellation of the business license. 
(e)  To contest a business license cancellation, the licensee must request a hearing within 10 business days of the notice of cancellation. If timely requested, a hearing before the Tax Collector will be held for the purpose of showing cause why the license should not be cancelled. If no such hearing is requested the business license will be cancelled. 
(Ord. No. 2990, § 1, 5-24-16, effective 1-1-17) 
Sec. 21-141. - City business licenses; cease and desist orders. 
    A cease and desist order may be issued if the Tax Collector determines that a person is conducting business without the required business license. Notification will be provided either in person or by certified mail. When a cease and desist order is issued, all business activities must cease immediately until such time as the licensing required by this chapter has been secured. It is unlawful and a violation of this Code for any person to engage in any business within the city when a cease and desist order has been issued and business may not commence until the cease and desist order has been lifted by the Tax Collector. 
(Ord. No. 2990, § 1, 5-24-16, effective 1-1-17) 
Secs. 21-142-21-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OCCASIONAL SALES 

Sec. 21-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Occasional sales: Sales by any person who conducts a sales event, directly or indirectly, when such person is not regularly engaged in the business of selling the items sold at such sales event, such sales event is three (3) days or less in length, and the total gross revenue of such person from all such sales events within the city in a calendar year is less than three thousand dollars ($3,000); provided, that any sales made by participants at open-air markets or park-and-swap operations pursuant to article V of this chapter shall not be deemed to be occasional sales. 
    Occasional sales exemption: An exemption, pursuant to the provisions of this article, from obtaining a transaction privilege license and from paying transaction privilege license fees and taxes under Article II of this chapter. 
    Transaction privilege license: A license issued pursuant to the provisions of Article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 4, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-152. - Issuance of occasional sales license; exemption from transaction privilege license and tax requirements. 
(a)  Any person engaging in occasional sales within the city may apply for an occasional sales license with the tax and license manager, on forms provided by the city. The license fee for an occasional sales license shall be set by resolution, and there shall be no application fee for such license. No license fees paid pursuant to this article shall be returned to the licensee if an occasional sales license terminates or is revoked pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Any person who obtains an occasional sales license and complies with the provisions of this article shall be exempt from the requirements of obtaining a transaction privilege license and of paying transaction privilege license fees and taxes imposed under Article II of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in section 21-154. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in occasional sales within the city without having first obtained a transaction privilege license or an occasional sales license. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92) 
Sec. 21-153. - Expiration of license. 
    An occasional sales license shall be valid only for the dates of the sales event for which it is issued. Any person who engages in occasional sales more than once shall file a new application and obtain a new occasional sales license for each sales event. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92) 
Sec. 21-154. - Termination of occasional sales exemption and license; transaction privilege license required. 
(a)  At any time that the sales activities of a licensee no longer conform to the definition of "occasional sales" set forth in section 21-151, the occasional sales license and exemption granted to such person shall automatically terminate, and such person shall be required to obtain a transaction privilege license and pay all transaction privilege taxes due under Article II of this chapter for sales made after the termination of the occasional sales license. Any such person shall have a ten (10) day grace period after the termination of his or her occasional sales license in which to obtain a transaction privilege license and to pay all transaction privilege license fees and taxes due under Article II of this chapter. The transaction privilege license fees paid by such person shall be prorated on a quarterly basis, based upon the date on which such person's sales activities commenced. 
(b)  Any person who fails to obtain a transaction privilege license within ten (10) days after the termination of his or her occasional sales license under subsection (a) shall be deemed to be operating without a license, shall be subject to all penalties imposed under this chapter for persons unlawfully operating without a transaction privilege license, and shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual transaction privilege license fee which would have been imposed on the date on which the occasional sales license terminated in addition to payment of the applicable transaction privilege license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a new occasional sales license or a transaction privilege license is issued to such person. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 4, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-155. - Revocation; denial; appeal. 
(a)  The tax and license manager may revoke any occasional sales license for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Knowingly making any false or misleading statement in the course of applying for an occasional sales license; or 
(2)  Any violation of this article by the licensee. 
(b)  The city shall give written notice of the revocation to the licensee, which notice shall contain the reasons for the revocation. Such notice shall either be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
(c)  The licensee may request an informal hearing on such revocation by submitting a written request to the tax and license manager within ten (10) calendar days after the notice of revocation is given. An informal hearing before the tax and license manager shall be held within fifteen (15) days after the request for the same is received by the city. If the licensee does not request a hearing within said ten (10) day period, the revocation shall take effect on the eleventh day after service of the notice of revocation. If a hearing is requested, the revocation shall not take effect until after the informal hearing and the service of a new notice from the tax and license manager on the licensee setting forth the tax and license manager's final decision. Such notice shall be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
(d)  A person who has been denied an occasional sales license may request an informal hearing on such denial by submitting a written request to the tax and license manager within ten (10) days from the date on which such person is given notice of such denial. An informal hearing before the tax and license manager shall be held within fifteen (15) days after the request for the same is received by the city. The tax and license manager shall notify the applicant of his or her decision within ten (10) days after the informal hearing is concluded. Such notice shall be personally served on the applicant or mailed to the applicant's last known address. 
(e)  Any decision of the tax and license manager after an informal hearing under subsections (c) or (d) shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92) 
Sec. 21-156. - Nontransferability; display. 
    No occasional sales license shall be transferable between persons. At all times during which a licensee is engaging in occasional sales within the city, such licensee shall carry the occasional sales license on his or her person. The licensee shall display his or her occasional sales license upon request to any police officer, law enforcement official or city official whose duties are related to licensing. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92) 
Sec. 21-157. - Compliance with other laws. 
    The issuance of an occasional sales license shall not be construed as authority to engage in any activity which is in violation of any other law or regulation to which such activity is subject, or to conduct activities on any property in violation of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 4, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-158. - Compliance with administrative regulations. 
    The tax and license manager may adopt such rules and regulations as he or she deems necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of this article; provided, that such rules and regulations are consistent with this article. All such administrative rules and regulations are subject to the approval of the city manager. All persons applying for or obtaining occasional sales licenses shall comply with all rules and regulations so adopted. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 4, 12-10-96) 
Secs. 21-159-21-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OPEN-AIR MARKETS AND PARK-AND-SWAP OPERATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96, renumbered §§ 21-163 to be 21-164, 21-164 to be 21-166, 21-165 to be 21-167, 21-166 to be 21-168, 21-167 to be 21-169, 21-168 to be 21-170, 21-170 to be 21-171; repealed §§ 21-169 and 21-171 and added new §§ 21-163, 21-165, 21-174-21-177. 

Sec. 21-161. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Open-air market: A retail market consisting of multiple participants who operate from one general business location which is not a permanent enclosed structure, under the control of a common operator or operators, on an irregular or semi-regular basis and who display, trade, barter, buy or sell new merchandise at such location. 
    Operator: Any person who directly or indirectly controls the admission of participants or merchandise into the selling or trading area of an open-air market or park-and-swap operation. 
    Operator's license: A license issued to the operator of an open-air market or park-and-swap operation pursuant to this article, excluding transaction privilege licenses. 
    Park-and-swap operation: A market consisting of multiple participants who operate from one general business location, under the control of a common operator or operators, on an irregular or semi-regular basis and who display, trade, barter, buy or sell used merchandise at such location, regardless or whether new merchandise is also displayed, traded, bartered, bought or sold at such location. 
    Participant: Any person who brings merchandise to an open-air market or park-and-swap operation for purposes of displaying, trading, bartering or selling such merchandise at such market or operation. 
    Persons financially interested: For a corporation, any person who is the beneficial owner of at least fifty percent (50%) of the shares of such corporation; for a noncorporate business, any person who shares in, directly or indirectly, at least fifty percent (50%) of any financial gain attributable to such business as an owner, proprietor or otherwise. 
    Police chief: Chief of the City of Glendale police department. 
    Tax code: The city's transaction privilege license tax code as set forth in chapter 21.1 of this Code (Article II of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1724, § 2, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-162. - Licenses required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an open-air market or park-and-swap operation within the city without having first obtained all of the following licenses: 
(1)  An operator's license for such market or operation; 
(2)  A transaction privilege license for reporting and paying all taxes due under the tax code for the operator's own activities; and 
(3)  A second transaction privilege license for reporting and paying all taxes due under the tax code from participants at the open-air market or park-and-swap operation, which taxes shall be collected, reported and paid pursuant to section 21-163. 
(Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-163. - Tax reporting and payment; duty to ensure compliance by participants. 
(a)  Each participant at an open-air market or park-and-swap operation shall have the option of reporting and paying taxes due under the Tax Code for such participant's activities at such market or operation by either of the following methods: 
(1)  The participant may obtain his or her own transaction privilege license and report and pay all taxes due under the Tax Code directly to the city, in which case the operator's only obligation concerning taxes on the participant's activities shall be to require proof of a valid transaction privilege license from the participant for his or her activities at the operator's market or operation; or 
(2)  The participant may report and pay all taxes due under the Tax Code to the operator on a daily basis, in which case the participant shall not be required to obtain his or her own transaction privilege license from the city or to file his or her own tax reports with the city. All tax reports from a participant to the operator shall be attached to the operator's tax reports to the city, which the operator shall file on a monthly basis pursuant to the Tax Code. If the participant elects to pay its taxes due under the tax code to the operator, the participant and the operator shall be jointly and severally liable for all taxes, interest and penalties due to the city as a result of the operator's non-payment, partial payment or late payment of taxes due for the participant's activities. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any operator to allow any participant to conduct any activities at such operator's open-air market or park-and-swap operation until the participant consents to reporting and paying his or her taxes due under the Tax Code to the operator or until the participant has displayed to the operator a valid transaction privilege license for his or her activities at such market or operation. On or before January 31 of each year, the operator shall verify with each participant who elects to report and pay his or her taxes due under the Tax Code directly to the city that such participant has renewed his or her transaction privilege license. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any operator to allow any participant to conduct any activities at such operator's open-air market or park-and-swap operation at any time that the operator knows, or reasonably should know, that the participant has not fully complied with his or her tax licensing, reporting and payment obligations to either the operator or the city. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-164. - Issuance; expiration; renewal. 
(a)  Any operator's license shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued. Each operator's license expires on December 31 of each year and must be renewed on or before January 31 of the following year by filing an application for renewal and paying the applicable renewal fee. The application and payment for renewal must be received by the tax and license division by January 31 to be deemed timely filed. 
(b)  Persons whose initial operator's licenses are issued after March 31 of any year shall be subject to an initial license fee on a prorated basis as follows: 
Business 
Start Date Proration of 
License Fee April 1-June 30 75% July 1-September 30 50% October 1-December 31 25%  
    The applicable proration percentage shall be applied to the annual license fee set by resolution to determine the initial license fee. 
(c)  Any person who fails to renew an operator's license by January 31 of any year and who conducts any activity covered by such license after such date shall be deemed to be operating without a license, shall be subject to all penalties imposed under this article against persons operating unlawfully without a license, and shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual license fee which would have been imposed on the date on which the license expired in addition to payment of the applicable license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a new operator's license is issued to such person. 
(d)  Any person who is required to obtain an operator's license and fails to do so prior to conducting any activity covered by such license shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual license fee which would have been imposed on the date on which such activities commenced in addition to payment of the applicable license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before an operator's license is issued to such person. 
(e)  No operator's license shall be renewed unless the operator is in compliance with all provisions of this article at the time of renewal. 
(Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-165. - Application; address changes. 
    An application for an operator's license shall be made on forms furnished by the city. Each application shall be accompanied by the required application fee. An applicant for or holder of an operator's license shall notify the tax and license division of any change of address from that which is listed on the application within forty-eight (48) hours of such change of address. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-166. - Issuance standards. 
(a)  An applicant for an open-air market operator's license shall not be required to prove his or her good moral character or be subject to a background check pursuant to section 21-4. 
(b)  No natural person shall be licensed as a park-and-swap operator if such person: 
(1)  Knowingly makes any false or misleading statement in the cause of applying for or renewing an operator's license; 
(2)  Has been convicted of any felony involving dishonesty, deceit, theft, trafficking in stolen property, assaultive conduct or sexual misconduct within five (5) years from the date that the application is submitted; 
(3)  Lacks good moral character as set forth in section 21-4; 
(4)  Is under eighteen (18) years of age; or 
(5)  Has been denied an operator's license, or had such license revoked, for a period of six (6) months following the final denial or revocation decision. 
(c)  No applicant which is not a natural person shall be licensed as a park-and-swap operator if any of the following persons would be disqualified from being licensed under subsection (b): 
(1)  The president of an applicant which is a corporation, if he or she is an Arizona resident; 
(2)  Each general partner of an applicant which is a partnership; 
(3)  The managing officer or agent for the in-state operations of the applicant; 
(4)  Any person financially interested in the applicant; 
(5)  Each managing member of a limited liability company, or if there are no designated managing members, all of the members; 
(6)  Each trustee of an applicant which is a trust. 
(d)  No park-and-swap operator's license shall be issued to an applicant if the chief of police determines that, due to the nature and location of the applicant's proposed business, the operation of such business is likely to create unreasonably unsafe conditions or to unreasonably increase existing, unsafe conditions in the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1724, § 2, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2077, § 5, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21-167. - Fees. 
(a)  The application and license fees for an operator's license shall be established by resolution. The city may set different application and license fees for an applicant who has not previously been issued an operator's license for the calendar year in which he or she submits an application and an applicant who has been issued an operator's license for the calendar year in which he or she submits an application and who is required to obtain a new operator's license due to a change in the location of an open-air market or park-and-swap operation. 
(b)  Each applicant for a park-and-swap operator's license shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the City of Glendale for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law (PL) 92-544. The department of safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. In addition to any other fees imposed under this article, an applicant for a park-and-swap operator's license shall pay an amount necessary to cover the costs of federal fingerprint processing or federal criminal history record information checks. The specific amount of such additional fee shall be set by administrative order based upon information received from the Department of Public Safety as to the cost of such fingerprint processing and record information checks. The additional fees collected pursuant to this subsection shall be transmitted to the Department of Public Safety as required by Arizona Revised Statutes section 41-1750, as amended. 
(c)  No application fee or fingerprinting fee paid pursuant to this article shall be returned to an applicant if his or her application is withdrawn or denied. No license fee paid pursuant to this article shall be returned to a licensee if his or her license is suspended or revoked. 
(d)  The application and license fees required by this section may be waived in whole or in part by the city manager or his or her designee if at least ten percent (10%) of the operator's yearly gross revenues from the open-air market or park-and-swap operation will be received by a nonprofit entity with tax-exempt status under Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(3) and if such entity is located within the city or has some other affiliation within the city. A request for a waiver shall be made on forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied by a copy of the nonprofit entity's tax-exempt certification from the Internal Revenue Service and a written verification from such entity of the portion of the operator's gross revenues to be received by it. If the nonprofit entity receives from ten to fifty percent (10%-50%) of the operator's gross revenues, the city may waive up to fifty percent (50%) of the application and license fees. If the nonprofit entity receives more than fifty percent (50%) of the operator's gross revenues, the city may waive all of the application and license fees. 
(Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1724, § 2, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2273, § 5, 7-23-02) 
Sec. 21-168. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  The tax and license manager may suspend any open-air market operator's license for a specified period not to exceed sixty (60) days, or revoke such license, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  When such operator has knowingly made any false or misleading statement in any report or record required to be made, kept or filed with the city under this article; 
(2)  When such operator fails to timely report and pay all taxes due to the city under the Tax Code and this article; 
(3)  Any other violation of this article. 
(b)  The tax and license manager may suspend any park-and-swap operator's license for a specified period not to exceed sixty (60) days, or revoke such license, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to maintain good moral character; 
(2)  When such operator has knowingly made any false or misleading statement in any report or record required to be made, kept or filed with the city under this article; 
(3)  When such operator fails to timely report and pay all taxes due to the city under the Tax Code and this article; 
(4)  Conviction of any felony involving dishonesty, deceit, theft, trafficking in stolen property, assaultive conduct or sexual misconduct; 
(5)  Any other violation of this article. 
(c)  The notice of the revocation or suspension shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds for such revocation or suspension. Such notice shall either be served on the licensee personally or mailed to the licensee's last known address. Service of the notice is deemed complete upon mailing. 
(d)  The licensee may request an informal hearing on such revocation or suspension by submitting a written request to the tax and license manager within ten (10) days after the notice of revocation or suspension is given. An informal hearing before the tax and license manager shall be held within fifteen (15) days after the request for the same is received by the city. If the licensee does not request a hearing within said ten (10) day period, the revocation or suspension shall take effect on the eleventh day after service of the notice of revocation or suspension. If a hearing is requested, the revocation or suspension shall not take effect until after the informal hearing and the service of a new notice from the tax and license manager on the licensee setting forth the tax and license manager's final decision. Such notice shall be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
(Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1724, § 2, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-169. - Appeal from denial, revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  A person who has been denied a license or whose license has been revoked or suspended after an informal hearing with the tax and license manager may appeal such decision to a hearing officer. The appeal shall be requested within ten (10) days from the date on which such person is given notice of the determination from which the appeal is taken. The request shall be in writing, shall be filed with the city manager and shall set forth specifically the grounds for such appeal. 
(b)  The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct a hearing in accordance with this section. The hearing officer shall not be a member of the tax and license division. The hearing officer may, in his or her discretion, stay any revocation or suspension pending final determination of the appeal. 
(c)  The burden of proof at the hearing shall be on the applicant or licensee to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he or she meets all of the requirements for holding a license. The hearing officer shall hear such testimony and consider such evidence as is relevant to the determination of such issues. The hearing officer shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence or procedure in conducting the hearing. 
(d)  The hearing officer shall render a written decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing is concluded based on the evidence presented by the city and the applicant or licensee. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1724, § 2, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-170. - Park-and-swap operations; police reports required. 
(a)  On each day a park-and-swap operation is open for business, the operator shall, on forms provided by the city, obtain the following information on each park-and-swap participant: 
(1)  Name and address. 
(2)  Date and time of entry. 
(3)  Vehicle description and license plate number. 
(4)  A general description of all property brought into the trading area. For any kind of property with an initial asking price of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more or which has or did have a serial number, a complete description shall be furnished including the name, make and any identifying number. 
(5)  Signature of the participant. 
(6)  Driver's license number and the state where issued, if any. 
(7)  Social security number, if available. 
(8)  Whether the participant has a valid city transaction privilege license, and if so, the number thereof. 
(9)  Space or lot designation assigned to each participant. 
(b)  Each park-and-swap participant shall submit daily to the operator a list giving the complete description of each item of property traded, bartered, bought or sold by such participant which had an initial asking price of at least twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or a sale price of at least twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or which had a serial number, and the name and address of the person receiving said property. The operator shall be responsible for forwarding these reports to the police chief on a weekly basis. Forms for such reports will be provided to the operator by the city. Such forms shall also be available for inspection upon request during normal business hours by any city official whose duties relate to the administration and enforcement of this article, at one specified location at the park-and-swap operation. 
(Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-171. - Park-and-swap operations; trading area; visibility of merchandise. 
    A park-and-swap operation shall be conducted only in a building, structure, enclosure, fenced lot or other area where entry thereto may be restricted to enable the operator to control effectively all participants and merchandise. All merchandise, both new and secondhand, for which a participant asks, or intends to ask, an initial price of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more, or which has or had a serial number shall at all times be visible to the general public and officials of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-172. - Park-and-swap operations; general operating restrictions. 
    The following restrictions and conditions shall apply to all park-and-swap operations: 
(1)  The operator shall produce satisfactory evidence that adequate off-street vehicle parking to accommodate the vehicles of all persons in attendance at the park-and-swap operation has been provided as required by the planning and zoning department. 
(2)  Adequate permanent rest room facilities approved by the building and safety department shall be provided. 
(3)  Adequate security to be determined by the chief of police shall be provided and paid for by the operator. The security shall be on duty at all times while the park-and-swap operation is open for business. 
(4)  The operator shall cooperate with members of the city police department investigating, examining or monitoring merchandise which is being displayed or is for sale, barter or exchange. 
(5)  Adequate access, as approved by the city fire department, to and within the park-and-swap operation shall be provided. 
(6)  The operator shall provide for a daily clean-up of the premises and maintain such premises in good, clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(7)  The premises must be vacated by all participants and all of their merchandise and personal property shall be removed at the close of each day's business. 
(Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-173. - Prohibited merchandise; all markets or operations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, display, offer for sale or barter at any open-air market or park-and-swap operation any of the following items of personal property: 
(1)  Any live animal; 
(2)  Ammunition, blasting agents, liquid petroleum gases or other combustible gases, any type of display fireworks, explosives, acids, caustics, oxidizing agents or any flammable liquids, including but not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, acetone, thinners and solvents. 
(3)  The sale of permissible consumer fireworks is allowed. Before engaging in the sale of permissible consumer fireworks, every person engaged in selling, or attempting to sell permissible consumer fireworks, shall: 
a.  Comply with the Glendale City Code, Chapter 21, Licenses, Taxation, and Miscellaneous Business Regulations; 
b.  Obtain an inspection certificate from the Glendale Fire Department verifying compliance with all applicable state laws pertaining to the storage, transportation, and sale of permissible consumer fireworks; and 
c.  Openly and conspicuously post color copies of inspection certificates at each cash register and in each area where fireworks are displayed for sale. 
(Ord. No. 1400, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96; Ord. No. 2801, § 2, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 017-18, § 2, 5-9-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 017-18, § 2, adopted May 9, 2017 amended § 21-173 to ensure consistency and compliance with Arizona State Law regulating fireworks. 
Sec. 21-174. - Display of license. 
    The holder of an operator's license shall at all times display such license in a conspicuous place at the open-air market, park-and-swap operation or such licensee's regular place of business within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-175. - Nontransferability. 
    No operator's license shall be transferable between persons or locations. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-176. - Compliance with other laws. 
    The issuance of an operator's license shall not be construed as authority to engage in any activity which is in violation of any other law or regulation to which such activity is subject, or to conduct activities on any property in violation of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96) 
Sec. 21-177. - Compliance with administrative regulations. 
    The chief of police and tax and license manager may adopt such rules and regulations as they deem necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of this article; provided, that such rules and regulations are consistent with this article. All such administrative rules and regulations are subject to the approval of the city manager. All persons who are required to be licensed as operators shall comply with all rules and regulations so adopted. 
(Ord. No. 1919, § 5, 12-10-96) 
Secs. 21-178-21-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - AUTOMATED KIOSKS 

Sec. 21-180. - Definitions. 
    In this article, unless the context requires otherwise: 
(1)  Applicant means the person who applies for a license pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Automated kiosk means an interactive device that is installed within a retail space and with which used consumer electronic devices are sold, traded, recycled, or otherwise received by a person. 
(3)  Automated kiosk license means a license issued pursuant to this article authorizing a person to operate one or more automated kiosk(s) within the boundaries of City of Glendale. 
(4)  Consumer electronic device means any portable electronic or digital device designed to be purchased and used by end users or consumers for daily, non-commercial purposes; examples of consumer electronic devices include, but are not limited to, cellular telephones, touch screen tablets, laptop computers, smart watches, and digital media players. 
(5)  Controlling person means a person who either (A) has a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the ownership or earnings of the applicant, or (B) is any of the following: 
a.  An officer, director, or any stockholder who owns ten (10) percent or more, of a corporation licensee/applicant; 
b.  A general partner of a limited partnership licensee/applicant or partner of a non-limited partnership licensee/applicant; 
c.  An officer, president, or secretary of a limited liability company/corporation licensee/applicant; or 
d.  The sole proprietor of a sole proprietorship licensee/applicant. 
(6)  Designated Agent means the person designated by the applicant or licensee to receive notices from the City of Glendale pursuant to this article. 
(7)  ESN means a unique number assigned by the manufacturer to identify a mobile phone or device, commonly referred to as an electronic serial number. 
(8)  IMEI means a unique number used by wireless carriers and cell phone manufacturers to identify mobile phones and devices, commonly referred to as an international mobile equipment identity. 
(9)  Licensee means the person who applied for a license pursuant to this chapter and in whose name such license was issued by the City of Glendale pursuant to this article. 
(10)  MEID means a unique identifier used by wireless carriers and cell phone manufacturers to identify a mobile phone, commonly referred to as a mobile equipment identifier. 
(11)  Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, association or any other entity of whatever kind or nature. 
(Ord. No. 018-31, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 21-181. - Licensing and operation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate an automated kiosk at any location within the City of Glendale without first obtaining a license pursuant to this article. The license to operate an automated kiosk shall be issued pursuant to this article instead of any other special regulatory or general business license required under article I or article III of this chapter of the City code, respectively. 
(b)  A separate license shall be obtained, and a separate licensing fee shall be paid for each automated kiosk. A licensee may submit one application for multiple locations. The city will issue a separate license for each approved location. 
(c)  A license issued pursuant to this article is valid for a period from the date of issuance to December 31 of the same calendar year. 
(d)  Each automated kiosk(s) shall operate only at the location(s) identified on the application and issued a license pursuant to section 21-181 (b). The application shall identify all locations where consumer electronic devices collected in automated kiosks within the City of Glendale are processed, stored, managed, or maintained, even if such action occurs outside the City of Glendale. Consumer electronic devices collected in automated kiosks within the City of Glendale, may be processed, stored, managed, or maintained at locations not identified on the license only with the written and signed consent of the City of Glendale. 
(e)  Application requirements; procedure . Any person desiring to obtain a new or renewal license must apply to the City of Glendale by submitting a complete application, the applicable fee, and fingerprint records to the City of Glendale, Tax and License division. 
(1)  The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  The names, addresses, and contact information for all controlling persons and designated agents of the applicant. 
b.  All locations within the City of Glendale at which the applicant intends to operate a kiosk and the number of kiosks that will be in service at each such location. 
c.  The location(s) where any consumer electronic devices placed in kiosks within the City of Glendale may be processed, stored, managed, or maintained. 
(2)  Fingerprint records are required: 
a.  On all new applications, for all applicants and controlling persons; and 
b.  For any existing license, for all changes in controlling person that occur during the licensing period; and 
c.  For renewal applications, for any controlling person(s) not previously fingerprinted for the licensee. 
(3)  Fingerprints shall be submitted in a form approved by the City of Glendale. The fingerprints shall be submitted to the Arizona Department of Public Safety to be used to obtain a state and federal criminal records check in accordance with A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law 92-544. The Arizona Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
(f)  Following receipt of the required documents and fees, all new applications, or existing licenses or renewal applications containing changes to the controlling person(s), shall be submitted to the City of Glendale Police Department for investigation and criminal record review in accordance with this article. The police department, on behalf of the City of Glendale, Tax and License division, shall receive and review the criminal history record information resulting from the criminal records check set forth above, including conviction and non-conviction data, of license applicants and controlling persons for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of licensees and controlling persons in connection with the issuance, renewal, suspension or revocation of a license. Such information shall be used only for the purpose of such evaluation or for the purpose of supporting and defending a denial, non-renewal, suspension, or revocation of a license. Fitness will be evaluated in accordance with the requirements of subsection (h). 
(g)  (1)  Complete renewal applications must be submitted to the City of Glendale, Tax and License division no later than October 31 of each year, prior to the expiration of a license, otherwise the license shall be deemed expired and non-renewable. If the renewal application is not received as stated above, the licensee shall submit an application for a new license and provide all information and fees required for a new license application. 
(2)  Applications to change a controlling person must be submitted within thirty (30) days of that person taking ownership or control of the automated kiosk or kiosks. Failure to submit such application within 30 days of such change in a controlling person shall constitute a violation of this article and may subject the controlling person to any penalties herein. 
(h)  A new or renewal license shall be issued to an applicant pursuant to this article unless: 
(1)  The applicant failed to provide a completed application, any required fee, or the fingerprint records; 
(2)  The applicant or a controlling person has been convicted during the ten (10) year period prior to submission of the application of a felony involving trafficking in stolen property, fraud, forgery, theft, burglary, robbery, extortion, conspiracy to defraud, any preparatory offenses of the aforementioned crimes, a felony involving fraudulent or dishonest act, or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  The applicant or a controlling person is currently in violation of this article, or any applicable provision of city code. 
(4)  The application contains false or misleading information; or 
(5)  The applicant has a current debt related to any open or closed account maintained or formerly maintained with the City of Glendale. 
(i)  A licensee will operate an automated kiosk in the City of Glendale in accordance with the following conditions. Licensee must: 
(1)  Use a live representative to remotely monitor the automated kiosk during all hours of operation; 
(2)  Verify a seller's identity via a valid motor vehicle operator's license, valid motor vehicle non-operating identification license, valid armed forces identification card or other valid photo identification, including the serial or identification number of such valid document sufficient to verify the information required to be reported in section 21-182 (a and b). 
(3)  Secure storage of consumer electronic devices accepted by the automated kiosk and adheres to the storage and retention requirements pursuant to section 21-183; 
(4)  Capture and store images during each transaction of i) the seller, ii) the identification required in section 21-181 (h)(2), and iii) the consumer electronic device; 
(5)  Electronically report all transactions to law enforcement pursuant to section 21-182; 
(6)  Read and record ESN, IMEI, or MEID, subject to section 21-182 (b)(7); and 
(7)  Only buy consumer electronic devices. 
(j)  Failure to meet any of the conditions in subsection (i) for the operation of an automated kiosk shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(1)  The City of Glendale shall give written notice of a violation to the licensee or designated agent that may result in the suspension or revocation of the license. The notice shall include a description of the violation, the statutory or code reference, how the licensee can comply with the requirements, a description of the process whereby a hearing may be requested, the time limit for requesting a hearing, and a warning that failure to timely request a hearing may result in suspension or revocation of the license. The notice shall be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing or personal service on the licensee. 
(2)  The licensee or designated agent receiving a notice under this section may request a formal hearing pursuant to section 21-25 by serving a written request on the city manager within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of the license suspension or revocation. If the licensee fails to comply with the requirements of this article by the date provided in the notice, the City of Glendale may suspend or revoke the license as provided in this section. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with section 21-25(b)-(d) of the City Code. 
(3)  The City of Glendale may suspend a license for a period of time not to exceed three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days if the City of Glendale determines that the licensee or the designated agent or a controlling person of the licensee has violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this article. During the suspension period, the licensee shall not transact any business through the automated kiosk(s) associated with the suspended licenses. If a fine is associated with the violation that is the basis for the suspension, the suspension may continue beyond the period set forth in this subsection until such time as the licensee pays the fine. 
(4)  Nothing in this section or this article prohibits the city from approving or denying an application for a license once the suspension is concluded. 
(k)  The City of Glendale may revoke a license issued pursuant to this article if the City of Glendale determines that: 
(1)  A licensee or designated agent operated the business during a period of time when the license was suspended; 
(2)  A licensee, designated agent or controlling person is convicted of a felony involving trafficking in stolen property, fraud, forgery, theft, burglary, robbery, extortion, conspiracy to defraud, any preparatory offenses of the aforementioned crimes, a felony involving fraudulent or dishonest act or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  The licensee or designated agent has operated, or has attempted to operate an automated kiosk at a location that is unlicensed; 
(4)  The City of Glendale previously issued three (3) or more notices of suspension within a six (6) month period; 
(5)  The licensee or designated agent has not complied with a provision of this article or has failed to provide information as required by this article; 
(6)  The application fee, license fee, reporting fee, or any transaction privilege tax has not been paid; or 
(7)  The licensee fails to pay outstanding fines or resolve any violations. 
(l)  It is a violation of this article for any person to provide false information on any license application. 
(m)  It is a violation of this article for a person to operate an automated kiosk that either fails to meet all of the requirements in this article or when the person does not have a license issued pursuant to this article. 
(n)  If a license is revoked pursuant to this section, the licensee and its controlling person(s) may not apply for a license under this article for a period of one (1) year from the date of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 018-31, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 21-182. - Reports to law enforcement. 
(a)  At the time of each transaction whereby a consumer electronic device is received at a kiosk, a licensee shall prepare a true, complete, legible and accurate report of the transaction including a description of the consumer electronic device received. The report shall be submitted to the City of Glendale within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the consumer electronic device. The report shall be in a form designated by the City of Glendale Police Department. Submission of the report to the City of Glendale is deemed accepted when the report is delivered in person to the address designated by the City of Glendale Police Department, or when the report is sent electronically to the police department utilizing software approved by the City of Glendale Police Department. The reporting party shall retain a copy of the report for a minimum of two (2) years from the date of the transaction. 
(b)  Each report shall, at a minimum, contain the following information for each consumer electronic device received: 
(1)  The name, current address and date of birth of the seller as shown on the identification requirements pursuant to section 21-181(h)(2); 
(2)  A legible color copy of the photo identification used to verify the seller's identity in section 21-181(h)(2); 
(3)  A digital color photograph of the consumer electronic device purchased by the licensee; 
(4)  A digital color photograph of the seller; 
(5)  An electronic signature and fingerprint of the seller; 
(6)  An accurate and legible description of each consumer electronic device item purchased or received, including, as applicable, the manufacturer's name, model number and serial number; 
(7)  The ESN, IMEI or the MEID of the consumer electronic device purchased. If the ESN, IMEI or MEID is not available at the time of purchase or receipt, the report filed pursuant to this subsection must be updated with the ESN, IMEI or MEID as soon as known by the licensee, but no later than fifteen (15) calendar days after the transaction. The hold requirement outlined in section 21-183(a) shall not begin until all required contents of the report are complete and submitted to the City of Glendale Police Department; 
(8)  The amount paid for the consumer electronic device; 
(9)  The date and time when the consumer electronic device was received; and 
(10)  The location of the automated kiosk where the consumer electronic device was sold or collected. 
(c)  It is a violation of this article any person to provide false information on reports required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 018-31, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 21-183. - Storage, retention and retrieval. 
(a)  A licensee shall retain consumer electronic devices received at an automated kiosk within the City of Glendale at a secure location designated on the license for at least thirty (30) calendar days after submitting the complete report to the City of Glendale required under section 21-182. Any consumer electronic device held in custody pursuant to this section shall not be altered or transformed in any way but shall be held in the same condition in which it was received by the automated kiosk. 
(b)  Consumer electronic devices retained at a designated location(s) under this section are subject to return and inspection by the City of Glendale during regular business hours of the location or, at a minimum, during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(c)  Within twenty-four (24) hours of a request by the City of Glendale Police Department or law enforcement agency, the licensee shall comply with a request to open the automated kiosk to allow the law enforcement agency the opportunity to inspect the accessory bin and review any data that records transactions. 
(d)  Upon being advised by a representative of the City of Glendale Police Department or other law enforcement agency that there is probable cause to believe a consumer electronic device in the possession of the licensee is stolen or was used in the perpetration of a crime, the licensee operating the automated kiosk shall, upon request by the City of Glendale Police Department or other law enforcement agency; 
(e)  Within three (3) calendar days, surrender such consumer electronic device to the law enforcement agency and the law enforcement agency shall provide a seized property receipt for the consumer electronic device; or 
(f)  At the sole discretion of the requesting law enforcement agency, the consumer electronic device may be retained within the place of business on an investigative hold for a period not to exceed ninety (90) calendar days; during that time period, law enforcement may seize the consumer electronic device upon providing the licensee appropriate notification of the seizure and making arrangements to take physical custody of the consumer electronic device. The licensee shall produce the consumer electronic device at reasonable times and places, or may deliver the consumer electronic device to a representative of the law enforcement agency. 
(g)  The investigative hold shall be effective immediately upon oral or written notice to the licensee. If the hold is placed orally, it shall be followed by a written notice mailed to the licensee operating the automated kiosk within five (5) calendar days. 
(h)  A licensee shall not sell, transfer, exchange or otherwise dispose of any consumer electronic devices in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 018-31, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 21-184. - Fees. 
(a)  The licensing and reporting fees shall be paid for each automated kiosk that is identified on the license: 
(1)  An initial application fee and annual license and reporting fee. 
(2)  An annual license renewal and reporting fee. 
(3)  A fee, if applicable, for the transfer of a license from one controlling person to another. 
(b)  The application and license fees for automated kiosk licenses shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  No application, renewal, transfer or fingerprinting fee paid pursuant to this article shall be returned to an applicant if his or her application is withdrawn or denied. No license fee paid pursuant to this article shall be returned to a licensee if his or her license is suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 018-31, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 21-185. - Fines; penalties. 
(a)  Each day any violation of any provision of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, except when the violation is from a bona fide error that occurred provided that the licensee maintains procedures reasonable adopted to avoid the occurrence of bona fide errors. 
(b)  A violation of this article that is not a bona fide error, whether or not specifically designated as being unlawful, shall be a class 1 misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punishable as provided for under state law. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, "bona fide error" includes clerical, calculation, computer malfunction, programming, and printing errors and other similar errors. 
(d)  A licensee or designated agent who does not comply with a request by a law enforcement agency to inspect an automated kiosk pursuant to section 21-183(c), or refuses to return a consumer electronic device to law enforcement that is identified as stolen or involved in the perpetration of a crime pursuant to section 21-18(d) shall be issued a notice stating that the licensee or designated agent shall comply with the request by the law enforcement agency within five (5) calendar days of receipt of the notice. 
(e)  The notice shall include a description of the violation, the statutory or code reference, how the licensee can comply with the requirements, a description of how a hearing may be requested, the time limit for requesting a hearing, and a warning that failure to timely request a hearing may result in revocation of the license. 
A licensee or designated agent receiving a notice under this section may request a formal hearing pursuant to section 21-25 by serving a written request on the city manager within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of violation. If the licensee fails to comply with the requirements under subsection (a) of this section by the date provided in the notice, the City of Glendale Police Department may: (1) disable the automated kiosks by removing the automated kiosks from the power source and placing a notice on the machines that the kiosk is not operational; and (2) revoke the license pursuant to section 21-181(l). The automated kiosk(s) shall remain disabled during the pendency of the appeal process. If a licensee or designated agent fails to request a hearing, the automated kiosks shall remain disabled. The licensee is responsible for the cost incurred by law enforcement to disable the automated kiosks in accordance with this subsection and any fines or fees assessed by the court. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with section 21-25(b)-(d) of the City Code. Should the licensee prevail in the hearing, the hearing officer may also determine whether to award the licensee the costs incurred by the city to disable the automated kiosk(s) and void any fines imposed under this section. 
(f)  The City of Glendale Police Department shall take every reasonable precaution in the event the City of Glendale finds it necessary to disable the automated kiosks and the City of Glendale shall incur no liability by such action. 
(g)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit or prevent the City of Glendale from seeking or obtaining a subpoena, search warrant or similar legal process, including, but not limited to, an order from a court of competent jurisdiction compelling licensee or designated agent to allow the City to inspect any automated kiosk or require the production of any consumer electronic device placed in a kiosk within the City of Glendale. 
(Ord. No. 018-31, § 1, 5-8-18) 
Chapter 21.1 - MODEL CITY PRIVILEGE (SALES) TAX CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2772, § 1, adopted June 14, 2011, repealed Ch. 21.1, in its entirety. Resolution No. 4491, adopted June 14, 2011, enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Ch. 21.1 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL CONDITIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 21.1-1. - Words of tense, number and gender; code references. 
(a)  For the purposes of this Chapter, all words of tense, number, and gender shall comply with A.R.S. § 1-214 as amended. 
(b)  For the purposes of this Chapter, all code references, unless specified otherwise, shall: 
(1)  Refer to this City Code; 
(2)  Be deemed to include all amendments to such code references. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-100. - General definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
    "Assembler" means a person who unites or combines products, wares, or articles of manufacture so as to produce a change in form or substance of such items without changing or altering component parts. 
    "Broker" means any person engaged or continuing in business who acts for another for a consideration in the conduct of a business activity taxable under this Chapter, and who receives for his principal all or part of the gross income from the taxable activity. 
    " Business " includes all activities or acts, personal or corporate, engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, either directly or indirectly, but does not include either: casual activities or sales, or the transfer of electricity from a solar photovoltaic generation system to an electric utility distribution system. 
    "Business Day" means any day of the week when the Tax Collector's office is open for the public to conduct the Tax Collector's business. 
    "Casual Activity or Sale" means a transaction of an isolated nature made by a person who neither represents himself to be nor is engaged in a business subject to a tax imposed by this Chapter. However, no sale, rental, license for use, or lease transaction concerning real property nor any activity entered into by a business taxable by this Chapter shall be treated, or be exempt, as casual. This definition shall include sales of used capital assets, provided that the volume and frequency of such sales do not indicate that the seller regularly engages in selling such property. 
    "Combined Taxes" means the sum of all applicable Arizona Transaction Privilege and Use Taxes; all applicable transportation taxes imposed upon gross income by this County as authorized by Article III, Chapter 6, Title 42, Arizona Revised Statutes; and all applicable taxes imposed by this Chapter. 
    "Commercial Property" is any real property, or portion of such property, used for any purpose other than lodging or lodging space, including structures built for lodging but used otherwise, such as model homes, apartments used as offices, etc. 
    "Communications Channel" means any line, wire, cable, microwave, radio signal, light beam, telephone, telegraph, or any other electromagnetic means of moving a message. 
    "Construction Contracting" refers to the activity of a construction contractor. 
    "Construction Contractor" means a person who undertakes to or offers to undertake to, or purports to have the capacity to undertake to, or submits a bid to, or does himself or by or through others, construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck, or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation, or other structure, project, development, or improvement to real property, or to do any part thereof. "Construction contractor" includes subcontractors, specialty contractors, prime contractors, and any person receiving consideration for the general supervision and/or coordination of such a construction project except for remediation contracting. This definition shall govern without regard to whether or not the construction contractor is acting in fulfillment of a contract. 
    "Delivery (of Notice) by the Tax Collector" means "receipt (of notice) by the taxpayer". 
    "Delivery, Installation, or Other Direct Customer Services" means services or labor, excluding repair labor, provided by a taxpayer to or for his customer at the time of transfer of tangible personal property; provided further that the charge for such labor or service is separately billed to the customer and maintained separately in the taxpayer's books and records. 
    "Engaging" , when used with reference to engaging or continuing in business, includes the exercise of corporate or franchise powers. 
    "Equivalent Excise Tax" means either: 
(1)  A Privilege or Use Tax levied by another Arizona municipality upon the transaction in question, and paid either to such Arizona municipality directly or to the vendor; or 
(2)  An excise tax levied by a political subdivision of a state other than Arizona upon the transaction in question, and paid either to such jurisdiction directly or to the vendor; or 
(3)  An excise tax levied by a Native American Government organized under the laws of the federal government upon the transaction in question, and paid either to such jurisdiction directly or to the vendor. 
    "Federal Government" means the United States Government, its departments and agencies; but not including national banks or federally chartered or insured banks, savings and loan institutions, or credit unions. 
    "Food" means any items intended for human consumption as defined by rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Revenue, State of Arizona, pursuant to A.R.S. § 42-5106. Under no circumstances shall "food" include alcoholic beverages or tobacco, or food items purchased for use in conversion to any form of alcohol by distillation, fermentation, brewing, or other process. Under no circumstances shall "food" include an edible product, beverage, or ingredient infused, mixed, or in any way combined with medical marijuana or an active ingredient of medical marijuana. 
    "Hotel" means any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home, house, motel, rooming house, apartment house, trailer, or other lodging place within the City offering lodging, wherein the owner thereof, for compensation, furnishes lodging to any transient, except foster homes, rest homes, sheltered care homes, nursing homes, or primary health care facilities. 
    "Jet Fuel" means jet fuel as defined in A.R.S. § 42-5351. 
    "Job Printing" means the activity of copying or reproducing an article by any means, process, or method. 
    "Job printing" includes engraving of printing plates, embossing, copying, micrographics, and photo reproduction. 
    "Lessee" includes the equivalent person in a rental or licensing agreement for all purposes of this Chapter. 
    "Lessor" includes the equivalent person in a rental or licensing agreement for all purposes of this Chapter. 
    "Licensing (for Use)" means any agreement between the user ("licensee") and the owner or the owner's agent ("licensor") for the use of the licensor's property whereby the licensor receives consideration, where such agreement does not qualify as a "sale" or "lease" or "rental" agreement. 
    "Lodging (Lodging Space)" means any room or apartment in a hotel or any other provider of rooms, trailer spaces, or other residential dwelling spaces; or the furnishings or services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of said dwelling space, including storage or parking space for the property of said tenant. 
    "Manufactured Buildings" means a manufactured home, mobile home or factory built building, as defined in A.R.S. § 41-2142. 
    "Manufacturer" means a person engaged or continuing in the business of fabricating, producing, or manufacturing products, wares, or articles for use from other forms of tangible personal property, imparting to such new forms, qualities, properties, and combinations. 
    "Medical Marijuana" means "marijuana" used for a "medical use" as those terms are defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801. 
    "Mining and Metallurgical Supplies" means all tangible personal property acquired by persons engaged in activities defined in Section 21.1-432 for such use. This definition shall not include: 
(1)  Janitorial equipment and supplies. 
(2)  Office equipment, office furniture, and office supplies. 
(3)  Motor vehicles licensed for use upon the highways of the State. 
    "Modifier" means a person who reworks, changes, or adds to products, wares, or articles of manufacture. 
    "Nonprofit Entity" means any entity organized and operated exclusively for charitable purposes, or operated by the Federal Government, the State, or any political subdivision of the State. 
    "Occupancy (of Real Property)" means any occupancy or use, or any right to occupy or use, real property including any improvements, rights, or interests in such property. 
    "Out-of-City Sale" means the sale of tangible personal property and job printing if all of the following occur: 
(1)  Transference of title and possession occur without the City; and 
(2)  The stock from which such personal property was taken was not within the corporate limits of the city; and 
(3)  The order is received at a permanent business location of the seller located outside the city; which location is used for the substantial and regular conduct of such business sales activity. In no event shall the place of business of the buyer be determinative of the situs of the receipt of the order. 
For the purpose of this definition it does not matter that all other indicia of business occur within the city, including, but not limited to, accounting, invoicing, payments, centralized purchasing, and supply to out-of-city storehouses and out-of-city retail branch outlets from a primary storehouse within the city. 
    "Out-of-State Sale" means the sale of tangible personal property and job printing if all of the following occur: 
(1)  The order is placed from without the State of Arizona; and 
(2)  The property is delivered to the buyer at a location outside the State; and 
(3)  The property is purchased for use outside the State. 
    "Owner-Builder" means an owner or lessor of real property who, by himself or by or through others, constructs or has constructed or reconstructs or has reconstructed any improvement to real property. 
    "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, broker, the Federal Government, this State, or any political subdivision or agency of this State. For the purposes of this Chapter, a person shall be considered a distinct and separate person from any general or limited partnership or joint venture or other association with which such person is affiliated. A subsidiary corporation shall be considered a separate person from its parent corporation for purposes of taxation of transactions with its parent corporation. 
    " Prosthetic " means any of the following tangible personal property if such items are prescribed or recommended by a licensed podiatrist, chiropractor, dentist, physician or surgeon, naturopath, optometrist, osteopathic physician or surgeon, psychologist, hearing aid dispenser, physician assistant, nurse practitioner or veterinarian: 
(1)  Any man-made device for support or replacement of a part of the body, or to increase acuity of one of the senses. Such items include: prescription eyeglasses; contact lenses; hearing aids; artificial limbs or teeth; neck, back, arm, leg, or similar braces. 
(2)  Insulin, insulin syringes, and glucose test strips sold with or without a prescription. 
(3)  Hospital beds, crutches, wheelchairs, similar home health aids, or corrective shoes. 
(4)  Drugs or medicine, including oxygen. 
(5)  Equipment used to generate, monitor, or provide health support systems, such as respiratory equipment, oxygen concentrator, dialysis machine. 
(6)  Durable medical equipment which has a federal health care financing administration common procedure code, is designated reimbursable by Medicare, can withstand repeated use, is primarily and customarily used to serve a medical purpose, is generally not useful to a person in the absence of illness or injury and is appropriate for use in the home. 
(7)  Orthodontic devices dispensed by a dental professional who is licensed under Title 32. Chapter 11 to a patient as part of the practice of dentistry. 
(8)  Under no circumstances shall "prosthetic" include medical marijuana regardless of whether it is sold or dispensed pursuant to a prescription, recommendation, or written certification by any authorized person. 
    "Qualifying Community Health Center" 
(1)  Means an entity that is recognized as nonprofit under 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, that is a community-based, primary care clinic that has a community-based board of directors and that is either: 
(a)  The sole provider of primary care in the community. 
(b)  A nonhospital affiliated clinic that is located in a federally designated medically underserved area in this State. 
(2)  Includes clinics that are being constructed as qualifying community health centers. 
    "Qualifying Health Care Organization" means an entity that is recognized as nonprofit under Section 501(c) of the United States Internal Revenue Code and that uses, saves or invests at least eighty percent (80%) of all monies that it receives from all sources each year only for health and medical related educational and charitable services, as documented by annual financial audits prepared by an independent certified public accountant, performed according to generally accepted accounting standards and filed annually with the Arizona Department of Revenue. Monies that are used, saved or invested to lease, purchase or construct a facility for health and medical related education and charitable services are included in the eighty percent (80%) requirement. 
    "Qualifying hospital" means any of the following: 
(1)  A licensed hospital which is organized and operated exclusively for charitable purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
(2)  A licensed nursing care institution or a licensed residential care institution or a residential care facility operated in conjunction with a licensed nursing care institution or a licensed kidney dialysis center, which provides medical services, nursing services or health related services and is not used or held for profit. 
(3)  A hospital, nursing care institution or residential care institution which is operated by the federal government, this State or a political subdivision of this State. 
(4)  A facility that is under construction and that on completion will be a facility under subdivision (1), (2) or (3) of this paragraph. 
    "Receipt (of Notice) by the Taxpayer" means the earlier of actual receipt or the first attempted delivery by certified United States mail to the taxpayer's address of record with the Tax Collector. 
    "Remediation" means those actions that are reasonable, necessary, cost-effective and technically feasible in the event of the release or threat of release of hazardous substances into the environment such that the waters of the State are or may be affected, such actions as may be necessary to monitor, assess and evaluate such release or threat of release, actions of remediation, removal or disposal of hazardous substances or taking such other actions as may be necessary to prevent, minimize or mitigate damage to the public health or welfare or to the waters of the State which may otherwise result from a release or threat of release of a hazardous substance that will or may affect the waters of the State. Remediation activities include the use of biostimulation with indigenous microbes and bioaugmentation using microbes that are nonpathogenic, nonopportunistic and that are naturally occurring. Remediation activities may include community information and participation costs and providing an alternative drinking water supply. 
    "Rental Equipment" means tangible personal property sold, rented, leased, or licensed to customers to the extent that the item is actually used by the customer for rental, lease, or license to others; provided that: 
(1)  The vendee is regularly engaged in the business of renting, leasing, or licensing such property for a consideration; and 
(2)  The item so claimed as "rental equipment" is not used by the person claiming the exemption for any purpose other than rental, lease, or license for compensation, to an extent greater than fifteen percent (15%) of its actual use. 
    "Rental Supply" means an expendable or nonexpendable repair or replacement part sold to become part of "rental equipment", provided that: 
(1)  The documentation relating to each purchased item so claimed specifically itemizes to the vendor the actual item of "rental equipment" to which the purchased item is intended to be attached as a repair or replacement part; and 
(2)  The vendee is regularly engaged in the business of renting, leasing, or licensing such property for a consideration; and 
(3)  The item so claimed as "rental equipment" is not used by the person claiming the exemption for any purpose other than rental, lease, or license for compensation, to an extent greater than fifteen percent (15%) of its actual use. 
    "Repairer" means a person who restores or renews products, wares, or articles of manufacture. 
    "Resides within the City" means in cases other than individuals, whose legal addresses are determinative of residence, the engaging, continuing, or conducting of regular business activity within the City. 
    "Restaurant" means any business activity where articles of food, drink, or condiment are customarily prepared or served to patrons for consumption on or off the premises, also including bars, cocktail lounges, the dining rooms of hotels, and all caterers. For the purposes of this Chapter, a "fast food" business, which includes street vendors and mobile vendors selling in public areas or at entertainment or sports or similar events, who prepares or sells food or drink for consumption on or off the premises is considered a "restaurant", and not a "retailer". 
    "Retail Sale (Sale at Retail)" means the sale of tangible personal property, except the sale of tangible personal property to a person regularly engaged in the business of selling such property. 
    "Retailer" means any person engaged or continuing in the business of sales of tangible personal property at retail. 
    "Sale" means any transfer of title or possession, or both, exchange, barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, including consignment transactions and auctions, of property for a consideration. "Sale" includes any transaction whereby the possession of such property is transferred but the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price. "Sale" also includes the fabrication of tangible personal property for consumers who, in whole or in part, furnish either directly or indirectly the materials used in such fabrication work. 
    "Solar Daylighting" means a device that is specifically designed to capture and redirect the visible portion of the solar beam, while controlling the infrared portion for use in illuminating interior building spaces in lieu of artificial lighting. 
    "Solar Energy Device" means a system or series of mechanisms designed primarily to provide heating, to provide cooling, to produce electrical power, to produce mechanical power, to provide solar daylighting or to provide any combination of the foregoing by means of collecting and transferring solar generated energy into such uses either by active or passive means, including wind generator systems that produce electricity. Solar energy systems may also have the capability of storing solar energy for future use. Passive systems shall clearly be designed as a solar energy device, such as a Trombe wall, and not merely as a part of a normal structure, such as a window. 
    "Speculative Builder" means either: 
(1)  An owner-builder who sells or contracts to sell, at anytime, improved real property (as provided in Section 21.1-416) consisting of: 
(a)  Custom, model, or inventory homes, regardless of the stage of completion of such homes; or 
(b)  Improved residential or commercial lots without a structure; or 
(2)  An owner-builder who sells or contracts to sell improved real property, other than improved real property specified in subsection (1) above: 
(a)  Prior to completion; or 
(b)  Before the expiration of twenty-four (24) months after the improvements of the real property sold are substantially complete. 
    "Substantially Complete" means the construction contracting or reconstruction contracting: 
(1)  Has passed final inspection or its equivalent; or 
(2)  Certificate of occupancy or its equivalent has been issued; or 
(3)  Is ready for immediate occupancy or use. 
    "Supplier" means any person who rents, leases, licenses, or makes sales of tangible personal property within the City, either directly to the consumer or customer or to wholesalers, jobbers, fabricators, manufacturers, modifiers, assemblers, repairers, or those engaged in the business of providing services which involve the use, sale, rental, lease, or license of tangible personal property. 
    "Tax Collector" means the City Manager or his designee or agent for all purposes under this Chapter. 
    "Taxpayer" means any person liable for any tax under this Chapter. 
    "Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer" means the individual designated by the City to perform the duties identified in Sections 21.1-515 and 21.1-516. In cities with a population of fifty thousand (50,000) or more, the Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer shall be an employee of the City. In cities with a population of less than fifty thousand (50,000), the Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer need not be an employee of the City. Regardless of whether the Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer is or is not an employee of the City, the Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer shall have substantive knowledge of taxation. The identity of and telephone number for the Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer can be obtained from the Tax Collector. 
    "Telecommunication Service" means any service or activity connected with the transmission or relay of sound, visual image, data, information, images, or material over a communications channel or any combination of communications channels. 
    "Transient" means any person who either at the person's own expense or at the expense of another obtains lodging space or the use of lodging space on a daily or weekly basis, or on any other basis for less than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
    "Utility Service" means the producing, providing, or furnishing of electricity, electric lights, current, power, gas (natural or artificial), or water to consumers or ratepayers. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2843, § 1, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4997, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Sec. 21.1-110. - Definitions: Income-producing capital equipment. 
(a)  The following tangible personal property, other than items excluded in subsection (d) below, shall be deemed "income-producing capital equipment" for the purposes of this Chapter: 
(1)  Machinery or equipment used directly in manufacturing, processing, fabricating, job printing, refining or metallurgical operations. The terms "manufacturing", "processing", "fabricating", "job printing", "refining", and "metallurgical" as used in this paragraph refer to and include those operations commonly understood within their ordinary meaning. "Metallurgical operations" includes leaching, milling, precipitating, smelting and refining. 
(2)  Mining machinery, or equipment, used directly in the process of extracting ores or minerals from the earth for commercial purposes, including equipment required to prepare the materials for extraction and handling, loading or transporting such extracted material to the surface. "Mining" includes underground, surface and open pit operations for extracting ores and minerals. 
(3)  Tangible personal property, sold to persons engaged in business classified under the telecommunications classification, consisting of central office switching equipment; switchboards; private branch exchange equipment; microwave radio equipment, and carrier equipment including optical fiber, coaxial cable, and other transmission media which are components of carrier systems. 
(4)  Machinery, equipment, or transmission lines used directly in producing or transmitting electrical power, but not including distribution. Transformers and control equipment used at transmission substation sites constitute equipment used in producing or transmitting electrical power. 
(5)  Pipes or valves four inches (4") in diameter or larger and related equipment, used to transport oil, natural gas, artificial gas, water, or coal slurry. For the purpose of this section, related equipment includes: compressor units, regulators, machinery and equipment, fittings, seals and any other parts that are used in operating the pipes or valves. 
(6)  Aircraft, navigational and communication instruments, and other accessories and related equipment sold to: 
(A)  A person holding a federal certificate of public convenience and necessity or foreign air carrier permit for air transportation for use as or in conjunction with or becoming a part of aircraft to be used to transport persons, property or United States mail in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce. 
(B)  Any foreign government for use by such government outside of this State. 
(C)  Persons who are not residents of this State and who will not use such property in this State other than in removing such property from this State. This subdivision also applies to corporations that are not incorporated in this State, regardless of maintaining a place of business in this State, if the principal corporate office is located outside this State and the property will not be used in this State other than in removing the property from this State. 
(7)  Machinery, tools, equipment and related supplies used or consumed directly in repairing, remodeling or maintaining aircraft, aircraft engines or aircraft component parts by or on behalf of a certificated or licensed carrier of persons or property. 
(8)  Railroad rolling stock, rails, ties and signal control equipment used directly to transport persons or property. 
(9)  Machinery or equipment used directly to drill for oil or gas or used directly in the process of extracting oil or gas from the earth for commercial purposes. 
(10)  Buses or other urban mass transit vehicles which are used directly to transport persons or property for hire or pursuant to a governmentally adopted and controlled urban mass transportation program and which are sold to bus companies holding a federal certificate of convenience and necessity or operated by a city, town or other governmental entity or by any person contracting with such governmental entity as part of a governmentally adopted and controlled program to provide urban mass transportation. 
(11)  Metering, monitoring, receiving, and transmitting equipment acquired by persons engaged in the business of providing utility services or telecommunications services; but only to the extent that such equipment is to be used by the customers of such persons and such persons separately charge or bill their customers for use of such equipment. 
(12)  Groundwater measuring devices required under A.R.S. § 45-604. 
(13)  Machinery or equipment used in research and development. In this paragraph, "research and development" means basic and applied research in the sciences and engineering, and designing, developing or testing prototypes, processes or new products, including research and development of computer software that is embedded in or an integral part of the prototype or new product or that is required for machinery or equipment otherwise exempt under this section to function effectively. Research and development do not include manufacturing quality control, routine consumer product testing, market research, sales promotion, sales service, research in social sciences or psychology, computer software research that is not included in the definition of research and development, or other nontechnological activities or technical services. 
(14)  (Reserved). 
(15)  Included in income producing capital equipment are liquid, solid or gaseous chemicals used in manufacturing, processing, fabricating, mining, refining, metallurgical operations, research and development or job printing, if using or consuming the chemicals, alone or as part of an integrated system of chemicals, involving direct contact with the materials from which the product is produced for the purpose of causing or permitting a chemical or physical change to occur in the materials as part of the production process. This subsection does not include chemicals that are used or consumed in activities such as packaging, storage or transportation but does not affect any deduction for such chemicals that is otherwise provided by this Code. Chemicals meeting the requirements of this subsection are deemed not to be expendable under subsection (d) of this section. 
(16)  Cleanrooms that are used for manufacturing, processing, fabrication or research and development, as defined in paragraph (13) of this subsection, of semiconductor products. For purposes of this paragraph, "cleanroom" means all property that comprises or creates an environment where humidity, temperature, particulate matter and contamination are precisely controlled within specified parameters, without regard to whether the property is actually contained within that environment or whether any of the property is affixed to or incorporated into real property. Cleanroom: 
(A)  Includes the integrated systems, fixtures, piping, movable partitions, lighting and all property that is nec-essary or adapted to reduce contamination or to control airflow, temperature, humidity, chemical purity or other environmental conditions or manufacturing tolerances, as well as the production machinery and equipment operating in conjunction with the cleanroom environment. 
(B)  Does not include the building or other permanent, nonremovable component of the building that houses the cleanroom environment. 
(17)  Machinery and equipment that are purchased by or on behalf of the owners of a soundstage complex and primarily used for motion picture, multimedia or interactive video production in the complex. This paragraph applies only if the initial construction of the soundstage complex begins after June 30, 1996 and before January 1, 2002 and the machinery and equipment are purchased before the expiration of five years after the start of initial construction. For purposes of this paragraph: 
(A)  "Motion picture, multimedia or interactive video production" includes products for theatrical and television release, educational presentations, electronic retailing, documentaries, music videos, industrial films, cd-rom, video game production, commercial advertising and television episode production and other genres that are introduced through developing technology. 
(B)  "Soundstage complex" means a facility of multiple stages including production offices, construction shops and related areas, prop and costume shops, storage areas, parking for production vehicles and areas that are leased to businesses that complement the production needs and orientation of the overall facility. 
(18)  Tangible personal property that is used by either of the following to receive, store, convert, produce, generate, decode, encode, control or transmit telecommunications information: 
(A)  Any direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission service that operates pursuant to 47 Code of Federal Regulations parts 25 and 100. 
(B)  Any satellite television or data transmission facility, if both of the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Over two-thirds of the transmissions, measured in megabytes, transmitted by the facility during the test period were transmitted to or on behalf of one or more direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission services that operate pursuant to 47 Code of Federal Regulations parts 25 and 100. 
(ii)  Over two-thirds of the transmissions, measured in megabytes, transmitted by or on behalf of those direct broadcast television or data transmission services during the test period were transmitted by the facility to or on behalf of those services. 
For purposes of subdivision (B) of this paragraph, "test period" means the three hundred sixty-five day period beginning on the later of the date on which the tangible personal property is purchased or the date on which the direct broadcast satellite television or data transmission service first transmits information to its customers. 
(19)  Machinery and equipment that is used directly in the feeding of poultry, the environmental control of housing for poultry, the movement of eggs within a production and packaging facility or the sorting or cooling of eggs. This exemption does not apply to vehicles used for transporting eggs. 
(20)  Machinery or equipment, including related structural components, that is employed in connection with manufacturing, processing, fabricating, job printing, refining, mining, natural gas pipelines, metallurgical operations, telecommunications, producing or transmitting electricity or research and development that is used directly to meet or exceed rules or regulations adopted by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality or a political subdivision of this state to prevent, monitor, control or reduce land, water or air pollution. 
(21)  Machinery or equipment that enables a television station to originate and broadcast or to receive and broadcast digital television signals and that was purchased to facilitate compliance with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (P.L. 104-104; 110 Stat. 56; 47 United States Code Section 336) and the Federal Communications Commission Order issued April 21, 1997, 47 Code of Federal Regulations Part 73. This paragraph does not exempt any of the following: 
(A)  Repair or replacement parts purchased for the machinery or equipment described in this paragraph. 
(B)  Machinery or equipment purchased to replace machinery or equipment for which an exemption was previously claimed and taken under this paragraph. 
(C)  Any machinery or equipment purchased after the television station has ceased analog broadcasting, or purchased after November 1, 2009, whichever occurs first. 
(b)  The term "income-producing capital equipment" shall further include ancillary machinery and equipment used for the treatment of waste products created by the business activities which are allowed to purchase "income-producing capital equipment" defined in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  The term "income-producing capital equipment" shall further include repair and replacement parts, other than the items in subsection (d) below, where the property is acquired to become an integral part of another item itemized in subsections (a) or (b) above. 
(d)  The tangible personal property defined as income-producing capital equipment in this Section shall not include: 
(1)  Expendable materials. For purposes of this paragraph, expendable materials do not include any of the categories of tangible personal property specified in subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this Section regardless of the cost or useful life of that property. 
(2)  Janitorial equipment and hand tools. 
(3)  Office equipment, furniture, and supplies. 
(4)  Tangible personal property used in selling or distributing activities. 
(5)  Motor vehicles required to be licensed by the State of Arizona, except buses or other urban mass transit vehicles specifically exempted pursuant to subsection (a)(10) above without regard to the use of such motor vehicles. 
(6)  Shops, buildings, docks, depots, and all other materials of whatever kind or character not specifically included as exempt. 
(7)  Motors and pumps used in drip irrigation systems. 
(8)  (Reserved). 
(e)  For the purposes of this Section: 
(1)  "Aircraft" includes: 
(A)  An airplane flight simulator that is approved by the Federal Aviation Administration for use as a Phase II or higher flight simulator under Appendix H, 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121. 
(B)  Tangible personal property that is permanently affixed or attached as a component part of an aircraft that is owned or operated by a certificated or licensed carrier of persons or property. 
(2)  "Other accessories and related equipment" includes aircraft accessories and equipment such as ground service equipment that physically contact aircraft at some point during the overall carrier operation. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-115. - Definitions: Computer software; custom computer programming. 
(a)  "Computer Software" means any computer program, part of such a program, or any sequence of instructions for automatic data processing equipment. Computer software which is not "custom computer programming" is deemed to be tangible personal property for the purposes of this Chapter, regardless of the method by which title, possession, or right to use the software is transferred to the user. 
(b)  "Custom Computer Programming" means any computer software which is written or prepared exclusively for a customer and includes those services represented by separately stated charges for the modification of existing prewritten programs when the modifications are written or prepared exclusively for a customer. 
(1)  The term does not include a prewritten program which is held or existing for general or repeated sale, lease, or license, even if the program was initially developed on a custom basis for in-house, or for a single customer's, use. 
(2)  Modification to an existing prewritten program to meet the customer's needs is custom computer programming only to the extent of the modification, and only to the extent that the actual amount charged for the modification is separately stated on invoices, statements, and other billing documents supplied to the customer. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-120. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2944, § 1, adopted June 23, 2015 and Res. No. 4997, § 1(Exh. A), adopted June 23, 2015 repealed § 21.1-120, which pertained to definitions: food for home consumption and derived from Res. No. 4491, § 1, adopted June 14, 2011. 
ARTICLE II. - DETERMINATION OF GROSS INCOME 

Sec. 21.1-200. - Determination of gross income: In general. 
(a)  Gross income includes: 
(1)  The value proceeding or accruing from the sale of property, the providing of service, or both. 
(2)  The total amount of the sale, lease, license for use, or rental price at the time of such sale, rental, lease, or license. 
(3)  All receipts, cash, credits, barter, exchange, reduction of or forgiveness of indebtedness, and property of every kind or nature derived from a sale, lease, license for use, rental, or other taxable activity. 
(4)  All other receipts whether payment is advanced prior to, contemporaneous with, or deferred in whole or in part subsequent to the activity or transaction. 
(b)  Barter, exchange, trade-outs, or similar transactions are includable in gross income at the fair market value of the service rendered or property transferred, whichever is higher, as they represent consideration given for consideration received. 
(c)  No deduction or exclusion is allowed from gross income on account of the cost of the property sold, the time value of money, expense of any kind or nature, losses, materials used, labor or service performed, interest paid, or credits granted. 
(d)  For the purpose of this chapter the total amount of gross income, gross receipts or gross proceeds of sales for nuclear fuel shall be deemed to be the value of the purchase price of uranium oxide used in producing the fuel. The tax imposed by this chapter may be imposed only once for any one quantity or batch of nuclear fuel regardless of the number of transactions or financing arrangements which may occur with respect to that nuclear fuel. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4997, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Sec. 21.1-210. - Determination of gross income: Transactions between affiliated companies or persons. 
    In transactions between affiliated companies or persons, or in other circumstances where the relationship between the parties is such that the gross income from the transaction is not indicative of the market value of the subject matter of the transaction, the Tax Collector shall determine the "market value" upon which the City Privilege and Use Taxes shall be levied. "Market value" shall correspond as nearly as possible to the gross income from similar transactions of like quality or character by other taxpayers where no common interest exists between the parties, but otherwise under similar circumstances and conditions. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-220. - Determination of gross income: Artificially contrived transactions. 
    The Tax Collector may examine any transaction, reported or unreported, if, in his opinion, there has been or may be an evasion of the taxes imposed by this Chapter and to estimate the amount subject to tax in cases where such evasion has occurred. The Tax Collector shall disregard any transaction which has been undertaken in an artificial manner in order to evade the taxes imposed by this Chapter. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-230. - Determination of gross income based upon method of reporting. 
    The method of reporting chosen by a taxpayer, as provided in Section 21.1-520, necessitates the following adjustments to gross income for all purposes under this Chapter: 
(a)  Cash basis. When a person elects to report and pay taxes on a cash basis, gross income for the reporting period shall include: 
(1)  The total amounts received on "paid in full" transactions, against which are allowed all applicable deductions and exclusions; and 
(2)  All amounts received on accounts receivable, conditional sales contract, or other similar transactions, against which no deductions and no exclusions from gross income are allowed. Interest on finance contracts may be deducted if separately itemized on all books and records. 
(b)  Accrual basis. When a person elects to report and pay taxes on an accrual basis, gross income shall include all gross income for the applicable period regardless of whether receipts are for cash, credit, conditional, or partially deferred transactions, and regardless of whether or not any security document or instrument is sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred to another. Persons reporting on the accrual basis may deduct bad debts, provided that: 
(1)  The amount deducted for the bad debt must be deducted from gross income of the month in which the actual charge-off was made, and only to the extent that such amount was actually charged-off, and also only to the extent that such amount is or was included as taxable gross income; and 
(2)  If any amount is subsequently collected on such charged-off account, it shall be included in gross income for the month in which it was collected, without deduction for expense of collection. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-240. - Exclusion of cash discounts, returns, refunds, trade-in values, vendor-issued coupons, and rebates from gross income. 
(a)  The following items are not included in gross income: 
(1)  Cash discounts allowed by the vendor for timely payment, but only discounts allowed against taxable gross income. 
(2)  The value of property returned by customers to the extent of the amount actually refunded either in cash or by credit and the amount refunded was included in taxable gross income. 
(3)  The trade-in allowance for tangible personal property accepted as payment, not to exceed the full sales price for any tangible personal property sold, when the full sales price is included in taxable gross income. Trade-in allowances are not allowed for manufactured buildings taxable under Section 21.1-427. 
(4)  When coupons issued by a vendor are later accepted by the vendor as a discount against the transaction, the discount may be excluded from gross income as a cash discount. Amounts credited or refunded by a vendor for redemption of coupons issued by any person other than the vendor may not be excluded from gross income. 
(5)  Rebates issued by the vendor to a customer as a discount against the transaction may be excluded from gross income as a cash discount. Rebates issued by a person other than the vendor may not be excluded from gross income, even when the vendee assigns his right to the rebate to the vendor. 
(6)  In computing the tax base, gross proceeds of sales or gross income does not include a manufacturer's cash rebate on the sales price of a motor vehicle if the buyer assigns the buyer's right in the rebate to the retailer. 
(b)  If the amount specified in subsection (a) above is credited by a vendor subsequent to the reporting period in which the original transaction occurs, such amount may be excluded from the taxable gross income of that subsequent reporting period, but only to the extent that the excludable amount was reported as taxable gross income in that prior reporting period. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-250. - Exclusion of combined taxes from gross income; itemization; notice; limitations. 
(a)  When tax is separately charged and/or collected. The total amount of gross income shall be exclusive of combined taxes only when the person upon whom the tax is imposed shall establish to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector that such tax has been added to the total price of the transaction. The taxpayer must provide to his customer and also keep a reliable record of the actual tax charged or collected, shown by cash register tapes, sales tickets, or other accurate record, separating net transaction price and combined tax. If at any time the Tax Collector cannot ascertain from the records kept by the taxpayer the total or amounts billed or collected on account of combined taxes, the claimed taxes collected may not be excluded from gross income, unless such records are completed and/or clarified to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector. 
(1)  Remittance of all tax charged and/or collected. When an added charge is made to cover City (or combined) Privilege and Use Taxes, the person upon whom the tax is imposed shall pay the full amount of the City taxes due, whether collected by him or not, and in the event he collects more than the amount due he shall remit the excess to the Tax Collector. In the event the Tax Collector cannot ascertain from the records kept by the taxpayer the total or amounts of taxes collected by him, and the Tax Collector is satisfied that the taxpayer has collected taxes in an amount in excess of the tax assessed under this Chapter, the Tax Collector may determine the amount collected and collect the tax so determined in the manner provided in this Chapter. 
(2)  Itemization. A taxpayer, in order to be entitled to exclude from his gross income any amounts paid to him by customers for combined taxes passed on to the customer, must prove that he has provided his customer with a written record of the transaction showing at a minimum the price before the tax, the combined taxes, and the total cost. This shall be [in] addition to the record required to be kept under subsection (a) above. 
(b)  When tax has been neither separately charged nor separately collected. When the person upon whom the tax is imposed shall establish by means of invoices, sales tickets, or other reliable evidence, that no added charge was made to cover combined taxes, the taxpayer may exclude tax collected from such income by dividing such taxable gross income by 1.00 plus a decimal figure representing the effective combined tax rate expressed as a fraction of 1.00. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-260. - Exclusion of fees and taxes from gross income; limitations. 
(a)  There shall be excluded from gross income of vendors of motor vehicles those motor vehicle registration fees, license fees and taxes, and lieu taxes imposed pursuant to Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes in connection with the initial purchase of a motor vehicle, but only to the extent that such taxes or fees or both have been separately itemized and collected from the purchaser of the motor vehicle by the vendor, actually remitted to the proper registering, licensing, and taxing authorities, and the provisions of Article III, regarding recordkeeping, are met. For the purpose of the exclusion provided by this subsection only, the terms vendor and vendee shall also apply to a lessor and lessee respectively, of a motor vehicle if, in addition to all other requirements of this subsection, the lease agreement specifically requires the lessee to pay such fees or taxes, and such amounts are separately itemized in the documentation provided to the lessee. 
(b)  There shall be excluded from gross income of vendors at retail of heavy trucks and trailers, the amount attributable to Federal Excise Taxes imposed by 26 U.S.C. Section 4051, but only to the extent that the provisions of Article III, relating to recordkeeping, have been met. 
(c)  There shall be excluded from gross income the following fees, taxes, and lieu taxes, but only to the extent that such taxes or fees or both have been separately itemized and collected from the purchaser by the vendor, actually remitted to the proper registering, licensing, and taxing authorities, and the provisions of Article III, regarding recordkeeping, are met: 
(1)  Emergency telecommunication services excise tax imposed pursuant to A.R.S. § 42-5252. "Emergency telecommunication services" means telecommunication services or systems that use number 911 or a similarly designated telephone number for emergency calls; 
(2)  The telecommunication devices for the deaf and the severely hearing and speech impaired excise tax imposed pursuant to A.R.S. § 42-5252; 
(3)  Federal excise taxes on communications services as imposed by 26 U.S.C. § 4251; 
(4)  Car rental surcharge imposed pursuant to A.R.S. § 48-4234; 
(5)  Federal excise taxes on passenger vehicles as imposed by 26 U.S.C. § 4001(.01); 
(6)  Waste tire disposal fees, imposed pursuant to A.R.S. § 44-1302. 
(d)  There shall be excluded from gross income of vendors of motor vehicles dealer documentation fees, but only to the extent that such fees have been separately itemized and collected from the purchaser of the motor vehicle by the vendor. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-266. - Exclusion of motor carrier revenues from gross income. 
    There shall be excluded from gross income the gross proceeds of sale or gross income derived from any of the following: 
(a)  A motor carrier's use on the public highways in this State if the motor carrier is subject to a fee prescribed in A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 15, Article 4 or A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 16. 
(b)  Leasing, renting or licensing a motor vehicle subject to and upon which the fee has been paid under A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 16. 
(c)  The sale of a motor vehicle and any repair and replacement parts and tangible personal property becoming a part of such motor vehicle, to a motor carrier who is subject to a fee prescribed in A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 16 and who is engaged in the business of leasing, renting or licensing such property. 
(d)  For the purposes of these exclusions, "motor carrier" includes a motor vehicle weighing 26,000 pounds or more, a lightweight motor vehicle which weighs 12,001 pounds to 26,000 pounds and a light motor vehicle weighing 12,000 pounds or less, which pay the fee prescribed in A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 15 or A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 16. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-270. - Exclusion of gross income of persons deemed not engaged in business. 
(a)  For the purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  "Federally Exempt Organization" means an organization which has received a determination of exemption, or qualifies for such exemption, under 26 U.S.C. Section 501(c) and rules and regulations of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue pertaining to same, but not including a "governmental entity", "non-licensed business", or "public educational entity". 
(2)  "Governmental Entity" means the Federal Government, the State of Arizona, any other state, or any political subdivision, department, or agency of any of the foregoing; provided further that persons contracting with such a governmental entity to operate any part of a governmentally adopted and controlled program to provide urban mass transportation shall be deemed a governmental entity in all activities such person performs when engaged in said contract. 
(3)  "Non-Licensed Business" means any person conducting any business activity for gain or profit, whether or not actually realized, which person is not required to be licensed for the conduct or transaction of activities subject to the tax imposed under this Chapter. 
(4)  "Proprietary Club" means any club which has qualified or would otherwise qualify as an exempt club under the provisions of 26 U.S.C. Section 501(c)(7), (8), and (9), notwithstanding the fact that some or all of the members may own a proprietary interest in the property and assets of the club. 
(5)  "Public Educational Entity" means any educational entity operated pursuant to any provisions of Title 15, Arizona Revised Statutes. 
(b)  Transactions which, if conducted by any other person, would produce gross income subject to tax under this Chapter shall not be subject to the imposition of such tax if conducted entirely by a public educational entity; governmental entity, except "proprietary activities" of municipalities as provided by Regulation; or non-licensed business. 
(c)  Transactions which, if conducted by any other person, would produce gross income subject to the tax under this Chapter shall not be subject to the imposition of such tax if conducted entirely by a federally exempt organization or proprietary club with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Transactions involving proprietary clubs and organizations exempt under 26 U.S.C. Section 501(c)(7), (8), and (9), where the gross revenue of the activity received from persons other than members and bona fide guests of members is in an amount in excess of fifteen percent (15%) of total gross revenue, as prescribed by Regulation. In the event this fifteen percent (15%) limit is exceeded, the entire gross income of such entity shall be subject to the applicable tax. 
(2)  Gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512, including all statutory definitions and determinations, the rules and regulations of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, and his administrative interpretations and guidelines. 
(3)  (Reserved) 
(d)  Except as may be provided elsewhere in this Chapter, transactions where customers are exempt organizations, proprietary clubs, public educational entities, governmental entities, or non-licensed businesses shall be deemed taxable transactions for the purpose of the imposition of taxes under this Chapter, notwithstanding that property so acquired may in fact be resold or leased by the acquiring person to others. In the case of sales, rentals, leases, or licenses to proprietary clubs or exempt organizations, the vendor may be relieved from the responsibility for reporting and paying tax on such income only by obtaining from its vendee a verified statement that includes: 
(1)  a statement that when the property so acquired is resold, rented, leased, or licensed, that the otherwise exempt vendee chooses, or is required, to pay City Privilege Tax or an equivalent excise tax on its gross income from such transactions and does in fact file returns on same; and 
(2)  The Privilege License number of the otherwise exempt vendee; and 
(3)  Such other information as the Tax Collector may require. 
(e)  Franchisees or concessionaires operating businesses for or on behalf of any exempt organization, governmental entity, public educational entity, proprietary club, or non-licensed business shall not be considered to be such an exempt organization, club, entity, or non-licensed business, but shall be deemed to be a taxpayer subject to the provisions of this Chapter, except as provided in the definition of governmental entity, regarding urban mass transit. 
(f)  In any case, if a federally exempt organization, proprietary club, or non-licensed business rents, leases, licenses, or purchases any tangible personal property for its own storage or use, and no City Privilege or Use Tax or equivalent excise tax has been paid on such transaction, said organization, club, or business shall be liable for the Use Tax upon such acquisitions or use of such property. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. [21.1]-280. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. [21.1]-285. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. [21.1]-290. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSING AND RECORDKEEPING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2925, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2014, and the subsequent resolution Res. No. 4911, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 18, 2014, repealed Art. III in its entirety, §§ 21.1-300-21.1-370 and reenacted a new article, §§ 21.1-300-21.1-380, as set out herein. The new article has been updated with the "2014 Amendment to Chapter 21.1 (Model City Privilege (Sales) Tax Code) Article III-Licensing and Recordkeeping, Sec. 21.1-300 thru 21.1-380." Former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. No. 4491, § 1, adopted June 14, 2011 and Ord. No. 2843, § 2, adopted May 14, 2013. 

Sec. 21.1-300. - Licensing requirements. 
(a)  The following persons shall make application to the Tax Collector for a Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License and no person shall engage or continue in business or engage in such activities until he shall have such a license: 
(1)  Every person engaging or continuing in business activities within the city or town upon which a Transaction Privilege Tax is imposed by this Chapter. 
(2)  Every person engaging or continuing in business within the city or town and storing or using tangible personal property in this municipality upon which a Use Tax is imposed by this Chapter. 
(3)  (Reserved). 
(b)  For the purpose of determining whether a Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License is required, a person shall be deemed to be " engaging or continuing in business " within the city or town if: 
(1)  engaging in any activity as a principal or broker, the gross receipts of which may be subject to Transaction Privilege Tax under Article IV of this Chapter, or 
(2)  maintaining within the city or town directly, or if a corporation by a subsidiary, an office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse or other place of business; maintaining within the city or town directly, or if a corporation by a subsidiary, any real or tangible personal property; or having any agent or other representative operating within the city or town under the authority of such person, or if a corporation by a subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business, property, or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or 
(3)  soliciting sales, orders, contracts, leases, and other similar forms of business relationships, within the city or town from customers, consumers, or users located within the city or town, by means of salesmen, solicitors, agents, representatives, brokers, and other similar agents or by means of catalogs or other advertising, whether such orders are received or accepted within or without this city or town. 
(4)  A person shall also be deemed to be " engaging or continuing in business " if engaging in any activity subject to Use Tax under Article VI of this Chapter for business purposes. Individuals who acquire items subject to Use Tax for their own personal use or their family's personal use are not required to obtain a license. 
(5)  (Reserved) 
(c)  A person engaging in more than one activity subject to Transaction Privilege Tax at any one business location is not required to obtain a separate license for each activity, provided that, at the time such person makes application for a license, he shall list on such application each category of activity in which he is engaged. 
(d)  The licensee shall inform the Tax Collector of any changes in his business activities, location, or mailing address within thirty (30) days. 
(e)  Limitation . The issuance of a Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License by the Tax Collector shall in no way be construed as permission to operate a business activity in violation of any other law or regulation to which such activity may be subject. 
(f)  Casual activity . For the purposes of this Chapter, individuals engaging in a " casual activity or sale " are not subject to the license requirements imposed under this Article provided that they are only engaged in private sales activities, such as the sale of a personal automobile or garage sale, on no more than three separate occasions during any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 1, 12-18-14; Res. No. 4911, § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-14) 
Sec. 21.1-310. - Licensing: special requirements. 
(a)  Partnerships . Application for a Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License for a partnership engaging or continuing in business shall provide, as a minimum, the names and addresses of all general partners. Licenses issued to persons engaging in business as partners, limited or general, shall be in the name of the partnership. 
(b)  Limited Liability Companies . Application for a Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License for a Limited Liability Company (LLC) engaging or continuing in business shall provide, as a minimum, the names and addresses of all members and the manager. Licenses issued to persons engaging in business as Limited Liability Companies, shall be in the name of the LLC. 
(c)  Corporations . Application for a Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License for a corporation engaging or continuing in business shall provide, as a minimum, the names and addresses of both the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer of the corporation. Licenses issued to persons engaging in business as corporations shall be in the name of the corporation. 
(d)  Multiple Locations or Multiple Business Names . A person engaging or continuing in one or more businesses at two (2) or more locations or under two (2) or more business names shall procure a license for each such location or business name. A "location" is a place of a separate business establishment. 
(e)  Real Property Rental Leasing, and Licensing for Use . In all cases the Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License shall be issued only to the owner of the real property regardless of the owner engaging a property manager or other broker to oversee the owner's business activity including filing tax returns on behalf of the owner. Each rental property that can be independently sold or transferred is deemed to be a separate business establishment. Each platted parcel of real property subject to the tax imposed by this Chapter is deemed to be a separate business establishment and requires a separate license, regardless of the number of rental units located on that platted parcel. If one structure is located on multiple parcels in a manner such that ownership of an individual parcel cannot be sold or transferred without requiring alteration to divide the structure, one license shall be required for all affected parcels. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 1, 12-18-14; Res. No. 4911, § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-14) 
Sec. 21.1-320. - License fees; annual renewal; renewal fees. 
(a)  The Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License shall be valid upon receipt of a non-refundable license fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00), except for a license to engage in the business activity of residential or commercial real property rental, leasing, and licensing for use as separately identified in this section. The Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued unless renewed each year by filing the appropriate application for license renewal and paying an annual license renewal fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for each license, subject to the limitations in A.R.S. § 42-5005. Such annual renewal fee shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year and shall be considered delinquent if not paid and received on or before the last business day of January. 
(b)  The Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License to engage in the business activity of residential real property rental, leasing, and licensing for use shall be valid only upon receipt of a non-refundable license fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). The Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued unless renewed each year by filing the appropriate application for license renewal and paying an annual license renewal fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for each license, subject to the limitations in A.R.S. § 42-5005. Such fee shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year and shall be considered delinquent if not paid and received on or before the last business day of January. 
(c)  The Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License to engage in the business activity of commercial real property rental, leasing, and licensing for use shall be valid only upon receipt of a non-refundable license fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). The Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued unless renewed each year by filing the appropriate application for license renewal and paying an annual license renewal fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for each license, subject to the limitations in A.R.S. § 42-5005. Such fee shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year and shall be considered delinquent if not paid and received on or before the last business day of January. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 1, 12-18-14; Res. No. 4911, § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-14; Ord. No. 2991, § 1, 5-24-2016, effective 1-1-17) 
Sec. 21.1-330. - Licensing: duration; transferability; display; penalties; penalty waiver; relicensing; fees collectible as if taxes. 
(a)  The Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued unless renewed each year by filing the appropriate application for license renewal and paying the applicable license renewal fee for each license, subject to the limitations in A.R.S. 42-5005. Such fee shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year and shall be considered delinquent if not paid and received on or before the last business day of January. Application and payment of the annual fee must be received in the Tax Collector's office to be deemed paid and received. 
(b)  The Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License shall be nontransferable between owners or locations, and shall be on display to the public in the licensee's place of business. 
(c)  Any person required to be licensed under this Chapter who fails to obtain a license on or before conducting any business activity requiring such license shall be subject to the license fees due for each year in business plus a penalty in the amount of fifty percent (50%) of the applicable fee for each period of time for which such fee would have been imposed, from and after the date on which such activity commenced until paid. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this Chapter and must be paid prior to the issuance of any license. License fee penalties may be waived by the Tax Collector subject to the same terms as the waiver of tax penalties as provided for in Section 21.1-540. 
(d)  Any licensee who fails to renew his license on or before the due date shall be deemed to be operating without a license following such due date, and shall be subject to all penalties imposed under this Chapter against persons required to be licensed and operating without a license. The non-licensed status may be removed by payment of the annual license fee for each year or portion of a year he operated without a license, plus a license fee penalty of 50% of the license fee due for each year. License fee penalties may be waived by the Tax Collector subject to the same terms as the waiver of tax penalties as provided for in Section 21.1-540. 
(e)  Any licensee who permits his license to expire through cancellation as provided in Section 21.1-340, by his request for cancellation, by surrender of the license, or by the cessation of the business activity for which the license was issued, and who thereafter applies for a license, shall be granted a new license as a new applicant and shall pay the current license fee imposed under Section 21.1-320. 
(f)  Any licensee who needs a copy of his Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License which is still in effect shall be charged the current license fee for each reissuance of a license. 
(g)  Any person conducting a business activity subject to licensing without obtaining a Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License shall be liable to the city for all applicable fees and penalties and shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 21.1-580 and 21.1-590, to the same extent as if such fees and penalties were taxes and penalties under such Sections. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 1, 12-18-14; Res. No. 4911, § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-14) 
Sec. 21.1-340. - Licensing: cancellation; revocation. 
(a)  Cancellation . The Tax Collector may cancel the Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License of any licensee as "inactive" if the taxpayer, required to report monthly, has neither filed any return nor remitted any taxes imposed by this Chapter for a period of six (6) consecutive months; or, if required to report quarterly, has neither filed any return nor remitted any taxes imposed by this Chapter for two (2) consecutive quarters; or, if required to report annually, has neither filed any return nor remitted any taxes imposed by this Chapter when such annual report and tax are due to be filed with and remitted to the Tax Collector. 
(b)  Revocation . If any licensee fails to pay any tax, interest, penalty, fee, or sum required to be paid under this Chapter, or if such licensee fails to comply with any other provisions of this Chapter, the Tax Collector may revoke the Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License of said licensee. 
(c)  Notice and Hearing . The Tax Collector shall deliver notice to such licensee of cancellation or revocation of the Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License. If the licensee requests a hearing within twenty (20) days of receipt of such notice, he shall be granted a hearing before the Tax Collector. 
(d)  After cancellation or revocation of a taxpayer's license, the taxpayer shall not be issued a new license until all reports have been filed; all fees, taxes, interest, and penalties due have been paid; and he is in compliance with all provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 1, 12-18-14; Res. No. 4911, § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-14) 
Sec. 21.1-350. - Operating without a license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who is required by this Chapter to obtain a Transaction Privilege and Use Tax License to engage in or continue in business without a license. The Tax Collector shall assess any delinquencies in tax, interest, and penalties which may apply against such person upon any transactions subject to the taxes imposed by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 1, 12-18-14; Res. No. 4911, § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-14) 
Sec. 21.1-360. - Recordkeeping requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person subject to the tax imposed by this Chapter to keep and preserve suitable records and such other books and accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for which he is liable under this Chapter. The books and records must contain, at a minimum, such detail and summary information as may be required by this Article; or when records are maintained within an electronic data processing (EDP) system, the requirements established by the Arizona Department of Revenue for privilege tax filings will be accepted. It shall be the duty of every person to keep and preserve such books and records for a period equal to the applicable limitation period for assessment of tax, and all such books and records shall be open for inspection by the Tax Collector during any business day. 
(b)  The Tax Collector may direct, by letter, a specific taxpayer to keep specific other books, records, and documents. Such letter directive shall apply: 
(1)  only for future reporting periods, and 
(2)  only by express determination of the Tax Collector that such specific recordkeeping is necessary due to the inability of the taxing jurisdiction to conduct an adequate examination of the past activities of the taxpayer, which inability resulted from inaccurate or inadequate books, records, or documentation maintained by the taxpayer. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 1, 12-18-14; Res. No. 4911, § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-14) 
Sec. 21.1-362. - Recordkeeping: income. 
    The minimum records required for persons having gross income subject to, or exempt or excluded from, tax by this Chapter must show: 
(a)  The gross income of the taxpayer attributable to any activity occurring in whole or in part in the City. 
(b)  The gross income taxable under this Chapter, divided into categories as stated in the official City tax return. 
(c)  The gross income subject to Arizona Transaction Privilege Taxes, divided into categories as stated in the official State tax return. 
(d)  The gross income claimed to be exempt, and with respect to each activity or transaction so claimed: 
(1)  If the transaction is claimed to be exempt as a sale for resale or as a sale, rental, lease, or license for use of rental equipment: 
(A)  The City Privilege License number and State Transaction Privilege Tax License number of the customer (or the equivalent city, if applicable, and state tax numbers of the city and state where the customer resides), and 
(B)  The name, business address, and business activity of the customer, and 
(C)  Evidence sufficient to persuade a reasonably prudent businessman that the transaction is believed to be in good faith a purchase for resale, or a purchase, rental, lease, or license for use of rental equipment, by the vendee in the ordinary and regular course of his business activity, as provided by Regulation. 
(2)  If the transaction is claimed to be exempt for any other reason: 
(A)  The name, business address, and business activity of the customer, and 
(B)  Evidence which would establish the applicability of the exemption to a reasonably prudent businessman acting in good faith. Ordinary business documentation which would reasonably indicate the applicability of an exemption shall be sufficient to relieve the person on whom the tax would otherwise be imposed from liability therein, if he acts in good faith as provided by Regulation. 
(e)  With respect to those allowed deductions or exclusions for tax collected or charges for delivery or other direct customer services, where applicable, evidence that the deductible income has been separately stated and shown on the records of the taxpayer and on invoices or receipts provided to the customer. All other deductions, exemptions, and exclusions shall be separately shown and substantiated. 
(f)  With respect to special classes and activities, such other books, records, and documentation as the Tax Collector, by regulation, shall deem necessary for specific classes of taxpayer by reason of the specialized business activity of any such class. 
(g)  In all cases, the books and records of the taxpayer shall indicate both individual transaction amounts and totals for each reporting period for each category of taxable, exempt, and excluded income defined by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 1, 12-18-14; Res. No. 4911, § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-14) 
Sec. 21.1-364. - Recordkeeping: expenditures. 
    The minimum records required for persons having expenditures, costs, purchases and rental or lease or license expenses subject to, or exempt or excluded from, tax by this Chapter are: 
(a)  The total price of all goods acquired for use or storage in the City. 
(b)  The date of acquisition and the name and business address of the seller or lessor of all goods acquired for use or storage in the City. 
(c)  Documentation of taxes, freight, and direct customer service labor separately charged and paid for each purchase, rental, lease, or license. 
(d)  The gross price of each acquisition claimed as exempt from tax, and with respect to each transaction so claimed, sufficient evidence to satisfy the Tax Collector that the exemption claimed is applicable. 
(e)  As applicable to each taxpayer, documentation sufficient to the Tax Collector, so that he may ascertain: 
(1)  All construction expenditures and all Privilege and Use Taxes claimed paid, relating to owner-builders and speculative builders. 
(2)  Disbursement of collected gratuities and related payroll information required of restaurants. 
(3)  Franchise and license fee payments and computations thereto which relate to: 
(A)  Utility service. 
(B)  Telecommunication service. 
(4)  The validity of any claims of proof of exemption. 
(5)  A claimed alternative prior value for reconstruction. 
(6)  All claimed exemptions to the Use Tax imposed by Article VI of this Chapter. 
(7)  Costs used to compute the "computed charge" claimed for retail service and repair. 
(8)  Payments of tax to the Arizona Department of Transportation and computations therefor, when a motor-vehicle transporter claims such the exemption. 
(9)  (Reserved) 
(f)  Any additional documentation as the Tax Collector, by Regulation, shall deem necessary for any specific class of taxpayer by reason of the specialized business activity of specific exemptions afforded to that class of taxpayer. 
(g)  In all cases, the books and records of the taxpayer shall indicate both individual transaction amounts and totals for each reporting period for each category of taxable, exempt, and excluded expenditures as defined by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 1, 12-18-14; Res. No. 4911, § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-14) 
Sec. 21.1-366. - Recordkeeping: out-of-city and out-of-state sales. 
(a)  Out-of-City Sales . Any person engaging or continuing in a business who claims out-of-City sales shall maintain and keep accounting records or books indicating separately the gross income from the sales of tangible personal property from such out-of-City branches or locations. 
(b)  Out-of-State sales. Persons engaged in a business claiming out-of-State sales shall maintain accounting records or books indicating for each out-of-State sale the following documentation: 
(1)  documentation of location of the buyer at the time of order placement; and 
(2)  shipping, delivery, or freight documents showing where the buyer took delivery; and 
(3)  documentation of intended location of use or storage of the tangible personal property sold to such buyer. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 1, 12-18-14; Res. No. 4911, § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-14) 
Sec. 21.1-370. - Recordkeeping: claim of exclusion, exemption, deduction, or credit; documentation; liability. 
(a)  All deductions, exclusions, exemptions, and credits provided in this Chapter are conditional upon adequate proof and documentation of such as may be required either by this Chapter or Regulation. 
(b)  Any person who claims and receives an exemption, deduction, exclusion, or credit to which he is not entitled under this Chapter, shall be subject to, liable for, and pay the tax on the transaction as if the vendor subject to the tax had passed the burden of the payment of the tax to the person wrongfully claiming the exemption. A person who wrongfully claimed such exemption shall be treated as if he is delinquent in the payment of the tax and shall be subject to interest and penalties upon such delinquency. However, if the tax is collected from the vendor on such transaction it shall not again be collected from the person claiming the exemption, or if collected from the person claiming the exemption it shall not also be collected from the vendor. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 1, 12-18-14; Res. No. 4911, § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-14) 
Sec. 21.1-372. - Proof of exemption: sale for resale; sale, rental, lease, or license of rental equipment. 
    A claim of purchase for resale or of purchase, rental, lease, or license for rent, lease, or license is valid only if the evidence is sufficient to persuade a reasonably prudent businessman that the particular item is being acquired for resale or for rental, lease, or license in the ordinary course of business. The fact that the acquiring person possesses a Privilege License number, and makes a verbal claim of "sale for resale or lease" or "lease for re-lease" does not meet this burden and is insufficient to justify an exemption. The "reasonable evidence" must be evidence which exists objectively, and not merely in the mind of the vendor, that the property being acquired is normally sold, rented, leased, or licensed by the acquiring person in the ordinary course of business. Failure to obtain such reasonable evidence at the time of the transaction will be a basis for disallowance of any claimed deduction on returns filed for such transactions. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 1, 12-18-14; Res. No. 4911, § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-14) 
Sec. 21.1-380. - Inadequate or unsuitable records. 
    In the event the records provided by the taxpayer are considered by the Tax Collector to be inadequate or unsuitable to determine the amount of the tax for which such taxpayer is liable under the provisions of this Chapter, it is the responsibility of the taxpayer either: 
(a)  to provide such other records required by this Chapter or Regulation; or 
(b)  to correct or to reconstruct his records, to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector. 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 1, 12-18-14; Res. No. 4911, § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-14) 
ARTICLE IV. - PRIVILEGE TAXES 

Sec. 21.1-400. - Imposition of privilege taxes; presumption. 
(a)  There are hereby levied and imposed, subject to all other provisions of this Chapter, the following Privilege Taxes for the purpose of raising revenue to be used in defraying the necessary expenses of the City, such taxes to be collected by the Tax Collector: 
(1)  A Privilege Tax upon persons on account of their business activities, to the extent provided elsewhere in this Article, to be measured by the gross income of persons, whether derived from residents of the City or not, or whether derived from within the City or from without. 
(2)  (Reserved). 
(3)  A privilege tax upon persons for the privilege of selling jet fuel, whether derived from residents of the City or not, or whether derived from within the City or from without, in accordance with the provisions of Section 21.1-422. 
(b)  Taxes imposed by this Chapter are in addition to others. Except as specifically designated elsewhere in this Chapter, each of the taxes imposed by this Chapter shall be in addition to all other licenses, fees, and taxes levied by law, including other taxes imposed by this Chapter. 
(c)  Presumption. For the purpose of proper administration of this Chapter and to prevent evasion of the taxes imposed by this Chapter, it shall be presumed that all gross income, or gallons sold, is subject to the tax until the contrary is established by the taxpayer. 
(d)  Limitation of exemptions, deductions, and credits allowed against the measure of taxes imposed by this Chapter. All exemptions, deductions, and credits set forth in this Chapter shall be limited to the specific activity or transaction described and not extended to include any other activity or transaction subject to the tax. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-405. - Advertising. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and nine-tenths percent (2.9%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of "local advertising" by billboards, direct mail, radio, television, or by any other means. However, commission and fees retained by an advertising agency shall not be includable in gross income from "local advertising." All delivery or disseminating of information directly to the public or any portion thereof for a consideration shall be considered "Local Advertising," except the following: 
(1)  The advertising of a product or service which is sold or provided both within and without the State by more than one "commonly designated business entity" within the State, and in which the advertisement names either no "commonly designated business entity" within the State or more than one "commonly designated business entity." "Commonly Designated Business Entity" means any person selling or providing any product or service to its customers under a common business name or style, even though there may be more than one legal entity conducting business functions using the same or substantially the same business name or style by virtue of a franchise, license, or similar agreement. 
(2)  The advertising of a facility or of a service or activity in which neither the facility nor a business site carrying on such service or activity is located within the State. 
(3)  The advertising of a product which may only be purchased from an out-of-State supplier. 
(4)  Political advertising for United States Presidential and Vice Presidential candidates only. 
(5)  Advertising by means of product purchase coupons redeemable at any retail establishment carrying such product but not product coupons redeemable only at a single commonly designated business entity. 
(6)  Advertising transportation services where a substantial portion of the transportation activity of the business entity advertised involves interstate or foreign carriage. 
(b)  (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 21.1-407. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-410. - Amusements, exhibitions, and similar activities. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and nine-tenths percent (2.9%)of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of providing amusement that begins in the city or takes place entirely within the City, which includes the following type or nature of businesses: 
(1)  Operating or conducting theaters, movies, operas, shows of any type or nature, exhibitions, concerts, carnivals, circuses, amusement parks, menageries, fairs, races, contests, games, billiard or pool parlors, bowling alleys, skating rinks, tennis courts, golf courses, video games, pinball machines, public dances, dance halls, sports events, jukeboxes, batting and driving ranges, animal rides, or any other business charging admission for exhibition, amusement, or entertainment. 
(2)  Health spas, fitness centers, dance studios, or other persons who charge for the use of premises for sports, athletic, other health-related activities or instruction, whether on a per-event use, or for long-term usage, such as membership fees. 
(b)  Deductions or exemptions. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from the following sources is exempt from the tax imposed by this Section: 
(1)  (Reserved). 
(2)  Amounts retained by the Arizona Exposition and State Fair Board from ride ticket sales at the annual Arizona State Fair. 
(3)  Income received from a hotel business subject to tax under Section 21.1-444, if all of the following apply: 
(A)  The hotel business receives gross income from a customer for the specific business activity otherwise subject to amusement tax. 
(B)  The consideration received by the hotel business is equal to or greater than the amount to be deducted under this subsection. 
(C)  The hotel business has provided an exemption certificate to the person engaging in business under this section. 
(4)  Income that is specifically included as the gross income of a business activity upon which another Section of this Article imposes a tax, that is separately stated to the customer and is taxable to the person engaged in that classification not to exceed consideration paid to the person conducting the activity. 
(5)  Income from arranging transportation connected to amusement activity that is separately stated to the customer, not to exceed consideration paid to the transportation business. 
(c)  The tax imposed by this Section shall not include arranging an amusement activity as a service to a person's customers if that person is not otherwise engaged in the business of operating or conducting an amusement themselves or through others. This exception does not apply to businesses that operate or conduct amusements pursuant to customer orders and send the billings and receive the payments associated with that activity, including when the amusement is performed by third party independent contractors. For the purposes of this paragraph, "arranging" includes billing for or collecting amusement charges from a person's customers on behalf of the persons providing the amusement. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 21.1-415. - Construction contracting: Construction contractors. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and nine-tenths percent (2.9%) of the gross income from the business upon every construction contractor engaging or continuing in the business activity of construction contracting within the City. 
(1)  However, gross income from construction contracting shall not include charges related to groundwater measuring devices required by A.R.S. § 45-604. 
(2)  (Reserved) 
(3)  Gross income from construction contracting shall not include gross income from the sale of manufactured buildings taxable under Section 21.1-427. 
(4)  For taxable periods beginning from and after December 1, 2008, the portion of gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the actual direct costs of providing architectural or engineering services that are incorporated in a contact is not subject to tax under this section. For the purposes of this subsection, "direct costs" means the portion of the actual costs that are directly expended in providing architectural or engineering services. 
(b)  Deductions and exemptions. 
(1)  Gross income derived from acting as a "subcontractor" shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this Section. 
(2)  All construction contracting gross income subject to the tax and not deductible herein shall be allowed a deduction of thirty-five percent (35%). 
(3)  The gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the purchase of machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property that is exempt from or deductible from privilege or use tax under: 
(A)  Section 21.1-465, subsections (g) and (p); 
(B)  Section 21.1-660, subsections (g) and (p); 
shall be exempt or deductible, respectively, from the tax imposed by this Section. 
(4)  The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a contract entered into for the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of income-producing capital equipment, as defined in Section 21.1-110, that is deducted from the retail classification pursuant to Section 21.1-465(g), that does not become a permanent attachment to a building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this Section. If the ownership of the realty is separate from the ownership of the income-producing capital equipment, the determination as to permanent attachment shall be made as if the ownership was the same. The deduction provided in this paragraph does not include gross proceeds of sales or gross income from that portion of any contracting activity which consists of the development of, or modification to, real property in order to facilitate the installation, assembly, repair, maintenance or removal of the income-producing capital equipment. For purposes of this paragraph, "permanent attachment" means at least one of the following: 
(A)  To be incorporated into real property. 
(B)  To become so affixed to real property that it becomes part of the real property. 
(C)  To be so attached to real property that removal would cause substantial damage to the real property from which it is removed. 
(5)  The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a contract for the construction of an environmentally controlled facility for the raising of poultry for the production of eggs and the sorting, or cooling and packaging of eggs shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section. 
(6)  The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of cleanrooms that are deducted from the tax base of the retail classification pursuant to Section 21.1-465, subsection (g) shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section. 
(7)  The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a contract entered into with a person who is engaged in the commercial production of livestock, livestock products or agricultural, horticultural, viticultural or floricultural crops or products in this State for the construction, alteration, repair, improvement, movement, wrecking or demolition or addition to or subtraction from any building, highway, road, excavation, manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement used directly and primarily to prevent, monitor, control or reduce air, water or land pollution shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section. 
(8)  The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a post construction contract to perform post-construction treatment of real property for termite and general pest control, including wood destroying organisms, shall be exempt from tax imposed under this section. 
(9)  Through December 31, 2009, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a contract for constructing any lake facility development in a commercial enhancement reuse district that is designated pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-499.08 if the contractor maintains the following records in a form satisfactory to the Arizona Department of Revenue and to the City: 
(A)  The certificate of qualification of the lake facility development issued by the City pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-499.08, subsection D. 
(B)  All state and local transaction privilege tax returns for the period of time during which the contractor received gross proceeds of sales or gross income from a contract to construct a lake facility development in a designated commercial enhancement reuse district, showing the amount exempted from state and local taxation. 
(C)  Any other information considered to be necessary. 
(10)  Any amount attributable to development fees that are incurred in relation to the construction, development or improvement of real property and paid by the taxpayer as defined in the model city tax code or by a contractor providing services to the taxpayer. For purposes of this paragraph: 
(A)  The attributable amount shall not exceed the value of the development fees actually imposed. 
(B)  The attributable amount is equal to the total amount of development fees paid by the taxpayer or by a contractor providing services to the taxpayer and the total development fees credited in exchange for the construction of, contribution to or dedication of real property for providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public services necessary to the development. The real property must be the subject of the development fees. 
(C)  "Development fees" means fees imposed to offset capital costs of providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public services to a development and authorized pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05, A.R.S. § 11-1102 or A.R.S. Title 48 regardless of the jurisdiction to which the fees are paid. 
(11)  For taxable periods beginning from and after December 1, 2008 and ending before January 1, 2017, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a contract to provide and install a solar energy device. The contractor shall register with the Department of Revenue as a solar energy contractor. By registering, the contractor acknowledges that it will make its books and records relating to sales of solar energy devices available to the Department of Revenue and the City, as applicable, for examination. 
(c)  "Subcontractor" means a construction contractor performing work for either: 
(1)  A construction contractor who has provided the subcontractor with a written declaration that he is liable for the tax for the project and has provided the subcontractor his City Privilege License number. 
(2)  An owner-builder who has provided the subcontractor with a written declaration that: 
(A)  The owner-builder is improving the property for sale; and 
(B)  The owner-builder is liable for the tax for such construction contracting activity; and 
(C)  The owner-builder has provided the contractor his City Privilege License number. 
(3)  A person selling new manufactured buildings who has provided the subcontractor with a written declaration that he is liable for the tax for the site preparation and set-up; and provided the subcontractor his City Privilege License number. 
Subcontractor also includes a construction contractor performing work for another subcontractor as defined above. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 21.1-416. - Construction contracting: Speculative builders. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be equal to two and nine-tenths percent (2.9%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in business as a speculative builder within the City. 
(1)  The gross income of a speculative builder considered taxable shall include the total selling price from the sale of improved real property at the time of closing of escrow or transfer of title. 
(2)  "Improved Real Property" means any real property: 
(A)  Upon which a structure has been constructed; or 
(B)  Where improvements have been made to land containing no structure (such as paving or landscaping); or 
(C)  Which has been reconstructed as provided by Regulation; or 
(D)  Where water, power, and streets have been constructed to the property line. 
(3)  "Sale of Improved Real Property" includes any form of transaction, whether characterized as a lease or otherwise, which in substance is a transfer of title of, or equitable ownership in, improved real property and includes any lease of the property for a term of thirty (30) years or more (with all options for renewal being included as a part of the term). In the case of multiple unit projects, "sale" refers to the sale of the entire project or to the sale of any individual parcel or unit. 
(4)  "Partially Improved Residential Real Property" , as used in this Section, means any improved real property, as defined in subsection (a)(2) above, being developed for sale to individual homeowners, where the construction of the residence upon such property is not substantially complete at the time of the sale. 
(b)  Exclusions. 
(1)  In cases involving reconstruction contracting, the speculative builder may exclude from gross income the prior value allowed for reconstruction contracting in determining his taxable gross income, as provided by Regulation. 
(2)  Neither the cost nor the fair market value of the land which constitutes part of the improved real property sold may be excluded or deducted from gross income subject to the tax imposed by this Section. 
(3)  (Reserved). 
(4)  A speculative builder may exclude gross income from the sale of partially improved residential real property as defined in (a)(4) above to another speculative builder only if all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(A)  The speculative builder purchasing the partially improved residential real property has a valid City privilege license for construction contracting as a speculative builder; and 
(B)  At the time of the transaction, the purchaser provides the seller with a properly completed written declaration that the purchaser assumes liability for and will pay all privilege taxes which would otherwise be due the City at the time of sale of the partially improved residential real property; and 
(C)  The seller also: 
(i)  Maintains proper records of such transactions in a manner similar to the requirements provided in this chapter relating to sales for resale; and 
(ii)  Retains a copy of the written declaration provided by the buyer for the transaction; and 
(iii)  Is properly licensed with the City as a speculative builder and provides the City with the written declaration attached to the City privilege tax return where he claims the exclusion. 
(5)  For taxable periods beginning from and after December 1, 2008, the portion of gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the actual direct costs of providing architectural or engineering services that are incorporated in a contract is not subject to tax under this section. For the purposes of this subsection, "direct costs" means the portion of the actual costs that are directly expended in providing architectural or engineering services. 
(c)  Tax liability for speculative builders occurs at close of escrow or transfer of title, whichever occurs earlier, and is subject to the following provisions, relating to exemptions, deductions and tax credits: 
(1)  Exemptions. 
(A)  The gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the purchase of machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property that is exempt from or deductible from privilege or use tax under: 
(i)  Section 21.1-465, subsections (g) and (p); 
(ii)  Section 21.1-660, subsections (g) and (p); 
shall be exempt or deductible, respectively, from the tax imposed by this Section. 
(B)  The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a contract for the construction of an environmentally controlled facility for the raising of poultry for the production of eggs and the sorting, or cooling and packaging of eggs shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section. 
(C)  The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of cleanrooms that are deducted from the tax base of the retail classification pursuant to Section 21.1-465, subsection (g) shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this section. 
(D)  The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a contract entered into with a person who is engaged in the commercial production of livestock, livestock products or agricultural, horticultural, viticultural or floricultural crops or products in this state for the construction, alteration, repair, improvement, movement, wrecking or demolition or addition to or subtraction from any building, highway, road, excavation, manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement used directly and primarily to prevent, monitor, control or reduce air, water or land pollution shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section. 
(E)  Any amount attributable to development fees that are incurred in relation to the construction, development or improvement of real property and paid by the taxpayer as defined in the model city tax code or by a contractor providing services to the taxpayer. For purposes of this paragraph: 
(i)  The attributable amount shall not exceed the value of the development fees actually imposed. 
(ii)  The attributable amount is equal to the total amount of development fees paid by the taxpayer or by a contractor providing services to the taxpayer and the total development fees credited in exchange for the construction of, contribution to or dedication of real property for providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public services necessary to the development. The real property must be the subject of the development fees. 
(iii)  "Development fees" means fees imposed to offset capital costs of providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public services to a development and authorized pursuant to A,R,S, § 9-463.05, A.R.S. § 11-1102 or A.R.S. Title 48 regardless of the jurisdiction to which the fees are paid. 
(2)  Deductions. 
(A)  All amounts subject to the tax shall be allowed a deduction in the amount of thirty-five percent (35%). 
(B)  The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a contract entered into for the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of income-producing capital equipment, as defined in Section 21.1-110, that is deducted from the retail classification pursuant to Section 21.1-465(g), that does not become a permanent attachment to a building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this Section. If the ownership of the realty is separate from the ownership of the income-producing capital equipment, the determination as to permanent attachment shall be made as if the ownership was the same. The deduction provided in this paragraph does not include gross proceeds of sales or gross income from that portion of any contracting activity which consists of the development of, or modification to, real property in order to facilitate the installation, assembly, repair, maintenance or removal of the income-producing capital equipment. For purposes of this paragraph, "permanent attachment" means at least one of the following: 
(i)  To be incorporated into real property. 
(ii)  To become so affixed to real property that it becomes part of the real property. 
(iii)  To be so attached to real property that removal would cause substantial damage to the real property from which it is removed. 
(C)  For taxable periods beginning from and after December 1, 2008 and ending before January 1, 2017, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a contract to provide and install a solar energy device. The contractor shall register with the Department of Revenue as a solar energy contractor. By registering, the contractor acknowledges that it will make its books and records relating to sales of solar energy devices available to the Department of Revenue and the City, as applicable, for examination. 
(3)  Tax credits. The following tax credits are available to owner-builders or speculative builders, not to exceed the tax liability against which such credits apply, provided such credits are documented to the satisfaction of the tax collector: 
(A)  A tax credit equal to the amount of city privilege or use tax, or the equivalent excise tax, paid directly to a taxing jurisdiction or as a separately itemized charge paid directly to the vendor with respect to the tangible personal property incorporated into the said structure or improvement to real property undertaken by the owner-builder or speculative builder. 
(B)  A tax credit equal to the amount of privilege taxes paid to this City, or charged separately to the speculative builder, by a construction contractor, on the gross income derived by said person from the construction of any improvement to the real property. 
(C)  No credits provided herein may be claimed until such time that the gross income against which said credits apply is reported. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 21.1-417. - Construction contracting: Owner-builders who are not speculative builders. 
(a)  At the expiration of twenty-four (24) months after improvement to the property is substantially complete, the tax liability for an owner-builder who is not a speculative builder shall be at an amount equal to two and nine-tenths percent (2.9%) of: 
(1)  The gross income from the activity of construction contracting upon the real property in question which was realized by those construction contractors to whom the owner-builder provided written declaration that they were not responsible for the taxes as prescribed in subsection 21.1-415(c)(2); and 
(2)  The purchase of tangible personal property for incorporation into any improvement to real property, computed on the sales price. 
(b)  For taxable periods beginning from and after December 1, 2008, the portion of gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the actual direct costs of providing architectural or engineering services that are incorporated in a contract is not subject to tax under this section. For the purposes of this subsection, "direct costs" means the portion of the actual costs that are directly expended in providing architectural or engineering services. 
(c)  The tax liability of this Section is subject to the following provisions, relating to exemptions, deductions and tax credits: 
(1)  Exemptions. 
(A)  The gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to the purchase of machinery, equipment or other tangible personal property that is exempt from or deductible from privilege or use tax under: 
(i)  Section 21.1-465, subsections (g) and (p); 
(ii)  Section 21.1-660, subsections (g) and (p); 
shall be exempt or deductible, respectively, from the tax imposed by this Section. 
(B)  The gross proceeds of sales or gross income received from a contract for the construction of an environmentally controlled facility for the raising of poultry for the production of eggs and the sorting, or cooling and packaging of eggs shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section. 
(C)  The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of cleanrooms that are deducted from the tax base of the retail classification pursuant to Section 21.1-465, subsection (g) shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section. 
(D)  The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a contract entered into with a person who is engaged in the commercial production of livestock, livestock products or agricultural, horticultural, viticultural or floricultural crops or products in this state for the construction, alteration, repair, improvement, movement, wrecking or demolition or addition to or subtraction from any building, highway, road, excavation, manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement used directly and primarily to prevent, monitor, control or reduce air, water or land pollution shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this Section. 
(E)  Any amount attributable to development fees that are incurred in relation to the construction, development or improvement of real property and paid by the taxpayer as defined in the model city tax code or by a contractor providing services to the taxpayer. For purposes of this paragraph: 
(i)  The attributable amount shall not exceed the value of the development fees actually imposed. 
(ii)  The attributable amount is equal to the total amount of development fees paid by the taxpayer or by a contractor providing services to the taxpayer and the total development fees credited in exchange for the construction of, contribution to or dedication of real property for providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public services necessary to the development. The real property must be the subject of the development fees. 
(iii)  "development fees" means fees imposed to offset capital costs of providing public infrastructure, public safety or other public services to a development and authorized pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05, A.R.S. § 11-1102 or A.R.S. Title 48 regardless of the jurisdiction to which the fees are paid. 
(2)  Deductions. 
(A)  All amounts subject to the tax shall be allowed a deduction in the amount of thirty-five percent (35%). 
(B)  The gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is derived from a contract entered into for the installation, assembly, repair or maintenance of income-producing capital equipment, as defined in Section 21.1-110, that is deducted from the retail classification pursuant to Section 21.1-465(g), that does not become a permanent attachment to a building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or manufactured building or other structure, project, development or improvement shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this Section. If the ownership of the realty is separate from the ownership of the income-producing capital equipment, the determination as to permanent attachment shall be made as if the ownership was the same. The deduction provided in this paragraph does not include gross proceeds of sales or gross income from that portion of any contracting activity which consists of the development of, or modification to, real property in order to facilitate the installation, assembly, repair, maintenance or removal of the income-producing capital equipment. For purposes of this paragraph, "permanent attachment" means at least one of the following: 
(i)  To be incorporated into real property. 
(ii)  To become so affixed to real property that it becomes part of the real property. 
(iii)  To be so attached to real property that removal would cause substantial damage to the real property from which it is removed. 
(C)  For taxable periods beginning from and after December 1, 2008 and ending before January 1, 2017, the gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from a contract to provide and install a solar energy device. The contractor shall register with the Department of Revenue as a solar energy contractor. By registering, the contractor acknowledges that it will make its books and records relating to sales of solar energy devices available to the Department of Revenue and the City, as applicable, for examination. 
(3)  Tax credits. The following tax credits are available to owner-builders and speculative builders, not to exceed the tax liability against which such credits apply, provided such credits are documented to the satisfaction of the tax collector: 
(A)  A tax credit equal to the amount of city privilege or use tax, or the equivalent excise tax, paid directly to a taxing jurisdiction or as a separately itemized charge paid directly to the vendor with respect to the tangible personal property incorporated into the said structure or improvement to real property undertaken by the owner-builder or speculative builder. 
(B)  A tax credit equal to the amount of privilege taxes paid to this City, or charged separately to the speculative builder, by a construction contractor, on the gross income derived by said person from the construction of any improvement to the real property. 
(C)  No credits provided herein may be claimed until such time that the gross income against which said credits apply is reported. 
(d)  The limitation period for the assessment of taxes imposed by this Section is measured based upon when such liability is reportable, that is, in the reporting period that encompasses the twenty-fifth (25th) month after said unit or project was substantially complete. Interest and penalties, as provided in Section 21.1-540, will be based on reportable date. 
(e)  (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4997, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Sec. 21.1-418. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-420. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-422. - Jet fuel sales. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be at an amount of $.028 per gallon sold from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of selling jet fuel. 
(1)  Gallons sold includes all gallons sold, bartered, exchanged, included as part or whole of a trade-out, or similar transactions regardless of the type or form of payment. 
(2)  For purposes of this section the following terms are substitutable in Articles III and V of this chapter, and corresponding regulations: 
(A)  "Gallons" for "gross income" 
(B)  "Gallon(s)" for "amount(s)". 
(b)  The burden of proving that a sale of jet fuel is not a taxable sale shall be upon the person who made the sale. 
(c)  When this city and another Arizona city or town with an equivalent excise tax could claim nexus for taxing a jet fuel sale, the city or town where the permanent business location of the seller at which the order was received shall be deemed to have precedence, and for the purposes of this chapter such city or town has sole and exclusive right to such tax. 
(d)  The appropriate tax liability for any jet fuel sale where the order is received at a permanent business location of the seller located in this city or in an Arizona city or town that levies an equivalent excise tax shall be at the rate of the city or town of such seller's location. 
(e)  Exemptions. Notwithstanding Section 21.1-400(d), the exemptions in Section 21.1-465(a), (b) and (d) through (z) will apply to sales of jet fuel taxed under this Section. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 2843, § 3, 5-14-13 ) 
Sec. 21.1-425. - Job printing. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and nine-tenths percent (2.9%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of job printing, which includes engraving of printing plates, embossing, copying, micrographics, and photo reproduction. 
(b)  The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Job printing purchased for the purpose of resale by the purchaser in the form supplied by the job printer. 
(2)  Out-of-City sales. 
(3)  Out-of-State sales. 
(4)  Job printing of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals or publications for a person who is subject to the tax imposed by subsection 21.1-435(a) or an equivalent excise tax; provided further that said person is properly licensed by the taxing jurisdiction at the location of publication. 
(5)  Sales of job printing to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when the property sold is for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512. 
(6)  (Reserved). 
(7)  Sales of postage and freight except that the amount deducted shall not exceed the actual postage and freight expense that is paid to the United States Postal Service or commercial delivery service and that is separately itemized by the taxpayer on the customer's invoice and in the taxpayer's records. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4997, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Sec. 21.1-427. - Manufactured buildings. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and nine-tenths percent (2.9%) of the gross income, including site preparation, moving to the site, and/or set-up, upon every person engaging or continuing in the business activity of selling manufactured buildings within the City. Such business activity is deemed to occur at the business location of the seller where the purchaser first entered into the contract to purchase the manufactured building. 
(b)  Sales of used manufactured buildings are not taxable. 
(c)  The sale prices of furniture, furnishings, fixtures, appliances, and attachments that are not incorporated as component parts of or attached to a manufactured building are exempt from the tax imposed by this Section. Sales of such items are subject to the tax under Section 21.1-460. 
(d)  Under this Section, a trade-in will not be allowed for the purpose of reducing the tax liability. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 21.1-430. - Timbering and other extraction. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and nine-tenths percent (2.9%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the following businesses: 
(1)  Felling, producing, or preparing timber or any product of the forest for sale, profit or commercial use. 
(2)  Extracting, refining, or producing any oil or natural gas for sale, profit, or commercial use. 
(b)  The rate specified in subsection (a) above shall be applied to the value of the entire product extracted, refined, produced, or prepared for sale, profit, or commercial use, when such activity occurs within the City, regardless of the place of sale of the product or the fact that delivery may be made to a point without the City or without the State. 
(c)  If any person engaging in any business classified in this Section ships or transports products, or any part thereof, out of the State without making sale of such products, or ships his products outside of the State in an unfinished condition, the value of the products or articles in the condition or form in which they existed when transported out-of-State and before they enter interstate commerce shall be the basis for assessment of the tax imposed by this Section. 
(d)  (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 21.1-432. - Mining. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to one tenth of one percent (.1%), not to exceed one tenth of one percent, of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of mining, smelting, or producing for sale, profit, or commercial use any copper, gold, silver, or other mineral product, compound, or combination of mineral products; but not including the extraction, removal, or production of sand, gravel, or rock from the ground for sale, profit, or commercial use. 
(b)  The rate specified in subsection (a) above shall be applied to the value of the entire product mined, smelted or produced for sale, profit, or commercial use, when such activity occurs within the City, regardless of the place of sale of the product or the fact that delivery may be made to a point without the City or without the State. 
(c)  If any person engaging in any business classified in this Section ships or transports products, or any part thereof, out of the State without making sale of such products, or ships his products outside of the State in an unfinished condition, the value of the products or articles in the condition or form in which they existed when transported out-of-State and before they enter interstate commerce shall be the basis for assessment of the tax imposed by this Section. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-435. - Publishing and periodicals distribution. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and nine-tenths percent (2.9%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business activity of: 
(1)  Publication of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals when published within the City, measured by the gross income derived from notices, subscriptions, and local advertising as defined in section 21.1-405. In cases where the location of publication is both within and without this State, gross income subject to the tax shall refer only to gross income derived from residents of this State or generated by permanent business locations within this State. 
(2)  Distribution or delivery within the City of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals not published within the City; measured by the gross income derived from subscriptions. 
(b)  "Location of Publication" is determined by: 
(1)  Location of the editorial offices of the publisher, when the physical printing is not performed by the publisher; or 
(2)  Location of either the editorial offices or the printing facilities, if the publisher performs his own physical printing. 
(c)  "Subscription income" shall include all circulation revenue of the publisher except amounts retained by or credited to carriers or other vendors as compensation for delivery within the State by such carriers or vendors, and further except sales of published items, directly or through distributors, for the purpose of resale, to retailers subject to the Privilege Tax on such resale. 
(d)  "Circulation," for the purpose of measurement of gross income subject to the tax, shall be considered to occur at the place of delivery of the published items to the subscriber or intended reader irrespective of the location of the physical facilities or personnel of the publisher. However, delivery by the United States mails shall be considered to have occurred at the location of publication. 
(e)  Allocation of taxes between cities and towns. In cases where publication or distribution occurs in more than one city or town, the measurement of gross income subject to tax by the City shall include: 
(1)  That portion of the gross income from publication which reflects the ratio of circulation within this City to circulation in all incorporated cities and towns in this State having substantially similar provisions; plus 
(2)  Only when publication occurs within the City, that portion of the remaining gross income from publication which reflects the ratio of circulation within this City to the total circulation of all incorporated cities or towns in this State within which cities the taxpayer maintains a location of publication. 
(f)  The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to sales of newspapers, magazines or other periodicals to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when the property sold is for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 21.1-440. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-444. - Hotels. 
    The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and nine-tenths percent (2.9%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of operating a hotel charging for lodging and/or lodging space furnished to any: 
(a)  Person. 
(b)  Exclusions. The tax imposed by this Section shall not include: 
(1)  Income derived from incarcerating or detaining prisoners who are under the jurisdiction of the United States, this State or any other state or a political subdivision of this State or of any other state in a privately operated prison, jail or detention facility. 
(2)  Gross proceeds of sales or gross income that is properly included in another business activity under this Article and that is taxable to the person engaged in that business activity, but the gross proceeds of sales or gross income to be deducted shall not exceed the consideration paid to the person conducting the activity. 
(3)  Gross proceeds of sales or gross income from transactions or activities that are not limited to transients and that would not be taxable if engaged in by a person not subject to tax under this Article. 
(4)  Gross proceeds of sales or gross income from transactions or activities that are not limited to transients and that would not be taxable if engaged in by a person subject to taxation under Section 21.1-410 or Section 21.1-475 due to an exclusion, exemption or deduction. 
(5)  Gross proceeds of sales or gross income from commissions received from a person providing services or property to the customers of the hotel. However, such commissions may be subject to tax under Section 21.1-445 or Section 21.1-450 as rental, leasing or licensing for use of real or tangible personal property. 
(6)  Income from providing telephone, fax or Internet services to customers at an additional charge that is separately stated to the customer and is separately maintained in the hotel's books and records. However, such gross proceeds of sales or gross income may be subject to tax under Section 21.1-470 as telecommunication services. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 21.1-445. - Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of real property. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and nine-tenths percent (2.9%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of leasing or renting real property located within the City for a consideration, to the tenant in actual possession, or the licensing for use of real property to the final licensee located within the City for a consideration including any improvements, rights, or interest in such property; provided further that: 
(1)  Payments made by the lessee to, or on behalf of, the lessor for property taxes, repairs, or improvements are considered to be part of the taxable gross income. 
(2)  Charges for such items as telecommunications, utilities, pet fees, or maintenance are considered to be part of the taxable gross income. 
(3)  However, if the lessor engages in telecommunication activity, as evidenced by installing individual metering equipment and by billing each tenant based upon actual usage, such activity is taxable under Section 21.1-470. 
(b)  If individual utility meters have been installed for each tenant and the lessor separately charges each single tenant for the exact billing from the utility company, such charges are exempt. 
(c)  Charges by a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization to patients of such facilities for use of rooms or other real property during the course of their treatment by such facilities are exempt. 
(d)  Charges for joint pole usage by a person engaged in the business of providing or furnishing utility or telecommunication services to another person engaged in the business of providing or furnishing utility or telecommunication services are exempt from the tax imposed by this Section. 
(e)  (Reserved). 
(f)  (Reserved). 
(g)  (Reserved). 
(h)  (Reserved). 
(i)  Exempt from the tax imposed by this Section is gross income derived from the rental, leasing, or licensing of real property to a corporation; provided that the lessor's aggregate holdings in the lessee corporation amount to at least eighty percent (80%) of the voting stock of the lessee corporation. 
(j)  Exempt from the tax imposed by this Section is gross income derived from the activities taxable under Section 21.1-444 of this Code. 
(k)  (Reserved). 
(l)  (Reserved). 
(m)  (Reserved). 
(n)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 21.1-200(b), the fair market value of one (1) apartment, in an apartment complex provided rent free to an employee of the apartment complex is not subject to the tax imposed by this Section. For an apartment complex with more than fifty (50) units, an additional apartment provided rent free to an employee for every additional fifty (50) units is not subject to the tax imposed by this Section. 
(o)  Income derived from incarcerating or detaining prisoners who are under the jurisdiction of the United States, this State or any other state or a political subdivision of this State or of any other state in a privately operated prison, jail or detention facility is exempt from the tax imposed by this Section. 
(p)  Charges by any hospital, any licensed nursing care institution, or any kidney dialysis facility to patients of such facilities for the use of rooms or other real property during the course of their treatment by such facilities are exempt. 
(q)  Charges to patients receiving "personal care" or "directed care", by any licensed assisted living facility, licensed assisted living center or licensed assisted living home as defined and licensed pursuant to Chapter 4 Title 36 Arizona Revised Statutes and Title 9 of the Arizona Administrative Code are exempt. 
(r)  Income received from the rental of any "low-income unit" as established under Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code, including the low-income housing credit provided by IRC Section 42, to the extent that the collection of tax on rental income causes the "gross rent" defined by IRC Section 42 to exceed the income limitation for the low-income unit is exempt. This exemption also applies to income received from the rental of individual rental units subject to statutory or regulatory "low-income unit" rent restrictions similar to IRC Section 42 to the extent that the collection of tax from the tenant causes the rental receipts to exceed a rent restriction for the low-income unit. This subsection also applies to rent received by a person other than the owner or lessor of the low-income unit, including a broker. This subsection does not apply unless a taxpayer maintains the documentation to support the qualification of a unit as a low-income unit, the "gross rent" limitation for the unit and the rent received from that unit. 
(s)  The gross proceeds of a commercial lease of real property between affiliated companies, businesses, persons or reciprocal insurers are exempt. For the purposes of this paragraph: 
(1)  "Affiliated Companies, Businesses, Persons or Reciprocal Insurers" means the lessor holds a controlling interest in the lessee, the lessee holds a controlling interest in the lessor, an affiliated entity holds a controlling interest in both the lessor and the lessee or an unrelated person holds a controlling interest in both the lessor and lessee. 
(2)  "Controlling interest" means direct or indirect ownership of at least eighty per cent of the voting shares of a corporation or of the interests in a company, business or person other than a corporation. 
(3)  "Reciprocal Insurer" has the same meaning as prescribed in A.R.S. Section 20-762. 
(t)  Reserved. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 2843, § 4, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4997, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Sec. 21.1-446. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-447. - Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of real property: additional tax upon transient lodging. 
    In addition to the taxes levied as provided in Section 21.1-444, there is hereby levied and shall be collected an additional tax in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the gross income from the business activity of any hotel engaging or continuing within the City in the business of charging for lodging and/or lodging space furnished to any transient. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2806, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 21.1-450. - Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal property. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and nine-tenths percent (2.9%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of leasing, licensing for use, or renting tangible personal property for a consideration, including that which is semi-permanently or permanently installed within the City as provided by Regulation. 
(b)  Special provisions relating to long-term motor vehicle leases. A lease transaction involving a motor vehicle for a minimum period of twenty-four (24) months shall be considered to have occurred at the location of the motor vehicle dealership, rather than the location of the place of business of the lessor, even if the lessor's interest in the lease and its proceeds are sold, transferred, or otherwise assigned to a lease financing institution; provided further that the city or town where such motor vehicle dealership is located levies a Privilege Tax or an equivalent excise tax upon the transaction. 
(c)  Gross income derived from the following transactions shall be exempt from Privilege Taxes imposed by this Section: 
(1)  Rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property to persons engaged or continuing in the business of leasing, licensing for use, or rental of such property. 
(2)  Rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property that is semi-permanently or permanently installed within another city or town that levies an equivalent excise tax on the transaction. 
(3)  Rental, leasing, or licensing for use of film, tape, or slides to a theater or other person taxed under Section 21.1-410, or to a radio station, television station, or subscription television system. 
(4)  Rental, leasing, or licensing for use of the following: 
(A)  Prosthetics. 
(B)  Income-producing capital equipment. 
(C)  Mining and metallurgical supplies. 
These exemptions include the rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property which, if it had been purchased instead of leased, rented, or licensed by the lessee or licensee, would qualify as income-producing capital equipment or mining and metallurgical supplies. 
(5)  Rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when the property so rented, leased, or licensed is for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512 or rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property in this State by a nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code and that engages in and uses such property exclusively for training, job placement or rehabilitation programs or testing for mentally or physically handicapped persons. 
(6)  Separately billed charges for delivery, installation, repair, and/or maintenance as provided by Regulation. 
(7)  Charges for joint pole usage by a person engaged in the business of providing or furnishing utility or telecommunication services to another person engaged in the business of providing or furnishing utility or telecommunication services. 
(8)  (Reserved). 
(9)  Rental, leasing, or licensing of aircraft that would qualify as aircraft acquired for use outside the State, as prescribed by Regulation, if such rental, leasing, or licensing had been a sale. 
(10)  Rental, leasing and licensing for use of an alternative fuel vehicle if such vehicle was manufactured as a diesel fuel vehicle and converted to operate on alternative fuel and equipment that is installed in a conventional diesel fuel motor vehicle to convert the vehicle to operate on an alternative fuel, as defined in A.R.S. § 1-215. 
(11)  Rental, leasing and licensing for use of solar energy devices for taxable periods beginning from and after July 1, 2008. The lessor shall register with the Department of Revenue as a solar energy retailer. By registering, the lessor acknowledges that it will make its books and records relating to leases of solar energy devices available to the Department of Revenue and City, as applicable for examination. 
(12)  Leasing or renting certified ignition interlock devices installed pursuant to the requirements prescribed by A.R.S. Section 28-1461. For the purposes of this paragraph, "Certified Ignition Interlock Device" has the same meaning prescribed in A.R.S. Section 28-1301. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4997, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Sec. 21.1-452. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-455. - Restaurants and bars. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to three and nine-tenths percent (3.9%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of preparing or serving food or beverage in a bar, cocktail lounge, restaurant, or similar establishment where articles of food or drink are prepared or served for consumption on or off the premises, including also the activity of catering. Cover charges and minimum charges must be included in the gross income of this business activity. 
(b)  Caterers and other taxpayers subject to the tax who deliver food and/or serve such food off premises, shall also be allowed to exclude separately charged delivery, set-up, and clean-up charges, provided that the charges are also maintained separately in the books and records. When a taxpayer delivers food and/or serves such food off premises, his regular business location shall still be deemed the location of the transaction for the purposes of the tax imposed by this Section. 
(c)  The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to sales to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when sold for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512. 
(d)  The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories used for serving food and beverages to a commercial airline, as defined in A.R.S. § 42-5061(A)49, that serves the food and beverages to its passengers, without additional charge, for consumption in flight. 
(e)  The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to sales of prepared food, beverages, condiments or accessories to a public educational entity, pursuant to any of the provisions of Title 15, Arizona Revised Statutes, to the extent such items are to be prepared or served to individuals for consumption on the premises of a public educational entity during school hours. 
(f)  For the purposes of this Section, "accessories" means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of the food. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 21.1-460. - Retail sales: Measure of tax; burden of proof; exclusions. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and nine-tenths percent (2.9%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail, except that the tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and five-tenths percent (2.5%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of selling food for home consumption. 
(b)  The burden of proving that a sale of tangible personal property is not a taxable retail sale shall be upon the person who made the sale. 
(c)  Exclusions. For the purposes of this Chapter, sales of tangible personal property shall not include: 
(1)  Sales of stocks, bonds, options, or other similar materials. 
(2)  Sales of lottery tickets or shares pursuant to Article I, Chapter 5, Title 5, Arizona Revised Statutes. 
(3)  Sales of platinum, bullion, or monetized bullion, except minted or manufactured coins transferred or acquired primarily for their numismatic value as prescribed by Regulation. 
(4)  Gross income derived from the transfer of tangible personal property which is specifically included as the gross income of a business activity upon which another Section of this Article imposes a tax, shall be considered gross income of that business activity, and are not includable as gross income subject to the tax imposed by this Section. 
(5)  Sales by professional or personal service occupations where such sales are inconsequential elements of the service provided. 
(6)  Sales of cash equivalents. The gross proceeds of sale or gross income derived from the redemption of any cash equivalent by the holder as means of payment for goods or services that are taxable under this Article is subject to the tax. "Cash Equivalents" means items or intangibles, whether or not negotiable that are sold to one or more persons, through which a value denominated in money is purchased in advance and may be redeemed in full or in part for tangible personal property, intangibles or services. Cash equivalents include gift cards, stored value cards, gift certificates, vouchers, traveler's checks, money orders or other instruments, orders or electronic mechanisms, such as an electronic code, personal identification number or digital payment mechanism, or any other prepaid intangible right to acquire tangible personal property, intangibles or services in the future, whether from the seller of the cash equivalent or from another person. Cash equivalents do not include either of the following: 
(A)  Items or intangibles that are sold to one or more persons, through which a value is not denominated in money. 
(B)  Prepaid calling cards or prepaid authorization numbers for telecommunications services made taxable by subsection (g) of this section. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, when the gross income from the sale of a single item of tangible personal property exceeds Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000), the two and two-tenths percent (2.2%) tax rate shall apply to the first $5,000. Above $5,000, the measure of tax shall be at a rate of two and two-tenths percent (2.2%). 
(e)  When this City and another Arizona city or town with an equivalent excise tax could claim nexus for taxing a retail sale, the city or town where the permanent business location of the seller at which the order was received shall be deemed to have precedence, and for the purposes of this Chapter such city or town has sole and exclusive right to such tax. 
(f)  The appropriate tax liability for any retail sale where the order is received at a permanent business location of the seller located in this City or in an Arizona city or town that levies an equivalent excise tax shall be at the tax rate of the city or town of such seller's location. 
(g)  Retail sales of prepaid calling cards or prepaid authorization numbers for telecommunications services, including sales of reauthorization of a prepaid card or authorization number, are subject to tax under this Section. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 2809, § 1, 6-26-12; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4997, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Sec. 21.1-462. - Retail sales: Food for home consumption. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and five-tenths percent (2.5%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of selling food for home consumption at retail. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section only. The following definitions shall be applicable: 
(1)  "Eligible Grocery Business" means an establishment whose sales of food are such that it is eligible to participate in the food stamp program established by the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (P.L. 95-113; 91 STAT. 958.7 U.S.C./Section 2011 ET SEQ.), according to regulations in effect on January l, 1979. An Establishment is deemed eligible to participate in the food stamp program if it is authorized to participate in the program by the United States Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service Field Office on the effective date of this section, or if, prior to a reporting period for which the return is filed, such retailer proves to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector that the establishment, based on the nature of the retailer's food sales, could be eligible to participate in the food stamp program established by the Food Stamp Act of 1977 according to regulations in effect on January l, 1979. 
(2)  "Facilities For The Consumption Of Food" means tables, chairs, benches, booths, stools, counters, and similar conveniences, trays, glasses, dishes, or other tableware and parking areas for the convenience of in-car consumption of food in or on the premises on which the retailer conducts business. 
(3)  "Food For Consumption On The Premises" means any of the following: 
(A)  "Hot prepared food" as defined below. 
(B)  Hot or cold sandwiches. 
(C)  Food serviced by an attendant to be eaten at tables, chairs, benches, booths, stools, counters, and similar conveniences and within parking areas for the convenience of in-car consumption of food. 
(D)  Food served with trays, glasses, dishes, or other tableware. 
(E)  Beverages sold in cups, glasses, or open containers. 
(F)  Food sold by caterers. 
(G)  Food sold within the premises of theatres, movies, operas, shows of any type or nature, exhibitions, concerts, carnivals, circuses, amusement parks, fairs, races, contests, games, athletic events, rodeos, billiard and pool parlors, bowling alleys, public dances, dance halls, boxing, wrestling and other matches, and any business which charges admission, entrance, or cover fees for exhibition, amusement, entertainment, or instruction. 
(H)  Any items contained in subsections (A)(3)(A) through (G) above even though they are sold on a "take-out" or "to go" basis, and whether or not the item is packaged, wrapped, or is actually taken from the premises. 
(4)  "Hot Prepared Food" means those products, items, or ingredients of food which are prepared and intended for consumption in a heated condition. "Hot Prepared Food" includes a combination of hot and cold food items or ingredients if a single price has been established. 
(5)  "Premises" means the total space and facilities in or on which a vendor conducts business and which are owned or controlled, in whole or in part, by a vendor or which are made available for the use of customers of the vendor or group of vendors, including any building or part of a building, parking lot, or grounds. 
(6)  "Food For Home Consumption" means all food, except food for consumption on the premises, if sold by an[y] of the following: 
(A)  An eligible grocery business. 
(B)  A person who conducts a business whose primary business is not the sale of food but who sells food which is displayed, packaged, and sold in a similar manner as in eligible grocery business. 
(C)  A person who sells food and does not provide or make available any facilities for the consumption of food on the premises. 
(D)  A person who conducts a delicatessen business either from a counter which is separate from the place and cash register where taxable sales are made or from a counter which has two cash registers and which are used to record taxable and tax exempt sales, or a retailer who conducts a delicatessen business who uses a cash register which has at least two tax computing keys which are used to record taxable and tax exempt sales. 
(E)  Vending machines and other types of automatic retailers. 
(F)  A person's sales of food, drink and condiment for consumption within the premises of any person, jail or other institution under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Corrections, the Department of Public Safety, the Department of Juvenile Corrections or a Count Sheriff. 
(c)  Income derived from the following sources is exempt from the tax imposed by this section: 
(1)  Sales of food for home consumption to a person regularly engaged in the business of selling such property. 
(2)  Out-of-city sales or out-of-state sales. 
(3)  Charges for deliver[y] or other "direct customer services" as prescribed by the regulation. 
(4)  Food purchased with food stamps provided through the food stamp program established by the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (P.L. 95-113; 91 STAT. 958.7 U.S.C. Section 2011 ET SEQ.) or purchased with food instruments issued under Section 17 of the Child Nutrition Act CP.L. 95-627; 92 STAT 3603; and P.L. 99-669; Section 4302; 42 United States Code Section 1786) but only to the extent that food stamps or food instruments were actually used to purchase such food. 
(5)  Sales of food products by producers as provided for by A.R.S. Sections 3-561, 3-562 and 3-563. 
(6)  Sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories to a public educational entity, pursuant to any of the provisions of Title 15, Arizona Revised Statutes, including a regularly organized private or parochial school that offers an educational program for grade twelve or under which may be attended in substitution for a public school pursuant to A.R.S. 15-802; to the extent such items are to be prepared or served to individuals for consumption on the premises of a public educational entity during school hours for the purposes of this subsection, "accessories" means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of the food. 
(7)  Sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories to a nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified as an exempt organization under 26 U.S.C. Section 50l(C)(3) and regularly serves meals to the needy and indigent on a continuing basis at no cost. For the purposes of this subsection, "accessories" means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of the food. 
(d)  Reporting . Such person[s] who sell food for home consumption shall, in conjunction with the return required pursuant to section 21.1-530, report to the Tax Collector in a manner prescribed by the Tax Collector all sales of food for home consumption exempted from taxed imposed by this chapter. 
(e)  Recordkeeping . 
(l)  Retailers shall maintain accurate, verifiable, and complete records of all purchases and sales of tangible personal property in order to verify exemptions from taxes imposed by this chapter. A retailer may use any method of reporting that properly reflects all purchases and sales of food for home consumption, as well as all purchases and sales of items subject to taxes imposed by this chapter, provided that such records are maintained in accordance with Article III and Regulations of the Tax Collector. 
(2)  Any person who fails to maintain records as provided herein shall be deemed to have had no sales of food for home consumption, and if upon request by the Tax Collector, a person cannot demonstrate to the Tax Collector that such records and reports do properly reflect all sales of food for home consumption, the Tax Collector may recompute the amount of tax to be paid as provided in Sections 21.1-370 and 21.1-545(B). 
(Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4997, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Sec. 21.1-465. - Retail sales: Exemptions. 
    Income derived from the following sources is exempt from the tax imposed by Section 21.1-460: 
(a)  Sales of tangible personal property to a person regularly engaged in the business of selling such property. 
(b)  Out-of-City sales or out-of-State sales. 
(c)  Charges for delivery, installation, or other direct customer services as prescribed by Regulation. 
(d)  Charges for repair services as prescribed by Regulation, when separately charged and separately maintained in the books and records of the taxpayer. 
(e)  Sales of warranty, maintenance, and service contracts, when separately charged and separately maintained in the books and records of the taxpayer. 
(f)  Sales of prosthetics. 
(g)  Sales of income-producing capital equipment. 
(h)  Sales of rental equipment and rental supplies. 
(i)  Sales of mining and metallurgical supplies. 
(j)  Sales of motor vehicle fuel and use fuel which are subject to a tax imposed under the provisions of Article I or II, Chapter 16, Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes; or sales of use fuel to a holder of a valid single trip use fuel tax permit issued under A.R.S. § 28-5739, or sales of natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas used to propel a motor vehicle. 
(k)  Sales of tangible personal property to a construction contractor who holds a valid Privilege Tax License for engaging or continuing in the business of construction contracting where the tangible personal property sold is incorporated into any structure or improvement to real property as part of construction contracting activity. 
(l)  Sales of motor vehicles to nonresidents of this State for use outside this State if the vendor ships or delivers the motor vehicle to a destination outside this State. 
(m)  Sales of tangible personal property which directly enters into and becomes an ingredient or component part of a product sold in the regular course of the business of job printing, manufacturing, or publication of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals. Tangible personal property which is consumed or used up in a manufacturing, job printing, publishing, or production process is not an ingredient nor component part of a product. 
(n)  Sales made directly to the Federal government to the extent of: 
(1)  one hundred percent (100%) of the gross income derived from retail sales made by a manufacturer, modifier, assembler, or repairer. 
(2)  Fifty percent (50%) of the gross income derived from retail sales made by any other person. 
(o)  Sales to hotels, bars, restaurants, dining cars, lunchrooms, boarding houses, or similar establishments of articles consumed as food, drink, or condiment, whether simple, mixed, or compounded, where such articles are customarily prepared or served to patrons for consumption on or off the premises, where the purchaser is properly licensed and paying a tax under Section 21.1-455 or the equivalent excise tax upon such income. 
(p)  Sales of tangible personal property to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when the property sold is for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512 or sales of tangible personal property purchased in this State by a nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code and that engages in and uses such property exclusively for training, job placement or rehabilitation programs or testing for mentally or physically handicapped persons. 
(q)  Reserved. 
(r)  (Reserved). 
(1)  (Reserved). 
(2)  (Reserved). 
(3)  (Reserved). 
(4)  (Reserved). 
(s)  Sales of groundwater measuring devices required by A.R.S. § 45-604. 
(t)  (Reserved). 
(u)  Sales of aircraft acquired for use outside the State, as prescribed by Regulation. 
(v)  Sales of food products by producers as provided for by A.R.S. §§ 3-561, 3-562 and 3-563. 
(w)  (Reserved). 
(x)  Sales of food and drink to a person who is engaged in business that is classified under the restaurant classification and that provides such food and drink without monetary charge to its employees for their own consumption on the premises during such employees' hours of employment. 
(y)  (Reserved). 
(z)  Gross income received for tangible personal property consisting of manufactured items destroyed by being subjected to destructive stress, strain or similar testing, for the purpose of developing engineering information or for the purpose of quality control, but only to the extent that a sale of said property would otherwise be exempt by the provisions of this Chapter. 
(aa)  The sale of tangible personal property used in remediation contracting as defined in Section 21.1-100 and Regulation 21.1-100.5. 
(bb)  Sales of materials that are purchased by or for publicly funded libraries including school district libraries, charter school libraries, community college libraries, state university libraries or federal, state, county or municipal libraries for use by the public as follows: 
(1)  Printed or photographic materials. 
(2)  Electronic or digital media materials. 
(cc)  Sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories used for serving food and beverages to a commercial airline, as defined in A.R.S. § 42-5061(A)(49), that serves the food and beverages to its passengers, without additional charge, for consumption in flight. For the purposes of this subsection, "accessories" means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of the food. 
(dd)  In computing the tax base in the case of the sale or transfer of wireless telecommunication equipment as an inducement to a customer to enter into or continue a contract for telecommunication services that are taxable under Section 21.1-470, gross proceeds of sales or gross income does not include any sales commissions or other compensation received by the retailer as a result of the customer entering into or continuing a contract for the telecommunications services. 
(ee)  For the purposes of this Section, a sale of wireless telecommunication equipment to a person who holds the equipment for sale or transfer to a customer as an inducement to enter into or continue a contract for telecommunication services that are taxable under Section 21.1-470 is considered to be a sale for resale in the regular course of business. 
(ff)  Sales of alternative fuel as defined in A.R.S. § 1-215, to a used oil fuel burner who has received a Department of Environmental Quality permit to burn used oil or used oil fuel under A.R.S. §§ 49-426 or 49-480. 
(gg)  Sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories to a public educational entity, pursuant to any of the provisions of Title 15, Arizona Revised Statutes, including a regularly organized private or parochial school that offers an educational program for grade twelve or under which may be attended in substitution for a public school Pursuant to A.R.S. 15-802; to the extent such items are to be prepared or served to individuals for consumption on the premises of a public educational entity during school hours. 
For the purposes of this subsection, "accessories" means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which facilities the consumption of the food. 
(hh)  Sales of personal hygiene items to a person engaged in the business of and subject to tax under Section 21.1-444 of this code if the tangible personal property is furnished without additional charge to and intended to be consumed by the person during his occupancy. 
(ii)  For the purposes of this Section, the diversion of gas from a pipeline by a person engaged in the business of operating a natural or artificial gas pipeline, for the sole purpose of fueling compressor equipment to pressurize the pipeline, is not a sale of the gas to the operator of the pipeline. 
(jj)  Sales of food, beverages, condiments and accessories to a nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified as an exempt organization under 26 U.S.C Section 501(c)(3) and regularly serves meals to the needy and indigent on a continuing basis at no cost. For the purposes of this subsection, "accessories" means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of the food. 
(kk)  Sales of motor vehicles that use alternative fuel if such vehicle was manufactured as a diesel fuel vehicle and converted to operate on alternative fuel and sales of equipment that is installed in a conventional diesel fuel motor vehicle to convert the vehicle to operate on an alternative fuel, as defined in A.R.S. § 1-215. 
(ll)  Sales of Solar Energy Devices, for taxable periods beginning from and after December 1, 2008. The retailer shall register with the Department of Revenue as a solar energy retailer. By registering, the retailer acknowledges that it will make its books and records relating to sales of solar energy devices available to the Department of Revenue and City as applicable, for examination. 
(mm)  Sales or other transfers of renewable energy credits or any other unit created to track energy derived from renewable energy resources. For the purposes of this paragraph, "renewable energy credit" means a unit created administratively by the Corporation Commission or governing body of a public power utility to track kilowatt hours of electricity derived from a renewable energy resource or the kilowatt hour equivalent of conventional energy resources displaced by distributed renewable energy resources. 
(nn)  Sales of magazines or other periodicals or other publications by the state to encourage tourist travel. 
(oo)  Sales of paper machine clothing, such as forming fabrics and dryer felts, sold to a paper manufacturer and directly used or consumed in paper manufacturing. 
(pp)  Sales of overhead materials or other tangible personal property that is used in performing a contract between the United States government and manufacturer, modifier, assembler or repairer, including property used in performing a subcontract with a government contractor who is a manufacturer, modifier, assembler or repairer, to which title passes to the government under the terms of the contract or subcontract. 
(qq)  Sales of coal, petroleum, coke, natural gas, virgin fuel oil and electricity sold to a qualified environmental technology manufacturer, producer or processor as defined in A R.S. Section 41-1514.02 and directly used or consumed in the generation or provision of on-site power or energy solely for environmental technology manufacturing, producing or processing or environmental protection. This paragraph shall apply for twenty full consecutive calendar or fiscal years from the date of the first paper manufacturing machine is placed in service. In the case of an environmental technology manufacturer, producer or processor who does not manufacture paper, the time period shall begin with the date of the first manufacturing, processing or production equipment is placed in service. 
(rr)  Sales or gross income derived from sales of machinery, equipment, materials and other tangible personal property used directly and predominantly to construct a qualified environmental technology manufacturing, producing or processing facility as described in A.R.S. Section 41-1514.02. This subsection applies for ten full consecutive calendar or fiscal years after the start of the initial construction. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4997, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Sec. 21.1-470. - Telecommunication services. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to six and one-tenth percent (6.1%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of providing telecommunication services to consumers within this City. 
(1)  Telecommunication services shall include: 
(A)  Two-way voice, sound, and/or video communication over a communications channel. 
(B)  One-way voice, sound, and/or video transmission or relay over a communications channel. 
(C)  Facsimile transmissions. 
(D)  Providing relay or repeater service. 
(E)  Providing computer interface services over a communications channel. 
(F)  Time-sharing activities with a computer accomplished through the use of a communications channel. 
(2)  Gross income from the business activity of providing telecommunication services to consumers within this City shall include: 
(A)  All fees for connection to a telecommunication system. 
(B)  Toll charges, charges for transmissions, and charges for other telecommunications services; provided that such charges relate to transmissions originating in the City and terminating in this State. 
(C)  Fees charged for access to or subscription to or membership in a telecommunication system or network. 
(D)  Charges for monitoring services relating to a security or burglar alarm system located within the City where such system transmits or receives signals or data over a communications channel. 
(E)  Charges for telephone, fax or internet access services provided at an additional charge by a hotel business subject to taxation under Section 21.1-444. 
(b)  Resale telecommunication services. Gross income from sales of telecommunication services to another provider of telecommunication services for the purpose of providing the purchaser's customers with such service shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this Section; provided, however, that such purchaser is properly licensed by the City to engage in such business. 
(c)  Interstate transmissions. Charges by a provider of telecommunication services for transmissions originating in the City and terminating outside the State are exempt from the tax imposed by this Section. 
(d)  Tax credit offset for franchise fees. There shall be allowed as an offset, up to the amount of tax due, any amounts paid to the City for license fees or franchise fees, but such offset shall not be allowed against taxes imposed by any other Section of this Chapter. Such offset shall not be deemed in conflict with or violation of subsection 21.1-400(b). 
(e)  However, gross income from the providing of telecommunication services by a cable television system, as such system is defined in A.R.S. § 9-505, shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this Section. 
(f)  Prepaid calling cards. Telecommunications services purchased with a prepaid calling card that are taxable under Section 21.1-460 are exempt from the tax imposed under this Section. 
(g)  Internet access services. The gross income subject to tax under this section shall not include sales of internet access services to the person's subscribers and customers. For the purposes of this subsection: 
(1)  "Internet" means the computer and telecommunications facilities that comprise the interconnected worldwide network of networks that employ the transmission control protocol or internet protocol, or any predecessor or successor protocol, to communicate information of all kinds by wire or radio. 
(2)  "Internet Access" means a service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail or other services over the internet. Internet access does not include telecommunication services provided by a common carrier. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 21.1-475. - Transporting for hire. 
    The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and nine-tenths percent (2.9%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of providing the following forms of transportation for hire from this City to another point within the State: 
(a)  Transporting of persons or property by railroad; provided, however, that the tax imposed by this subsection shall not apply to transporting freight or property for hire by a railroad operating exclusively in this State if the transportation comprises a portion of a single shipment of freight or property, involving more than one railroad, either from a point in this State to a point outside this State or from a point outside this State to a point in this State. For purposes of this paragraph, "a single shipment" means the transportation that begins at the point at which one of the railroads first takes possession of the freight or property and continues until the point at which one of the railroads relinquishes possession of the freight or property to a party other than one of the railroads. 
(b)  Transporting of oil or natural or artificial gas through pipe or conduit. 
(c)  Transporting of property by aircraft. 
(d)  Transporting of persons or property by motor vehicle, including towing and the operation of private car lines, as such are defined in Article VII, Chapter 14, Title 42, Arizona Revised Statutes; provided, however, that the tax imposed by this subsection shall not apply to: 
(1)  Gross income subject to the tax imposed by Article IV, Chapter 16, Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes. 
(2)  Gross income derived from the operation of a governmentally adopted and controlled program to provide urban mass transportation. 
(3)  (Reserved). 
(4)  (Reserved). 
(e)  (Reserved). 
(f)  Deductions or exemptions. The gross proceeds of sales or gross income derived from the following sources is exempt from the tax imposed by this Section: 
(1)  Income that is specifically included as the gross income of a business activity upon which another Section of Article IV imposes a tax, that is separately stated to the customer and is taxable to the person engaged in that classification not to exceed consideration paid to the person conducting the activity. 
(2)  Income from arranging amusement or transportation when the amusement or transportation is conducted by another person not to exceed consideration paid to the amusement or transportation business. 
(g)  The tax imposed by this Section shall not include arranging transportation as a convenience to a person's customers if that person is not otherwise engaged in the business of transporting persons, freight or property for hire. This exception does not apply to businesses that dispatch vehicles pursuant to customer orders and send the billings and receive the payments associated with that activity, including when the transportation is performed by third party independent contractors. For the purposes of this paragraph, "arranging" includes billing for or collecting transportation charges from a person's customers on behalf of the persons providing the transportation. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12) 
Sec. 21.1-480. - Utility services. 
(a)  The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and nine-tenths percent (2.9%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or continuing in the business of producing, providing, or furnishing utility services, including electricity, electric lights, current, power, gas (natural or artificial), or water to: 
(1)  Consumers or ratepayers who reside within the City. 
(2)  Consumers or ratepayers of this City, whether within the City or without, to the extent that this City provides such persons utility services, excluding consumers or ratepayers who are residents of another city or town which levies an equivalent excise tax upon this City for providing such utility services to such persons. 
(b)  Exclusion of certain sales of natural gas to a public utility. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, the gross income derived from the sale of natural gas to a public utility for the purpose of generation of power to be transferred by the utility to its ratepayers shall be considered a retail sale of tangible personal property subject to Sections 21.1-460 and 21.1-465, and not considered gross income taxable under this Section. 
(c)  Resale utility services. Sales of utility services to another provider of the same utility services for the purpose of providing such utility services either to another properly licensed utility provider or directly to such purchaser's customers or ratepayers shall be exempt and deductible from the cross income subject to the tax imposed by this Section, provided that the purchaser is properly licensed by all applicable taxing jurisdictions to engage or continue in the business of providing utility services, and further provided that the seller maintains proper documentation, in a manner similar to that for sales for resale, of such transactions. 
(d)  (Reserved). 
(e)  The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to sales of utility services to a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when sold for use in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512. 
(f)  The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to sales of natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas used to propel a motor vehicle. 
(g)  The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Revenues received by a municipality owned utility in the form of fees charged to persons constructing residential, commercial or industrial developments or connecting residential, commercial or industrial developments to a municipal utility system or systems if the fees are segregated and used only for capital expansion, system enlargement or debt service of the utility system or systems. 
(2)  Revenues received by any person or persons owning a utility system in the form of reimbursement or contribution compensation for property and equipment installed to provide utility access to, on or across the land of an actual utility consumer if the property and equipment become the property of the utility. This exclusion shall not exceed the value of such property and equipment. 
(h)  The tax imposed by this Section shall not apply to sales of alternative fuel as defined in A.R.S. § 1-215, to a used oil fuel burner who has received a Department of Environmental Quality permit to burn used oil or used oil fuel under A.R.S. §§ 49-426 or 49-480. 
(i)  The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to sales or other transfers of renewable energy credits or any other unit created to track energy derived from renewable energy resources. For the purposes of this paragraph, "renewable energy credit" means a unit created administratively by the Corporation Commission or governing body of a public power utility to track kilowatt hours of electricity derived from a renewable energy resource or the kilowatt hour equivalent of conventional energy resources displaced by distributed renewable energy resources. 
(j)  The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to the portion of gross proceeds of sales or gross income attributable to transfers of electricity by any retail electric customer owning a solar photovoltaic energy generating system to an electric distribution system, if the electricity transferred is generated by the customer's system. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4997, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Sec. 21.1-485. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 21.1-500. - Administration of this chapter; rule making. 
(a)  The administration of this Chapter is vested in the Tax Collector, except as otherwise specifically provided, and all payments shall be made to the Tax Collector. 
(b)  The Tax Collector shall prescribe the forms and procedures necessary for the administration of the taxes imposed by this Chapter. 
(c)  Except as provided in this Section, no rule or regulation shall be adopted until approved by formal action of the City Council. 
(d)  (Reserved). 
(e)  The Unified Audit Committee shall publish uniform guidelines that interpret the model city tax code and that apply to all cities and towns that have adopted the model city tax code as provided by A.R.S. § 42-6005. 
(1)  Prior to finalization of uniform guidelines that interpret the model city tax code, the unified audit committee shall disseminate draft guidelines for public comment. 
(2)  Pursuant to A.R.S. § 42-6005(D), when the state statutes and the model city tax code are the same and where the Arizona Department of Revenue has issued written guidance, the department's interpretation is binding on cities and towns. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-510. - Divulging of information prohibited; exceptions allowing disclosure. 
(a)  Except as specifically provided, it shall be unlawful for any official or employee of the City to make known information obtained pursuant to this Chapter concerning the business financial affairs or operations of any person. 
(b)  The City Council may authorize an examination of any return or audit of a specific taxpayer made pursuant to this Chapter by authorized agents of the Federal Government, the State of Arizona, or any political subdivisions. 
(c)  The Tax Collector may provide to an Arizona county, city, or town any information concerning any taxes imposed in this Chapter relative to the taxing ordinances of that county, city, or town. 
(d)  Successors, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, executors, guardians, administrators, and assignees, if directly interested, may be given information by the Tax Collector as to the items included in the measure and amounts of any unpaid tax, interest, and penalties required to be paid. 
(e)  Upon a written direction by the City Attorney or other legal advisor to the City designated by the City Council, officials or employees of the City may divulge the amount and source of income, profits, leases, or expenditures disclosed in any return or report, and the amount of such delinquent and unpaid tax, penalty, or interest, to a private collection agency having a written collection agreement with the City. 
(f)  The Tax Collector shall provide information to appropriate representatives of any Arizona city or town to comply with the provisions of A.R.S. § 42-6003, A.R.S. § 42-6005, and A.R.S. § 42-6056. 
(g)  The Tax Collector may provide information to authorized agents of any other Arizona governmental agency involving the allocation of taxes imposed by Section 21.1-435 upon publishing and distribution of periodicals. 
(h)  The Tax Collector may provide information regarding the enforcement and collection of taxes imposed by this Chapter to any governmental agency with which the City has an agreement. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-515. - Duties of the taxpayer problem resolution officer. 
(a)  The Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer shall assist taxpayers in: 
(1)  Obtaining easily understandable tax information and information on audits, corrections and appeals procedures of the City. 
(2)  Answering questions regarding preparing and filing the returns required under this chapter. 
(3)  Locating documents filed with or payments submitted to the Tax Collector by the taxpayer. 
(b)  The Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer shall also: 
(1)  Receive and evaluate complaints of improper, abusive or inefficient service by the Tax Collector or any of his designees, employees, or agents and recommend to the City Manager or, for a City without a City Manager, the Chief Administrative Officer appropriate action to correct such service. 
(2)  Identify policies and practices of the Tax Collector or any of his designees, employees, or agents that might be barriers to the equitable treatment of taxpayers and recommend alternatives to the City Manager or, for a City without a City Manager, the Chief Administrative Officer. 
(3)  Provide expeditious service to taxpayers whose problems are not resolved through normal channels. 
(4)  Negotiate with the Tax Collector, his designees, employees, or agents to resolve the most complex and sensitive taxpayer problems. 
(5)  Take action to stop or prohibit the Tax Collector from taking an action against a taxpayer. 
(6)  Participate and present taxpayers' interests and concerns in meetings formulating the City's policies and procedures under and interpretation of this Chapter. 
(7)  Compile data each year on the number and type of taxpayer complaints and evaluate the actions taken to resolve those complaints. 
(8)  Survey taxpayers each year to obtain their evaluation of the quality of service provided by the Tax Collector, his designees, employees, and agents. 
(9)  Perform other functions which relate to taxpayer assistance as prescribed by the City Manager or, for a City without a City Manager, the Chief Administrative Officer. 
(c)  Actions taken by the Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer may be reviewed and/or modified only by the City Manager or, for a City without a City Manager, the Chief Administrative Officer upon request of the Tax Collector or a taxpayer. 
(d)  The Mayor and Council of the City shall be provided with a report quarterly which identifies: 
(1)  Any complaints of improper, abusive or inefficient service received by the Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer since the date of the last report. 
(2)  Any recommendations made, action taken or surveys obtained by the Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer pursuant to subsection (b)(1)-(9), above, since the date of the last report. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-516. - Taxpayer assistance orders. 
(a)  The Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer, with or without a formal written request from a taxpayer, may issue a taxpayer assistance order that suspends or stays an action or proposed action by the Tax Collector if, in the problem resolution officer's determination, a taxpayer is suffering or will suffer a significant hardship due to the manner in which the Tax Collector is administering the tax laws. 
(b)  A taxpayer assistance order may require the Tax Collector to release any lien perfected under this Chapter, or cease any action or refrain from taking any action to enforce against the taxpayer any Section of this Chapter pending resolution of the issue giving rise to the taxpayer assistance order. 
(c)  The Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer, City Manager or, for a City without a City Manager, the Chief Administrative Officer may modify, reverse or rescind a taxpayer assistance order. A taxpayer assistance order is binding on the Tax Collector until it is reversed or rescinded. 
(d)  The running of the applicable statute of limitations for any action that is the subject of a taxpayer assistance order is suspended from the date the taxpayer applies for the order or the date the order is issued, whichever is earlier, until the order's expiration date, modification date or recession date, if any. Interest that would otherwise accrue on an outstanding tax obligation is not affected by the issuance of a taxpayer assistance order. 
(e)  A taxpayer assistance order may not be used: 
(1)  To contest the merits of a tax liability. 
(2)  To substitute for informal protest procedures or administrative or judicial proceedings to review a deficiency assessment, collection action or denial of a refund claim. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-517. - Basis for evaluating employee performance. 
(a)  The Tax Collector shall solicit evaluations from taxpayers and include such evaluations in the performance appraisals of his employees, where applicable. 
(b)  The Tax Collector shall not evaluate an employee on the basis of taxes assessed or collected by that employee. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-520. - Reporting and payment of tax. 
(a)  Returns. The returns required under this Chapter shall be made upon forms prescribed or approved by the Tax Collector, and shall be considered filed only when the accuracy of the return has been attested to, by signature upon the form, by an authorized agent of the taxpayer, and when such form has been received by the Tax Collector. 
(b)  Payment. If payment is made in any form other than United States legal tender, the tax obligation shall not be satisfied until the payment has been honored in funds. 
(c)  Requirement of Security. If a taxpayer has remitted payment in the form of a check or other form of draw upon a bank or third party and such remittance has not been honored in funds, the Tax Collector may demand security for future payments. 
(d)  Method of Reporting. Each taxpayer shall elect to report on either a cash receipts basis or an accrual basis and shall indicate the choice on the Privilege License application. A taxpayer shall not change his reporting method without receiving prior written approval by the Tax Collector. 
(1)  Taxpayers must report all gross income subject to the tax using the same basis of reporting. 
(2)  Taxes imposed upon construction contracting shall be reported as follows: 
(A)  Construction contractors shall report on either a progressive billing ("accrual") basis or cash receipts basis. 
(B)  Speculative builders shall report the gross income derived from sale of improved real property at close of escrow or at transfer of title or possession, whichever occurs earlier. 
(C)  Owner-builders who are not speculative builders shall report taxable amounts as provided in Section 21.1-417. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-530. - When tax due; when delinquent; verification of return; extensions. 
(a)  Except as provided elsewhere in this Section, the taxes shall be due and payable monthly on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the month next succeeding the month in which the tax accrues. 
(1)  Quarterly returns. The Tax Collector may authorize a taxpayer whose reporting history indicates an estimated annual City Privilege and Use Tax liability on taxable gross income in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) but less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to file returns on a calendar-quarterly basis. The taxes for each calendar quarter shall be due and payable on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the month next succeeding the end of each calendar quarter. 
(2)  Annual returns. The Tax Collector may authorize a taxpayer whose reporting history indicates an estimated annual City Privilege and Use Tax liability on taxable gross income of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to file returns for such taxes on a calendar-annual basis. The taxes for each calendar year shall be due and payable on or before the twentieth (20th) day of January of the following year. 
(b)  Special Requirements of taxpayers filing quarterly or annual returns. No taxpayer may report on a quarterly or annual basis until he has established, to the Tax Collector's satisfaction, six (6) months reporting history. It is the taxpayer's responsibility to notify the Tax Collector and increase his reporting frequency (to quarterly or monthly as applicable) when his taxable income or tax due exceeds the maximum limits for his current reporting frequency. Failure to do so may be deemed negligence or evasion, and penalties may apply. Failure to file returns timely, without good cause shown to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector, is sufficient cause for the Tax Collector to deny future filings by the taxpayer on a quarterly or annual basis. 
(c)  Delinquency Date. Except as provided in subsection (d) below, all returns and remittances received within the Tax Collector's office on or before the last business day of the month when due shall be regarded as timely filed. The start of business of the first business day following the month when due shall be the delinquency date. It shall be the taxpayer's responsibility to cause his return and remittance to be timely received. Mailing the return or remittance on or before the due date or delinquency date does not relieve the taxpayer of the responsibility of causing his return or remittance to be received by the last business day of the month when due. 
(d)  Jeopardy reporting. If the Tax Collector determines that the collection of any tax due to the City is in jeopardy, the Tax Collector may direct the taxpayer to file his return and remit the tax on a weekly, daily, or transaction-by-transaction basis. Such return and remittance shall be due upon the date fixed by the Tax Collector, and the "delinquency date" shall be the following day. 
(e)  Extensions. The Tax Collector may extend the time for filing a return, for good cause shown, and only when requested in writing and received by the Tax Collector prior to the tax due date. However, the time for filing such return shall not be extended beyond the last business day of the month next succeeding the due date of such return. In such cases, only the penalties for late filing and late payment may be waived by the Tax Collector for filing and payment within the extension period. Notwithstanding the granting of an extension, the interest payable for late payment of taxes shall be paid for the period commencing upon the original delinquency date and ending on the date the tax is paid. The interest may not be waived by the Tax Collector. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-540. - Interest and civil penalties. 
(a)  Any taxpayer who failed to pay any of the taxes imposed by this Chapter which were due or found to be due before the delinquency date shall be subject to and shall pay interest upon such tax until paid. From and after October 1, 2005, the interest rate shall be determined in the same manner and at the same times as prescribed by Section 6621 of the United States Internal Revenue Code and compounded annually under the method described in subsection (1) below. The rate of interest for both overpayments and underpayments for all taxpayers is the federal short-term rate, determined pursuant to Section 6621(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, plus three percentage points. The interest rate prior to October 1, 2005 shall be one percent (1%) per month. Said interest may be neither waived by the Tax Collector nor abated by the Hearing Officer except as it might relate to a tax abated as provided by Section 21.1-570. 
(1)  On January 1 of each year any interest outstanding as of that date that was accrued from and after October 1, 2005 is thereafter considered a part of the principal amount of the tax and accrues interest pursuant to this section. 
(2)  Interest accrued prior to October 1, 2005 shall not be added to the principal. 
(b)  In addition to interest assessed under subsection (a) above, any taxpayer who failed to pay any of the taxes imposed by this Chapter which were due or found to be due before the delinquency date shall be subject to and shall pay any or all of the following civil penalties, in addition to any other penalties prescribed by this Chapter: 
(1)  A taxpayer who fails to timely file a return for a tax imposed by this Chapter shall pay a penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax for each month or fraction of a month elapsing between the delinquency date of the return and the date on which it is filed, unless the taxpayer shows that the failure to timely file is due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect. This penalty shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the tax due. 
(2)  A taxpayer who fails to pay the tax within the time prescribed shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid tax, unless the taxpayer shows that the failure to timely pay is due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect. If the taxpayer is also subject to a penalty under subsection (b)(1) above for the same tax period, the total penalties under subsection (b)(1) and this subsection shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the tax due. 
(3)  A taxpayer who fails or refuses to file a return within thirty (30) days of having received a written notice and demand from the Tax Collector shall pay a penalty of twenty-five percent (25%) of the tax, unless the taxpayer shows that the failure is due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect or the Tax Collector agrees to a longer time period. 
(4)  If the cause of a tax deficiency is determined by the Tax Collector to be due to negligence, but without regard for intent to defraud, the taxpayer shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of deficiency. If the taxpayer is also subject to a penalty under subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) above for the same tax period, the total penalties imposed under subsection (b)(1), (b)(2) and this subsection shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the tax due. 
(5)  If the cause of a tax deficiency is determined by the Tax Collector to be due to civil fraud or evasion of the tax, the taxpayer shall pay a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the amount of deficiency. 
(c)  Penalties and interest imposed by this Section are due and payable upon notice by the Tax Collector. 
(d)  If, following an audit, penalties attributable to the audit period are to be assessed pursuant to subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) above, the Tax Collector, before assessing such penalties, must take into consideration any information or explanations provided by the taxpayer as to why the return was not timely filed and/or the tax was not timely paid. If such information and/or explanations are provided by the taxpayer, and the Tax Collector nevertheless decides to assess penalties pursuant to subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) above, then, at the time the penalties are assessed, the Tax Collector must provide the taxpayer with a detailed written explanation of the basis for the Tax Collector's determination that the information and/or explanations provided by the taxpayer did not constitute reasonable cause. 
(e)  The assessment of the penalties prescribed by subsections (b)(3) through (b)(5) above must be approved on a case-by-case basis by the Tax Collector prior to such assessment. In addition, any assessment which includes penalties based upon subsection (b)(3), (b)(4), or (b)(5) above must be accompanied by a statement signed by the Tax Collector setting forth in detail the basis for the Tax Collector's determination that the penalties are warranted under the circumstances. 
(f)  The Tax Collector shall waive or adjust penalties imposed by subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) above upon a finding that: 
(1)  in the past, the taxpayer has consistently filed and paid the taxes imposed by this Chapter in a timely manner; or 
(2)  the amount of the penalty is greatly disproportionate to the amount of the tax; or 
(3)  the failure of a taxpayer to file a return and/or pay any tax by the delinquency date was caused by any of the following circumstances which must occur prior to the delinquency date of the return or payment in question: 
(A)  the return was timely filed but was inadvertently forwarded to another taxing jurisdiction. 
(B)  erroneous or insufficient information was furnished the taxpayer by the Tax Collector or his employee or agent. 
(C)  death or serious illness of the taxpayer, member of his immediate family, or the preparer of the reports immediately prior to the due date. 
(D)  unavoidable absence of the taxpayer immediately prior to the due date. 
(E)  destruction, by fire or other casualty, of the taxpayer's place of business or records. 
(F)  prior to the due date, the taxpayer made application for proper forms which could not be furnished in sufficient time to permit a timely filing. 
(G)  the taxpayer was in the process of pursuing an active protest of the tax in question in another taxing jurisdiction at the time the tax and/or return was due. 
(H)  the taxpayer establishes through competent evidence that the taxpayer contacted a tax advisor who is competent on the specific tax matter and, after furnishing necessary and relevant information, the taxpayer was incorrectly advised that no tax was owed and/or the filing of a return was not required. 
(I)  the taxpayer has never been audited by a City for the tax or on the issue in question and relied, in good faith, on a state exemption or interpretation. 
(J)  the taxpayer can provide some public record (court case, report in a periodical, professional journal or publication, etc.) stating that the transaction is not subject to tax. 
(K)  the Arizona Department of Revenue, based upon the same facts and circumstances, abated penalties for the same filing period. 
A taxpayer may also request a waiver or adjustment of penalty for a reason thought to be equally substantive to those reasons itemized above. All requests for waiver or adjustment of penalty must be in writing and shall contain all pertinent facts and other reliable and substantive evidence to support the request. In all cases, the burden of proof is upon the taxpayer. 
(g)  No request for waiver of penalty under subsection (f) above may be granted unless written request for waiver is received by the Tax Collector within forty-five (45) days following the imposition of penalty. Any taxpayer aggrieved by the refusal to grant a waiver under subsection (f) above may appeal under the provisions of Section 21.1-570 provided that a petition of appeal or request for an extension is submitted to the Tax Collector within forty-five (45) days of the taxpayer's receipt of notice by the City that waiver has been denied. 
(h)  For the purpose of this Section, "reasonable cause" shall mean that the taxpayer exercised ordinary business care and prudence, i.e., had a reasonable basis for believing that the tax did not apply to the business activity or the storage or use of the taxpayer's tangible personal property in this City. 
(i)  For the purpose of this Section, "negligence" shall be characterized chiefly by inadvertence, thoughtlessness, inattention, or the like, rather than an "honest mistake". Examples of negligence include: 
(1)  the taxpayer's failure to maintain records in accordance with Article III of this Chapter; 
(2)  repeated failures to timely file returns; or 
(3)  gross ignorance of the law. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2843, § 6, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 2925, § 4, 12-18-14) 
Sec. 21.1-541. - Erroneous advice or misleading statements by the tax collector; abatement of penalties and interest; definition. 
(a)  Notwithstanding Section 21.1-540(a), no interest or penalty may be assessed on an amount assessed as a deficiency if either: 
(1)  The deficiency assessed is directly attributable to erroneous written advice furnished to the taxpayer by an employee of the City acting in an official capacity in response to a specific request from the taxpayer and not from the taxpayer's failure to provide adequate or accurate information. 
(2)  All of the following are true: 
(A)  A tax return form prepared by the Tax Collector contains a statement that, if followed by a taxpayer, would cause the taxpayer to misapply this Chapter. 
(B)  The taxpayer reasonably relies on the statement. 
(C)  The taxpayer's underpayment directly results from this reliance. 
(b)  Each employee of the Tax Collector, at the time any oral advice is given to any person, shall inform the person that the Tax Collector is not bound by such oral advice. 
(c)  For purposes of this Section "tax return form" includes the instructions that the Tax Collector prepares for use with the tax return form. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-542. - Prospective application of new law or interpretation or application of law. 
(a)  Unless expressly authorized by law, the Tax Collector shall not apply any newly enacted legislation retroactively or in a manner that will penalize a taxpayer for complying with prior law. 
(b)  If the Tax Collector adopts a new interpretation or application of any provision of this Chapter or determines that any provision applies to a new or additional category or type of business and the change in interpretation or application is not due to a change in the law: 
(1)  The change in interpretation or application applies prospectively only unless it is favorable to taxpayers. 
(2)  The Tax Collector shall not assess any tax, penalty or interest retroactively based on the change in interpretation or application. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b), "New interpretation or application" includes policies and procedures which differ from established interpretations of this Chapter. 
(d)  (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-545. - Deficiencies; when inaccurate return is filed; when no return is filed; estimates. 
(a)  If the taxpayer has failed to file a return, or if the Tax Collector is not satisfied with the return and payment of the amount of tax required, and additional taxes are determined by the Tax Collector to be due, the Tax Collector shall deliver written notice of his determination of a deficiency to the taxpayer, and such deficiency, plus penalties and interest, shall be due and payable forty-five (45) days after receipt of the notice and demand. Such additional taxes shall bear any applicable civil penalties and interest as provided in Section 21.1-540, and every such notice of a determination of an additional amount due shall be assessed within the limitation period provided in Section 21.1-550. 
(1)  When a return is filed. If the Tax Collector is not satisfied with a return and payment of the amount of tax required by this Chapter to be paid to the City, he may examine the return or examine the records of the taxpayer, and redetermine the amount of tax, penalties, and interest required to be paid, for any periods available to the Tax Collector under Section 21.1-550, based upon the information contained in the return or records or based upon any information within his possession or which comes into his possession. 
(2)  When no return is filed. If any person fails to make a return, the Tax Collector may make an estimate of the amount of tax due under this Chapter and compute any applicable penalties and interest due, based upon any information within his possession or which comes into his possession. 
(b)  Estimates by the Tax Collector. Any estimate made by the Tax Collector is to be made on a reasonable basis. The existence of another reasonable basis of estimation does not, in any way, invalidate the Tax Collector's estimate. It is the responsibility of the taxpayer to prove that the Tax Collector's estimate is not reasonable and correct, by providing sufficient documentation of the type and form required by this Chapter or satisfactory to the Tax Collector. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-546. - Closing agreements in cases of extensive taxpayer misunderstanding or misapplication; approval; rules. 
(a)  If the Tax Collector determines that noncompliance with tax obligations results from extensive misunderstanding or misapplication of provisions of this Chapter it may enter into closing agreements with those taxpayers under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Extensive misunderstanding or misapplication of the tax laws occurs if the Tax Collector determines that more than sixty percent (60%) of the persons in the affected class have failed to properly account for their taxes owing to the same misunderstanding or misapplication of the tax laws. 
(2)  The Tax Collector shall publicly declare the nature of the possible misapplication and the proposed definition of the class of affected taxpayers and shall conduct a public hearing to hear testimony regarding the extent of the misapplication and the definition of the affected class. 
(3)  If, after the public hearing, the Tax Collector determines that a class of affected taxpayers has failed to comply with their tax obligations because of extensive misunderstanding or misapplication of the tax laws it shall issue a tax ruling announcing that finding and publish the ruling in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and through the next two (2) model city tax code updates. 
(4)  A closing agreement under this Section may abate some or all of the penalties, interest and tax that taxpayers have failed to remit, or the agreement may provide for the prospective treatment of the matter as to the class of affected taxpayers. All taxpayers in the class shall be offered the opportunity to enter into a similar agreement for the same tax periods. 
(5)  Taxpayers in the affected class who have properly accounted for their tax obligations for these tax periods shall be offered the opportunity to enter into an equivalent closing agreement providing for a pro rata credit or refund of their taxes previously paid. 
(6)  The closing agreement shall require the taxpayers to properly account for and pay such taxes in the future. If a taxpayer fails to adhere to such a requirement, the closing agreement is voidable by the Tax Collector and he may assess the taxpayer for the delinquent taxes. The Tax Collector may issue such a proposed assessment within six (6) months after the date that he declares that closing agreement void or within the period prescribed by Section 21.1-550 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Before entering into closing agreements pursuant to this Section, the Tax Collector shall secure such approval as required by charter, ordinance or administrative regulation. 
(c)  After a closing agreement has been signed pursuant to this Section, it is final and conclusive except on a showing of fraud, malfeasance or misrepresentation of a material fact. The case shall not be reopened as to the matters agreed upon or the agreement shall not be modified by any officer, employee or agent of the City. The agreement or any determination, assessment, collection, payment abatement, refund or credit made pursuant to the agreement shall not be annulled, modified, set aside or disregarded in any suit, action or proceeding. 
(d)  The Tax Collector shall report in writing its activities under this Section to the Mayor and City Council on or before February 1 of each year. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-550. - Limitation periods. 
(a)  Limitation when a return has been filed. 
(1)  Except as provided elsewhere in this Section, the Tax Collector may assess additional tax due at any time within four (4) years after the date on which the return is required to be filed, or within four (4) years after the date on which the return is filed, whichever period expires later. 
(2)  However, if a taxpayer does not report an amount properly reportable which is in excess of twenty-five percent (25%) of the taxable amount stated on the return, the Tax Collector may assess additional tax due at any time within six (6) years after the date on which the return was filed. 
(3)  Any delay in commencement or completion of any examination by the Tax Collector, which is requested or agreed to in writing by the taxpayer, shall be excluded from the computation of any limitation period prescribed by this Section, and the Tax Collector shall be entitled to make a determination for taxes due without exclusion of any such time period, and any limitation period shall be extended for a length of time equivalent to the period of the agreed upon delay. 
(4)  Any assessment of additional tax due by the Tax Collector shall be deemed to have been made by mailing a copy of a notice of audit assessment by certified mail to the taxpayer's address of record with the Tax Collector or by personal delivery of a copy of a notice of audit assessment to the taxpayer or his authorized agent. 
(b)  Suspension of limitation period. The limitation period on assessment shall be suspended for any period: 
(1)  The assets of the taxpayer are in the control or custody of the court in any proceeding before any court of jurisdiction within the United States of America, and for one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days thereafter; or 
(2)  Which the taxpayer and the Tax Collector agree upon in writing. 
(c)  When no return filed; fraudulent return. In the case of a fraudulent return with the intent to evade tax, or the failure or refusal to file a return for any month, the Tax Collector may assess the amount of taxes payable for that month at any time, without any reliance by the taxpayer upon any time limitation provided elsewhere in this Chapter. 
(d)  Special provisions relating to owner-builders. The limitation for an owner-builder subject to the tax as prescribed in Section 21.1-417 shall be based upon the date such tax liability is reportable or was reported, as provided in Section 21.1-417. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-553. - Examination of taxpayer records; joint audits. 
(a)  Waiver of joint audit. A taxpayer that does not authorize a joint audit to be conducted for a tax jurisdiction is subject to audit by that tax jurisdiction at any time subject to the limitation provisions provided in Section 21.1-550. 
(b)  Tax jurisdiction acceptance of joint audit. If the Arizona Department of Revenue intends to conduct an audit of a taxpayer, the cities or towns for whom a joint audit is being conducted may accept the audit by the Arizona Department of Revenue or may elect to have a representative participate, provided that no more than two city or town representatives in total may participate. 
(1)  If a city or town does not accept the audit as a joint audit, the city or town may not conduct an audit of the taxpayer for forty-two months from the close of the last tax period covered by the audit unless an exception applies to that taxpayer pursuant to A.R.S. § 42-2059. 
(2)  If a joint audit is performed by a city or town, the Arizona Department of Revenue is not prohibited from conducting an audit that does not violate the provisions of A.R.S. § 42-2059. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-555. - Tax collector may examine books and other records; failure to provide records. 
(a)  The Tax Collector may require the taxpayer to provide and may examine any books, records, or other documents of any person who, in the opinion of the Tax Collector, might be liable for any tax under this Chapter, for any periods available to him under Section 21.1-550. 
(b)  In order to perform any examination authorized by this Chapter, the Tax Collector may issue an Administrative Request for the attendance of witnesses or for the production of documents, as provided by Regulation. 
(c)  If within sixty (60) days of receiving a written request for information in the possession of the taxpayer, the taxpayer fails or refuses to furnish the requested information, the Tax Collector may, in addition to penalties prescribed under Section 21.1-540, impose an additional penalty of twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of any tax deficiency which is attributable to the information which the taxpayer failed to provide, unless the taxpayer shows that the failure was due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect. 
(d)  The Tax Collector may use any generally accepted auditing procedures, including sampling techniques, to determine the correct tax liability of any taxpayer. The Tax Collector shall ensure that the procedures used are in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. 
(e)  The fact that the taxpayer has not maintained or provided such books and records which the Tax Collector considers necessary to determine the tax liability of any person does not preclude the Tax Collector from making any assessment. In such cases, the Tax Collector is authorized to use estimates, projections, or samplings, to determine the correct tax. The provisions of Section 21.1-545(b), concerning estimates, shall apply. 
(f)  The Tax Collector shall give the taxpayer written notice of his determination of a deficiency by certified mail to the taxpayer's address of record with the tax collector, and the tax deficiency, plus interest and penalties, is final forty-five (45) days from the date of receipt of the notice by the taxpayer, unless an appeal is taken pursuant to the provisions of Sections 21.1-570 through 21.1-575. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-556. - No additional audits or proposed assessments; exceptions. 
(a)  Once the Tax Collector completes an examination authorized by Section 21.1-555 and a written notice of the determination of a deficiency has been issued to the taxpayer pursuant to Section 21.1-545(a) or 21.1-555(f), the taxpayer's liability for the time period subjected to the examination is fixed and determined, and no additional audit or examination may be conducted by the Tax Collector with respect to such time period except under the following circumstances. 
(1)  If a taxpayer files a claim for refund under Section 21.1-560, the Tax Collector may conduct an examination limited to the issues presented in the refund claim. 
(2)  If the taxpayer failed to disclose material information during the initial examination, falsified books or records, or otherwise engaged in conduct which prevented the Tax Collector from conducting an accurate examination. The applicability of this subsection, and the Tax Collector's right to proceed there under, may be raised and contested by the taxpayer in a subsequent administrative review brought pursuant to Section 21.1-570. 
(b)  An audit or examination conducted by any other taxing jurisdiction will not preclude the Tax Collector from conducting an audit or examination for the same time period. 
(c)  If the Tax Collector issues a notice of deficiency pursuant to either Section 21.1-545(a) or Section 21.1-555(f), the Tax Collector may not increase the proposed deficiency except in one or more of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The taxpayer made a material misrepresentation of fact. 
(2)  The taxpayer failed to disclose a material fact. 
(3)  The Tax Collector submitted a written request for information prior to issuance of the assessment, and the taxpayer, despite possessing or having access to such information, failed to provide it within sixty (60) days as required by Section 21.1-555(c). 
(4)  After issuing the notice of determination of deficiency but before the deficiency became final, the Arizona Tax Court, Court of Appeals or Supreme Court issued a decision, the applicability of which causes the deficiency initially proposed to increase. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-560. - Erroneous payment of tax; credits and refunds; limitations. 
(a)  The Tax Collector may authorize either credits or payments of refunds for any taxes, penalties or interest paid in excess of the amount actually due. Any credit authorized by the Tax Collector shall be canceled from the accounts of the City if no timely filed request for credit or refund is made by the claimant claiming same within one (1) year following the date of determination and notice by the Tax Collector of the excess payment. For purposes of this section, "claimant" means a taxpayer that has paid a tax imposed under this article and has submitted a credit or refund claim under this Section. Except where the taxpayer has granted a customer a power of attorney to pursue a credit or refund claim on the taxpayer's behalf, claimant does not include any customer of such taxpayer, whether or not the claimant collected the tax from customers by separately stated itemization. 
(b)  No credit shall be allowed or refund paid except under one of the following conditions: 
(1)  As provided in Section 21.1-565. 
(2)  Upon examination of filed returns for any period not excluded by Section 21.1-550, and not to exceed the tax, penalty, or interest actually paid with such returns. 
(3)  Upon audit or other examination of the books and records of the taxpayer, but only for periods as provided in Section 21.1-550. In the case of an examination performed at the taxpayer's request, credit shall be allowed or refund paid only for any excess taxes, penalties, or interest actually paid within the limitation period provided in Section 21.1-550, such period to be calculated from the date of receipt of the taxpayer's request by the Tax Collector. Requests by taxpayers for audits to authorize credits shall be honored unless, in the opinion of the Tax Collector, the taxpayer has made excessive requests for audits. 
(4)  Upon the claimant's submission of a written claim for credit or refund of any taxes, penalties, or interest paid to the City by the claimant. 
(c)  A credit or refund claim submitted by a claimant pursuant to subsection (b)(4) of this Section must: 
(1)  Identify the name, address and city tax identification number of the taxpayer; and 
(2)  Identify the dollar amount of the credit or refund requested; and 
(3)  Identify the specific tax period involved; and 
(4)  Identify the specific grounds upon which the claim is based. 
(d)  When a written claim for credit or refund is submitted pursuant to subsection (b)(4) of this section, no credit shall be allowed or refund paid except for those taxes, penalties, or interest paid in excess of the amount due within the limitation period provided in Section 21.1-550. The credit or refund limitation period shall be calculated from the date the Tax Collector receives the claimant's written claim meeting the requirements of subsection (c) of this Section. 
(e)  The following additional requirements apply to the Tax Collector and the claimant for claims for credit or refund submitted pursuant to subsection (b)(4) of this Section: 
(1)  The Tax Collector shall notify the claimant that the claim for credit or refund has been received and shall indicate whether the claim meets the requirements of subsection (c) of this Section. If the claim does not meet the requirements of subsection (c) of this Section, the Tax Collector shall identify the deficiency in writing. Any claim that does not meet the requirements of subsection (c) of this Section shall not secure the limitation period pursuant to Section 21.1-550. 
(2)  The Tax Collector may request, in writing, additional information or documentation from the claimant to support the requested credit or refund. Such information or documentation must be reasonably related to the claim and required to be maintained under this Chapter in the normal course of business. 
(A)  The claimant may request in writing one or more extensions to supply the requested information or documentation. The Tax Collector may reject an extension request only by denying the claim in whole or in part, subject to appeal by the claimant pursuant to Section 21.1-570. 
(B)  A claimant aggrieved by a request for information or documentation under this subsection may file an appeal in the manner provided for in Section 21.1-570 regarding the scope of the request for information or documentation. Such petition must be filed no later than the last day by which requested information or documentation must be provided to the Tax Collector, including any extensions. The decision of the Hearing Officer regarding a request for information or documentation may not be appealed by either party until the claim has been approved or denied, in whole or in part, under subsection (h) of this Section or through subsubsections (e)(3) or (e)(4) of this Section. A claimant shall not be barred from raising the issue of the reasonableness of the Tax Collector's information or documentation request in an appeal filed under subsection (h) of this Section or through subsubsections (e)(3) or (e)(4) of this Section through a lack of filing a petition under this subsubsection. 
(3)  If the Tax Collector fails to request additional information or documentation pursuant to this Section and fails to issue a determination on any claim for credit or refund within six (6) months after the claim is filed, the claimant may consider the claim denied and may file an appeal pursuant to Section 21.1-570. 
(4)  If the Tax Collector fails to issue a determination within six (6) months of receiving all requested additional information or documentation, the claimant may consider the claim for credit or refund denied and may file an appeal pursuant to Section 21.1-570. 
(5)  The burden of proof to show that a notice, request, determination or other communication was received by the Claimant in this Section is on the Tax Collector, and will be satisfied by receipt of notice. The burden of proof to show that a claim or additional information or documentation was received by the Tax Collector is on the claimant and will be satisfied by receipt of notice. 
(f)  Interest shall be allowed on the overpayment of tax for any credit or refund authorized pursuant to subsections (b)(3) or (b)(4) of this Section. Such interest shall be allowed on the overpayment of tax at the rate and in the manner set forth in Section 21.1-540(a), except that interest shall be allowed prior to October 1, 2005 at the rate of interest earnings on the City of Flagstaff Treasurer's pool for the period of time the cash was held through September 30, 2005. Interest shall be allowed as follows: 
(1)  For credits or refunds authorized pursuant to subsection (b)(3) of this Section, interest shall be calculated from the date the Tax Collector receives the claimant's written claim following the date of notice to the claimant authorizing the credit or refund. 
(2)  For credits or refunds authorized pursuant to subsection (b)(4) of this Section, interest shall be calculated from the date the Tax Collector receives the claimant's written claim meeting the requirements of subsection (c) of this Section. 
(g)  The Tax Collector shall give the claimant a written notice of determination for a claim made under subsection (b) of this Section. If the determination is a denial of a claim, in whole or in part, the determination must state that the claim for credit or refund has been denied in whole or in part, with the reason for denial, and must include the claimant's rights of appeal pursuant to Section 21.1-570. 
(h)  A determination by the Tax Collector under this section, whether an approval of a claim or a denial of a claim, in whole or in part, shall become final forty-five (45) days from the date of receipt of the notice by the claimant, unless an appeal is made pursuant to Section 21.1-570. If the claimant is the prevailing party in an appeal of a determination under this Section, Section 21.1-578 shall apply, except that reasonable fees and other costs may be awarded either by the Hearing Officer or court and are not subject to the monetary limitations of subsection 21.1-578(e) if the Tax Collector's position was not substantially justified or was brought for the purpose of harassing the claimant, frustrating the credit or refund process or delaying the credit or refund. For the purposes of this Section, "reasonable fees and other costs" means fees and other costs that are based on prevailing market rates for the kind and quality of the furnished services, not to exceed the amounts actually paid for expert witnesses, the cost of any study, analysis, report, test, project or computer program that is found to be necessary to prepare the claimant's case and necessary fees for attorneys or other representatives. 
(i)  The amendments to this Section as enacted in Ordinance No. 2607, New Series, shall be effective as follows: 
(1)  For any claim for refund or credit received by the Tax Collector before October 1, 2005: 
(A)  The provisions of this Section as it existed prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 2607, New Series, shall apply, except that interest shall be allowed from and after October 1, 2005 as provided in subsection (f) of this Section as enacted by Ordinance No. 2607, New Series. 
(B)  Except as noted in subsection (1)(a) above, the amendments to this Section as enacted in Ordinance No. 2607, New Series, shall not be cited or considered in the construction or the interpretation of the City tax refund or credit provisions, interest provisions, or appeal provisions in effect prior to October 1, 2005. 
(2)  The provisions of this Section enacted by Ordinance No. 2607, New Series, shall apply to all claims for refund or credit, for any periods as determined by subsections (d) or (e) of this Section, received by the Tax Collector from and after October 1, 2005, except for claims that, in whole or in part, had been received by the Collector prior to October 1, 2005. 
(j)  Any refund paid under the provisions of this Section shall be paid from the Privilege Tax revenue accounts. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-565. - Payment of tax by the incorrect taxpayer or to the incorrect arizona city or town. 
(a)  When it is determined that taxes have been reported and paid to the City by the wrong taxpayer, any taxes erroneously paid shall be transferred by the City to the privilege tax account of the person who actually owes and should have paid such taxes, provided that the City receives an assignment and waiver signed by both the person who actually paid the tax and the person who should have paid the tax. 
(b)  An assignment and waiver provided under this Section must: 
(1)  Identify the name and City privilege license number of the person who erroneously paid the tax and the person who should have paid the tax. 
(2)  Provide that the person who erroneously paid the tax waives any right such person may have to a refund of the taxes erroneously paid. 
(3)  Authorize the City Treasurer to transfer the erroneously paid tax to the privilege tax account of the person who should have paid the tax. 
(c)  When it is determined that taxes have been reported and paid to the wrong Arizona city or town, such taxes shall be remitted to the correct city or town, provided that the city or town to whom the taxes were erroneously paid receives an assignment and waiver signed by both the person who actually paid the tax and the person who should have paid the tax. Where the person who actually paid the tax and the person who should have paid the tax are one and the same, no assignment and waiver need be provided. The City shall neither pay nor charge any interest or penalty on any overpayment or underpayment except such interest and penalty actually paid by the taxpayer relating to such tax. 
(d)  This Section in no way limits or restricts the applicability of any remedies which may otherwise be available under A.R.S. § 42-6003. The limitations and procedures set forth in A.R.S. § 42-6003 shall apply to all payments under this Section. 
(e)  When reference is made in this Section to this City or an Arizona city or town, and payments made to or requested from this City or an Arizona city or town, the provisions shall be applicable to the Arizona Department of Revenue when it is acting for or on behalf of this City or an Arizona city or town. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-567. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-570. - Administrative review; petition for hearing or for redetermination; finality of order. 
    For the purpose of this section, "Municipal Tax Hearing Office" means the administrative offices of the Municipal Tax Hearing Officer. 
(a)  Informal Conference. A taxpayer shall have the right to discuss any proposed assessment with the auditor prior to the issuance of any assessment, but any such informal conference is not required for the taxpayer to file a petition for administrative review. 
(b)  Administrative Review. 
(1)  Filing a Petition. Other than in the case of a jeopardy assessment, a taxpayer may contest the applicability or amount of tax, penalty, or interest imposed upon or paid by him pursuant to this Chapter by filing a petition for a hearing or for redetermination with the Tax Collector as set forth below: 
(A)  Within forty-five (45) days of receipt by the taxpayer of notice of a determination by the Tax Collector that a tax, penalty, or interest amount is due, or that a request for refund or credit has been denied; or 
(B)  By voluntary payment of any contested amount when accompanied by a timely filed return and a petition requesting a refund of the protested portion of said payment; or 
(C)  By petition accompanying a timely filed return contesting an amount reported but not paid; or 
(D)  By petition requesting review of denial of waiver of penalty as provided in subsection 21.1-540(g). 
(2)  Extension to file a petition. In all cases, the taxpayer may request an extension from the Tax Collector. Such request must be in writing, state the reasons for the requested delay, and must be filed with the Tax Collector within the period allowed above for originally filing a petition. The Tax Collector shall allow a forty-five (45) day extension to file a petition, when such written request has been properly and timely made by the taxpayer. The Tax Collector may grant an additional extension and may determine the corresponding time of any such extension at his sole discretion. 
(3)  Requirements for petition. 
(A)  The petition shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons why any correction, abatement, or refund should be granted, and the amount of reduction or refund requested. The petition may be amended at any time prior to the time the taxpayer rests his case at the hearing or such time as the Hearing Officer allows for submitting of amendments in cases of redeterminations without hearings. The Hearing Officer may require that amendments be in writing, and in that case, he shall provide a reasonable period of time to file the amendment. The Hearing Officer shall provide a reasonable period of time for the Tax Collector to review and respond to the petition and to any written amendments. 
(B)  The taxpayer, as part of the petition, may request a hearing which shall be granted by the Hearing Officer. If no request for hearing is made the petition shall be considered to be submitted for decision by the Hearing Officer on the matters contained in the petition and in any reply made by the Tax Collector. 
(C)  The provisions of this section are exclusive, and no petition seeking any correction, abatement, or refund shall be considered unless the petition is timely and properly filed under the Section. 
(4)  Transmittal to Hearing Officer. The city/town shall designate a Hearing Officer, who may be other than an employee of the City. The Tax Collector, if designated to receive petitions, shall forward any petition to the Municipal Tax Hearing Officer within twenty (20) days after receipt, accompanied by documentation as to timeliness. In cases where the Hearing Officer determines that the petition is not timely or not in proper form, he shall notify both the taxpayer and the Tax Collector; and in cases of petitions not in proper form only, the Hearing Officer shall provide the taxpayer with an extension up to forty-five (45) days to correct the petition. 
(5)  Hearings shall be conducted by a Hearing Officer and shall be continuous until the Hearing Officer closes the record. The taxpayer may be heard in person or by his authorized representative at such hearing. Hearings shall be conducted informally as to the order of proceeding and presentation of evidence. The Hearing Officer shall admit evidence over hearsay objections where the offered evidence has substantial probative value and reliability. Further, copies of records and documents prepared in the ordinary course of business may be admitted, without objection as to foundation, but subject to argument as to weight, admissibility, and authenticity. Summary accounting records may be admitted subject to satisfactory proof of the reliability of the summaries. In all cases, the decision of the Hearing Officer shall be made solely upon substantial and reliable evidence. All expenses incurred in the hearing shall be paid by the party incurring the same. 
(6)  Redeterminations upon a "petition for redetermination" shall follow the same conditions, except that no oral hearing shall be held. 
(7)  Hearing Ruling. In either case, the Hearing Officer shall issue his ruling not later than forty-five (45) days after the close of the record by the Hearing Officer. 
(8)  Notice of refund or adjusted assessment. Within sixty (60) days of the issuance of the Hearing Officer's decision, the Tax Collector shall issue to the taxpayer either a notice of refund or an adjusted assessment recalculated to conform to the Hearing Officer's decision. 
(c)  Stipulations that future tax is also protested. A taxpayer may enter into a stipulation with the Tax Collector that future taxes of similar nature are also at issue in any protest or appeal. However, unless such stipulation is made, it is presumed that the protest or appeal deals solely and exclusively with the tax specifically protested and no other. When a taxpayer enters into such a stipulation with the Tax Collector that future taxes of similar nature will be included in any redetermination, hearing, or court case, it is the burden of that taxpayer to identify, segregate, and keep record of such income or protested taxable amount in his books and records in the same manner as the taxpayer is required to segregate exempt income. 
(d)  When an assessment is final. 
(1)  If a request for administrative review and petition for hearing or redetermination of an assessment made by the Tax Collector is not filed within the period required by subsection (b) above, such person shall be deemed to have waived and abandoned the right to question the amount determined to be due and any tax, interest, or penalty determined to be due shall be final as provided in subsections 21.1-545(a) and 21.1-555(f). 
(2)  The decision made by the Hearing Officer upon administrative review by hearing or redetermination shall become final thirty (30) days after the taxpayer receives the notice of refund or adjusted assessment required by subsection (b)(8) above, unless the taxpayer appeals the order or decision in the manner provided in Section 21.1-575. 
(e)  (Reserved). (For cities and towns in the state collection system this subsection will read: "Taxpayers shall be subject to the State taxpayer bill of rights (A.R.S. § 42-2051 et seq.)") 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-571. - Jeopardy assessments. 
(a)  If the Tax Collector believes that the collection of any assessment or deficiency of any amounts imposed by this Chapter will be jeopardized by delay, he shall deliver to the taxpayer a notice of such finding and demand immediate payment of the tax or deficiency declared to be in jeopardy, including interest, penalties, and additions. 
(b)  Jeopardy assessments are immediately due and payable, and the Tax Collector may immediately begin proceedings for collection. The taxpayer, however, may stay collection by filing, within ten (10) days after receipt of notice of jeopardy assessment, or within such additional time as the Tax Collector may allow, by bond or collateral in favor of the City in the amount Tax Collector declared to be in jeopardy in his notice. 
(c)  "Bond or Collateral", as required by this Section, 
(1)  Shall mean either: 
(A)  A bond issued in favor of the City by a surety company authorized to transact business in this State and approved by the Director of Insurance as to solvency and responsibility, or 
(B)  Collateral composed of securities or cash which are deposited with, and kept in the custody of, the Tax Collector. 
(2)  Shall be of such form that it may, at any time without notice, be applied to any tax, penalties, or interest due and payable for the purposes of this Chapter. Securities held as collateral by the Tax Collector must be of a nature that they may be sold at public or private sale without notice to the taxpayer. 
(d)  If bond or collateral is not filed within the period prescribed by subsection (b) above, the tax collector may treat the assessment as final for purposes of any collection proceedings. The taxpayer nevertheless shall be afforded the appeal rights provided in Sections 21.1-570 and 21.1-575. The filing of a petition by the taxpayer under Section 21.1-570, however, shall not stay the tax collector's rights to pursue any collection proceedings. 
(e)  If the taxpayer timely files sufficient bond or collateral, the jeopardy requirements are deemed satisfied, and the taxpayer may avail himself of the provisions of Section 21.1-570, including requests for additional time to file a petition. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-572. - Expedited review of jeopardy assessments. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days after the day on which the Tax Collector furnishes the written notice required by Section 21.1-571(a), the taxpayer, pursuant to Section 21.1-570, may request the Tax Collector to review the action taken. Within fifteen (15) days after the request for review, the Tax Collector shall determine whether both the jeopardy determination and the amount assessed are reasonable. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days after the Tax Collector notifies the taxpayer of the determination he reached pursuant to subsection (a) above, the taxpayer may bring a civil action in the appropriate court. If the taxpayer so requests, the City shall stipulate to an accelerated and expedited resolution of the civil action. If the court determines that either the jeopardy determination or the amount assessed is unreasonable, the court may order the Tax Collector to abate the assessment, to redetermine any part of the amount assessed or to take such other action as the court finds to be appropriate. A determination made by the court under this subsection is final except as provided in A.R.S. § 12-170. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-575. - Judicial review. 
(a)  A taxpayer may seek judicial review of all or any part of a Hearing Officer's decision by initiating an action against the City in the appropriate Court of this County. A taxpayer is not required to pay any tax, penalty, or interest upheld by the Hearing Officer before seeking such judicial review. 
(b)  The Tax Collector may seek judicial review of all or any part of a Hearing Officer's decision by initiating an action in the appropriate Court of this County. 
(c)  An action for judicial review can not be commenced by either the taxpayer or the Tax Collector more than thirty (30) days after receipt by the taxpayer of notice of any refund or assessment recalculated or reduced to conform to the Hearing Officer's decision, unless the time to commence such an action is extended in writing signed by both the taxpayer and the Tax Collector. Failure to bring the action within thirty (30) days or such other time as is agreed upon in writing shall constitute a waiver of any right to judicial review, except as provided in subsection (g) below. 
(d)  The court shall hear and determine the appeal as a trial de novo; however, the Tax Collector cannot raise in the court any grounds or basis for the assessment not asserted before the Hearing Officer. Nothing in this subsection, however, shall preclude the Tax Collector from responding to any arguments which are raised by the taxpayer in the appeal. 
(e)  The City has the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence in any court proceeding regarding any factual issue relevant to ascertaining the tax liability of a taxpayer. This subsection does not abrogate any requirement of this Chapter that requires a taxpayer to substantiate an item of gross income, exclusion, exemption, deduction, or credit. This subsection applies to a factual issue if a preponderance of the evidence demonstrates that: 
(1)  The taxpayer asserts a reasonable dispute regarding the issue. 
(2)  The taxpayer has fully cooperated with the tax collector regarding the issue, including providing within a reasonable period of time, access to and inspection of all witnesses, information and documents within the taxpayer's control, as reasonably requested by the tax collector. 
(3)  The taxpayer has kept and maintained records as required by the City. 
(f)  The issuance of an adjusted or corrected assessment or notice of refund due to the taxpayer, where made by the Tax Collector pursuant to the decision of the Hearing Officer, shall not be deemed an acquiescence by the City or the Tax Collector in said decision, nor shall it constitute a bar or estoppel to the institution of an action or counterclaim by the City to recover any amounts claimed to be due to it by virtue of the original assessment. 
(g)  After the initiation of any action in the appropriate court by either party, the opposite party may file such counterclaim as would be allowed pursuant to the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-577. - Refunds of taxes paid under protest. 
    In the event the Hearing Officer's decision or a final judgment by the Court is rendered in favor of the taxpayer to recover protested taxes, it shall be the duty of the Tax Collector, upon receipt of such decision or of a certified copy of such final judgment, to authorize a warrant in favor of the taxpayer in an amount equal to the amount of the tax found by such decision or by the final judgment to have been paid under protest, and such warrant shall include the amount of interest or other cost that may have been recovered against the City by the final judgment in such action in the courts, to be paid from the Privilege Tax revenue accounts. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-578. - Reimbursement of fees and other costs; definitions. 
(a)  A taxpayer who is a prevailing party may be reimbursed for reasonable fees and other costs related to any administrative proceeding brought by the taxpayer pursuant to Section 21.1-570(b). For purposes of this Section, a taxpayer is considered to be the prevailing party only if both of the following are true: 
(1)  The Tax Collector's position was not substantially justified. 
(2)  The taxpayer prevails as to the most significant issue or set of issues. 
(b)  Reimbursement under this Section may be denied if any of the following circumstances apply: 
(1)  During the course of the proceeding the taxpayer unduly and unreasonably protracted the final resolution of the matter. 
(2)  The reason that the taxpayer prevailed is due to an intervening change in the applicable law. 
(c)  The taxpayer shall present an itemization of the reasonable fees and other costs to the Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer within thirty (30) days after receipt by the taxpayer of a notice of refund or recalculated assessment issued by the Tax Collector pursuant to Section 21.1-570(b)(8). The Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer shall determine the validity of the fees and other costs within thirty (30) days after receiving the itemization. The Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer's decision is considered a final decision. Either the taxpayer or the Tax Collector may seek judicial review of the Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer's decision. An action for judicial review, however, shall not be commenced more than thirty (30) days after receipt of the resolution officer's decision. 
(d)  In the event judicial review is not sought pursuant to subsection (c) above, the City shall pay the fees and other costs awarded as provided in this Section within thirty days after demand by a person who has received an award pursuant to this Section. 
(e)  Reimbursement to a taxpayer under this Section shall not exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or actual monies spent, whichever is less. The reimbursable attorney or representative fees shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour or actual monies spent, whichever is less, unless the Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer determines that an increase in the cost of living or a special factor such as the limited availability of qualified attorneys or representatives for the proceeding involved justifies a higher fee. 
(f)  For purposes of this Section "reasonable fees and other costs" means fees and other costs that are based on prevailing market rates for the kind and quality of the furnished services, but not exceeding the amounts actually spent for expert witnesses, the cost of any study, analysis, report, test or project that is found to be necessary to prepare the party's case and necessary fees for attorneys or other representatives. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-580. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully: 
(1)  fail or refuse to make any return required by this Chapter. 
(2)  fail to remit as and when due the full amount of any tax or additional tax or penalty and interest thereon. 
(3)  make or cause to be made a false or fraudulent return. 
(4)  make or cause to be made a false or fraudulent statement in a return, in written support of a return, or to demonstrate or support entitlement to a deduction, exclusion, or credit or to entitle the person to an allocation or apportionment or receipts subject to tax. 
(5)  fail or refuse to permit any lawful examination of any book, account, record, or other memorandum by the Tax Collector. 
(6)  fail or refuse to remit any tax collected by such person from his customer to the Tax Collector before the delinquency date next following such collection. 
(7)  advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that any tax imposed by this Chapter, as provided in this Chapter, is not considered as an element in the price to the consumer. 
(8)  fail or refuse to obtain a Privilege License or to aid or abet another in any attempt to intentionally refuse to obtain such a license or evade the license fee. 
(9)  reproduce, forge, falsify, fraudulently obtain or secure, or aid or abet another in any attempt to reproduce, forge, falsify, or fraudulently obtain or secure, an exemption from taxes imposed by this Chapter. 
(b)  The violation of any provision of subsection (a) above shall constitute a Class One Misdemeanor. 
(c)  In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who shall knowingly swear to or verify any false or fraudulent statement, with the intent aforesaid, shall be guilty of the offense of perjury and on conviction thereof shall be punished in the manner provided by law. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2843, § 6, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 2925, § 4, 12-18-14) 
Sec. 21.1-590. - Civil actions. 
(a)  Liens. 
(1)  Any tax, penalty, or interest imposed under this Chapter which has become final, as provided in this Chapter, shall become a lien when the City perfects a notice and claim of lien setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount of the tax, penalty, and interest, the period or periods for which the same is due, and the date of accrual thereof, the amount of the recording costs by the county recorder in any county in which the taxpayer owns real property and the documentation and lien processing fees imposed by the City Council and further, stating that the City claims a lien therefor. 
(2)  The notice of claim of lien shall be signed by the City Attorney under his official seal or the official seal of the City, and, with respect to real property, shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder of any county in which the taxpayer owns real property, and, with respect to personal property shall be filed in the office of the Secretary of State. After the notice and claim of lien is recorded or filed, the taxes, penalties, interest and recording costs and lien processing fees referred to above in the amounts specified therein shall be a lien on all real property of the taxpayer located in such county where recorded, and all tangible personal property of the taxpayer within the State, superior to all other liens and assessments recorded or filed subsequent to the recording or filing of the notice and claim of lien. 
(3)  Every tax and any increases, interest, penalties, and recording costs and lien processing fees referred to above, shall become from the time the same is due and payable a personal debt from the person liable to the City, but shall be payable to and recoverable by the Tax Collector and which may be collected in the manner set forth in subsection (b) below. 
(4)  Any lien perfected pursuant to this Section shall, upon payment of the taxes, penalties, interest, recording costs and lien processing fees referred to above and lien release fees imposed by the county recorder in any county in which the lien was recorded, thereby, be released by the Tax Collector in the same manner as mortgages and judgments are released. The Tax Collector may, at his sole discretion, release a lien in part, that is, against only specified property, for partial payment of moneys due the City. 
(b)  Actions to recover tax. An action may be brought by the City Attorney or other legal advisor to the City designated by the City Council, at the request of the Tax Collector, in the name of the City, to recover the amount of any taxes, penalties, interest, recording costs, lien processing fees and lien release fees due under this Chapter; provided that: 
(1)  No action or proceeding may be taken or commenced to collect any taxes levied by this Chapter until the amount thereof has been established by assessment, correction, or reassessment; and 
(2)  Such collection effort is made or the proceedings begun: 
(A)  Within six (6) years after the assessment of the tax; or 
(B)  Prior to the expiration of any period of collection agreed upon in writing by the Tax Collector and the taxpayer before the expiration of such six (6) year period, or any extensions thereof; or 
(C)  At any time for the collection of tax arising by reason of a tax lien perfected, recorded, or possessed by the City under this Section. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-595. - Collection of taxes when there is succession in and/or cessation of business. 
(a)  In addition to any remedy provided elsewhere in this City Code that may apply, the Tax Collector may apply the provisions of subsections (b) through (d) below concerning the collection of taxes when there is succession in and/or cessation of business. 
(b)  The taxes imposed by this Chapter are a lien on the property of any person subject to this Chapter who sells his business or stock of goods, or quits his business, if the person fails to make a final return and payment of the tax within fifteen (15) days after selling or quitting his business. 
(c)  Any person who purchases, or who acquires by foreclosure, by sale under trust deed or warranty deed in lieu of foreclosure, or by any other method, improved real property or a portion of improved real property for which the Privilege Tax imposed by this Chapter has not been paid shall be responsible for payment of such tax as a speculative builder or owner builder, as provided in Sections 21.1-416 and 21.1-417. 
(1)  Any person who is a creditor or an affiliate of creditor, who acquires improved real property directly or indirectly from the creditor's debtor by any means set forth in this subsection, shall pay the tax based on the amount received by the creditor or its affiliate in a subsequent sale of such improved real property to a party unrelated to the creditor, regardless of when such subsequent sale takes place. Such tax shall be due in the month by the creditor or its affiliate occurs. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the real property meets the definition of partially improved residential real property in Section 21.1-416(A)(4) and all of the requirements of Section 21.1-416(B)(4) are met by the parties to the subsequent sale transaction, then the tax shall not apply to the subsequent sale. 
(2)  In the event a creditor or its affiliate uses the acquired improved real property for any business purpose, other than operating the property in the manner in which it was operated, or was intended to be operated, before the acquisition or in any other manner unrelated to selling the property, the tax shall be due. The gross income upon which the tax shall be determined pursuant to Sections 21.1-416 and 21.1-417 shall be the fair market value of the improved real property as of the date of acquisition. The tax shall be due in the month following the month in which such first business use occurs. When applicable, the credit bid shall be deemed to be the fair market value of the property as of the date of acquisition. 
(3)  Once the subsequent sale by the creditor or its affiliate has occurred and the creditor or its affiliate has paid the tax due from it pursuant to this subsection, neither the creditor nor its affiliate, nor any future owner, shall be liable for any outstanding tax, penalties or interest that may continue to be due from the debtor based on the transfer from the debtor to the creditor or its affiliate. 
(4)  If the tax liability imposed by either Section 21.1-416 or Section 21.1-417 on the transfer of the improved real property to the creditor or its affiliate, or any part thereof, is paid to the tax collector by the debtor subsequent to payment of the tax by the creditor or its affiliate, the amount so paid may constitute a credit, as equitably determined by the tax collector in good faith, against the tax imposed on the creditor or its affiliate by either paragraph (1) or paragraph (2) of this subsection. 
(5)  Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, if a creditor or its affiliate is subject to tax as described in paragraph (1) or paragraph (2) of this subsection and such creditor or affiliate has not previously been required to be licensed, such creditor or affiliate shall become licensed no later than the date on which the tax is due. 
(d)  A person's successors or assignees shall withhold from the purchase money an amount sufficient to cover the taxes required to be paid, and interest or penalties due and payable, until the former owner produces a receipt from the Tax Collector showing that all City tax has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due as then shown by the records of the Tax Collector. The Tax Collector shall respond to a request from the seller for a certificate within fifteen (15) days by either providing the certificate or a written notice stating why the certificate cannot be issued. 
(1)  If a subsequent audit shows a deficiency arising before the sale of the business, the deficiency is an obligation of the seller and does not constitute a liability against a buyer who has received a certificate from the Tax Collector. 
(2)  If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods fails to obtain a certificate as provided by this Section, he is personally liable for payment of the amount of taxes required to be paid by the former owner on account of the business so purchased, with interest and penalties accrued by the former owner or assignees. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-596. - Agreement for installment payments of tax. 
(a)  The City may enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to allow the taxpayer to satisfy a liability for any tax imposed by this Chapter by means of installment payments. The Tax Collector may require a taxpayer who requests an installment payment agreement to complete a financial report in such form and manner as the Tax Collector may prescribe. 
(b)  The Tax Collector, without notice, may alter, modify or terminate an installment payment agreement if the taxpayer: 
(1)  Fails to pay an installment at the time the installment payment is due under the agreement. 
(2)  Fails to pay any other tax liability at the time the liability is due. 
(3)  Fails to file any tax report or return at the time the report or return is due. 
(4)  Fails to furnish any information requested by the Tax Collector within thirty (30) days after receiving a written request for such information. 
(5)  Fails to notify the Tax Collector of a material improvement in the taxpayer's financial condition above the income previously reported in the most recent income statement within thirty (30) days after the material improvement. 
(6)  Provides inaccurate, false or incomplete information to the Tax Collector. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any installment payment agreement, the Tax Collector may offset any tax refunds against the liabilities provided for in the installment payment agreement, may file and perfect any tax liens and, in the event the taxpayer breaches any term or provision of the installment payment agreement, may engage in collection activities. 
(d)  The Tax Collector, without notice, may terminate an installment payment agreement if the Tax Collector believes that the collection of tax to which the payment agreement pertains is in jeopardy. 
(e)  If the Tax Collector determines that the financial condition of a taxpayer has improved, the Tax Collector may alter, modify or terminate the agreement by providing notice to the taxpayer at least thirty days before the effective date of the action. The notice shall include the reasons why the Tax Collector believes the alteration, modification or termination is appropriate. 
(f)  An installment payment agreement shall remain in effect for the term of the agreement except as otherwise provided in this Section. 
(g)  A taxpayer who is aggrieved by a decision of the Tax Collector to refuse to enter into an installment payment agreement or to alter, modify or terminate an agreement entered into pursuant to this Section may petition the Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer to review that determination. The Taxpayer Problem Resolution Officer may stay such alteration, modification or termination pending its review and may modify or nullify the determination. 
(h)  The City and the taxpayer may modify any installment payment agreement at any time by entering into a new or modified agreement. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-597. - Private taxpayer rulings; request; revocation or modification; definition. 
(a)  The Tax Collector shall issue private taxpayer rulings to taxpayers and potential taxpayers on request. Each request shall be in writing and shall: 
(1)  State the name, address and, if applicable, taxpayer identifying number of the taxpayer or potential taxpayer who requests the ruling. 
(2)  Describe all facts that are relevant to the requested ruling. 
(3)  State whether, to the best knowledge of the taxpayer or potential taxpayer, the issue or related issues are being considered by the Tax Collector or any other taxing jurisdiction in connection with an active audit, protest or appeal that involves the taxpayer or potential taxpayer and whether the same request has been or is being submitted to another taxing jurisdiction for a ruling. 
(4)  Be signed by the taxpayer or potential taxpayer who makes the request or by an authorized representative of the taxpayer or potential taxpayer. 
(b)  A private taxpayer ruling may be revoked or modified by either: 
(1)  A change or clarification in the law that was applicable at the time the ruling was issued, including changes or clarifications caused by regulations and court decisions. 
(2)  Actual written notice by the Tax Collector to the last known address of the taxpayer or potential taxpayer of the revocation or modification of the private taxpayer ruling. 
(c)  With respect to the taxpayer or prospective taxpayer to whom a private taxpayer ruling is issued, the revocation or modification of a private taxpayer ruling shall not be applied retroactively to tax periods or tax years before the effective date of the revocation or modification and the Tax Collector shall not assess any penalty or tax attributable to erroneous advice that is furnished to the taxpayer or potential taxpayer in the private taxpayer ruling if: 
(1)  The taxpayer reasonably relied on the private taxpayer ruling. 
(2)  The penalty or tax did not result either from a failure by the taxpayer to provide adequate or accurate information or from a change in the information. 
(d)  A private taxpayer ruling may not be relied upon, cited nor introduced into evidence in any proceeding by any taxpayer other than the taxpayer who received the ruling. 
(e)  A taxpayer may appeal the propriety of a retroactive application of a revoked or modified private taxpayer ruling by filing a written petition with the Tax Collector pursuant to Section 21.1-570 within forty-five (45) days after receiving written notice of the intent to retroactively apply a revoked or modified private taxpayer ruling. 
(f)  A private taxpayer ruling constitutes the Tax Collector's interpretation of the Sections of this Chapter only as they apply to the taxpayer making, and the particular facts contained in, the request. 
(g)  A private taxpayer ruling which addresses a taxpayer's ongoing business activities will apply only to transactions that occur or tax liabilities that accrue from and after the date of the taxpayer's ruling request. 
(h)  The Tax Collector shall attempt to issue private taxpayer rulings within forty-five (45) days after receiving the written request and on receiving the facts that are relevant to the ruling. If the ruling is expected to be delayed beyond the forty-five (45) days, the Tax Collector shall notify the requestor of the delay and the proposed date of issuance. 
(i)  Within thirty (30) days after being issued, the Tax Collector shall maintain the private taxpayer ruling as a public record and make it available at a reasonable cost for public inspection and copying. The text of private taxpayer rulings are open to public inspection subject to the confidentiality requirements prescribed by Section 21.1-510. 
(j)  In this Section, "private taxpayer ruling" means a written determination by the Tax Collector issued pursuant to this Section that interprets and applies one or more Sections contained in this Chapter and any applicable regulations. 
(k)  A private taxpayer ruling issued by the Arizona Department of Revenue pursuant to A.R.S. § 42-2101 may be relied upon by the taxpayer to whom the ruling was issued and must be recognized and followed by any City in which such taxpayer has obtained a privilege license if the City has not issued a ruling addressing the facts described in the taxpayer's ruling request and the statute at issue in the taxpayer's ruling request is, in essence, worded and written the same as the applicable Section hereunder. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
ARTICLE VI. - USE TAX 

Sec. 21.1-600. - Use tax: Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Article only, the following definitions shall apply, in addition to the definitions provided in Article I: 
    "Acquire (for Storage or Use)" means purchase, rent, lease, or license for storage or use. 
    "Retailer" also means any person selling, renting, licensing for use, or leasing tangible personal property under circumstances which would render such transactions subject to the taxes imposed in Article IV, if such transactions had occurred within this City. 
    "Storage (within the City)" means the keeping or retaining of tangible personal property at a place within the City for any purpose, except for those items acquired specifically and solely for the purpose of sale, rental, lease, or license for use in the regular course of business or for the purpose of subsequent use solely outside the City. 
    "Use (of Tangible Personal Property)" means consumption or exercise of any other right or power over tangible personal property incident to the ownership thereof except the holding for the sale, rental, lease, or license for use of such property in the regular course of business. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-601. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-602. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-610. - Use tax: Imposition of tax; presumption. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed, subject to all other provisions of this Chapter, an excise tax on the storage or use in the City of tangible personal property, for the purpose of raising revenue to be used in defraying the necessary expenses of the City, such taxes to be collected by the Tax Collector. 
(b)  The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to two and nine-tenths percent (2.9%) of the: 
(1)  Cost of tangible personal property, except jet fuel, acquired from a retailer, upon every person storing or using such property in this City. 
(2)  Gross income from the business activity upon every person meeting the requirements of subsection 21.1-620(b) or (c) who is engaged or continuing in the business activity of sales, rentals, leases, or licenses of tangible personal property to persons within the City for storage or use within the City, to the extent that tax has been collected upon such transaction. 
(3)  Cost of the tangible personal property provided under the conditions of a warranty, maintenance, or service contract. 
(4)  Cost of complimentary items provided to patrons without itemized charge by a restaurant, hotel, or other business. 
(5)  Cost of food consumed by the owner or by employees or agents of the owner of a restaurant or bar subject to the provisions of Section 21.1-455 of this Chapter. 
(c)  It shall be presumed that all tangible personal property acquired by any person who at the time of such acquisition resides in the City is acquired for storage or use in this City, until the contrary is established by the taxpayer. 
(d)  Exclusions. For the purposes of this Article, the acquisition of the following shall not be deemed to be the purchase, rental, lease, or license of tangible personal property for storage or use within the City: 
(1)  Stocks, bonds, options, or other similar materials. 
(2)  Lottery tickets or shares sold pursuant to Article I, Chapter 5, Title 5, Arizona Revised Statutes. 
(3)  Platinum, bullion, or monetized bullion, except minted or manufactured coins transferred or acquired primarily for their numismatic value as prescribed by Regulation. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, when the amount subject to the tax for any single item of tangible personal property exceeds Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000), the two and two-tenths percent (2.2%) tax rate shall apply to the first $5,000. Above $5,000, the measure of tax shall be at a rate of two and two-tenths percent (2.2%). 
(f)  Additional imposition. The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to $.028 per gallon of jet fuel upon every person storing or using such property in this City. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2807, § 1, 6-12-12; Ord. No. 2809, § 2, 6-26-12) 
Sec. 21.1-620. - Use tax: Liability for tax. 
    The following persons shall be deemed liable for the tax imposed by this Article; and such liability shall not be extinguished until the tax has been paid to this City, except that a receipt from a retailer separately charging the tax imposed by this Chapter is sufficient to relieve the person acquiring such property from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers: 
(a)  Any person who acquires tangible personal property from a retailer, whether or not such retailer is located in this City, when such person stores or uses said property within the City. 
(b)  Any retailer not located within the City, selling, renting, leasing, or licensing tangible personal property for storage or use of such property within the City, may obtain a License from the Tax Collector and collect the Use Tax on such transactions. Such retailer shall be liable for the Use Tax to the extent such Use Tax is collected from his customers. 
(c)  Every agent within the City of any retailer not maintaining an office or place of business in this City, when such person sells, rents, leases, or licenses tangible personal property for storage or use in this City shall, at the time of such transaction, collect and be liable for the tax imposed by this Article upon the storage or use of the property so transferred, unless such retailer or agent is liable for an equivalent excise tax upon the transaction. 
(d)  Any person who acquires tangible personal property from a retailer located in the City and such person claims to be exempt from the City Privilege or Use tax at the time of the transaction, and upon which no City Privilege Tax was charged or paid, when such claim is not sustainable. 
(e)  Every person storing or using tangible personal property under the conditions of a warranty, maintenance, or service contract. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-630. - Use tax: Recordkeeping requirements. 
    All deductions, exclusions, exemptions, and credits provided in this Article are conditional upon adequate proof of documentation as required by Article III or elsewhere in this Chapter. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-640. - Use tax: Credit for equivalent excise taxes paid another jurisdiction. 
    In the event that an equivalent excise tax has been levied and paid upon tangible personal property which is acquired to be stored or used within this City, full credit for any and all such taxes so paid shall be allowed by the Tax Collector but only to the extent Use Tax is imposed upon that transaction by this Article. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-650. - Use tax: Exclusion when acquisition subject to use tax is taxed or taxable elsewhere in this chapter; limitation. 
    The tax levied by this Article does not apply to the storage or use in this City of tangible personal property acquired in this City, the gross income from the sale, rental, lease, or license of which were included in the measure of the tax imposed by Article IV of this Chapter; provided, however, that any person who has acquired tangible personal property from a vendor in this City without paying the City Privilege Tax because of a representation to the vendor that the property was not subject to such tax, when such claim is not sustainable, may not claim the exclusion from such Use Tax provided by this Section. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 21.1-660. - Use tax: Exemptions. 
    The storage or use in this City of the following tangible personal property is exempt from the Use Tax imposed by this Article: 
(a)  Tangible personal property brought into the City by an individual who was not a resident of the City at the time the property was acquired for his own use, if the first actual use of such property was outside the City, unless such property is used in conducting a business in this City. 
(b)  Tangible personal property, the value of which does not exceed the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per item, acquired by an individual outside the limits of the City for his personal use and enjoyment. 
(c)  Charges for delivery, installation, or other customer services, as prescribed by Regulation. 
(d)  Charges for repair services, as prescribed by Regulation. 
(e)  Separately itemized charges for warranty, maintenance, and service contracts. 
(f)  Prosthetics. 
(g)  Income-producing capital equipment. 
(h)  Rental equipment and rental supplies. 
(i)  Mining and metallurgical supplies. 
(j)  Motor vehicle fuel and use fuel which are used upon the highways of this State and upon which a tax has been imposed under the provisions of Article I or II, Chapter 16, Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes. 
(k)  Tangible personal property purchased by a construction contractor, but not an owner-builder, when such person holds a valid Privilege License for engaging or continuing in the business of construction contracting, and where the property acquired is incorporated into any structure or improvement to real property in fulfillment of a construction contract. 
(l)  Sales of motor vehicles to nonresidents of this State for use outside this State if the vendor ships or delivers the motor vehicle to a destination outside this State. 
(m)  Tangible personal property which directly enters into and becomes an ingredient or component part of a product sold in the regular course of the business of job printing, manufacturing, or publication of newspapers, magazines or other periodicals. Tangible personal property which is consumed or used up in a manufacturing, job printing, publishing, or production process is not an ingredient nor component part of a product. 
(n)  Rental, leasing, or licensing for use of film, tape, or slides by a theater or other person taxed under Section 21.1-410, or by a radio station, television station, or subscription television system. 
(o)  Food served to patrons for a consideration by any person engaged in a business properly licensed and taxed under Section 21.1-455, but not food consumed by owners, agents, or employees of such business. 
(p)  Tangible personal property acquired by a qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying health care organization, except when the property is in fact used in activities resulting in gross income from unrelated business income as that term is defined in 26 U.S.C. Section 512. 
(q)  Reserved. 
(r)  (Reserved). 
(1)  (Reserved). 
(2)  (Reserved). 
(3)  (Reserved). 
(4)  (Reserved). 
(s)  Groundwater measuring devices required by A.R.S. § 45-604. 
(t)  (Reserved). 
(u)  Aircraft acquired for use outside the State, as prescribed by Regulation. 
(v)  Sales of food products by producers as provided for by A.R.S. §§ 3-561, 3-562 and 3-563. 
(w)  (Reserved). 
(x)  Food and drink provided by a person who is engaged in business that is classified under the restaurant classification without monetary change to its employees for their own consumption on the premises during such employees' hours of employment. 
(y)  (Reserved). 
(z)  Tangible personal property used or stored by this City. 
(aa)  Tangible personal property used in remediation contracting as defined in Section 21.1-100 and Regulation 21.1-100.5. 
(bb)  Materials that are purchased by or for publicly funded libraries including school district libraries, charter school libraries, community college libraries, state university libraries or federal, state, county or municipal libraries for use by the public as follows: 
(1)  Printed or photographic materials. 
(2)  Electronic or digital media materials. 
(cc)  Food, beverages, condiments and accessories used for serving food and beverages by a commercial airline, as defined in A.R.S. § 42-5061(A)(49), that serves the food and beverages to its passengers, without additional charge, for consumption in flight. For the purposes of this subsection, "accessories" means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of the food. 
(dd)  Wireless telecommunication equipment that is held for sale or transfer to a customer as an inducement to enter into or continue a contract for telecommunication services that are taxable under Section 21.1-470. 
(ee)  (Reserved). 
(ff)  Alternative fuel as defined in A.R.S. § 1-215, by a used oil fuel burner who has received a Department of Environmental Quality permit to burn used oil or used oil fuel under A.R.S. § 49-426 or Section 49-480. 
(gg)  Food, beverages, condiments and accessories purchased by or for a public educational entity, pursuant to any of the provisions of Title 15, Arizona Revised Statutes, including a regularly organized private or parochial school that offers an educational program for grade twelve or under which may be attended in substitution for a public school Pursuant to A.R.S. 15-802; to the extent such items are to be prepared or served to individuals for consumption on the premises of a public educational entity during school hours. For the purposes of this subsection, "accessories" means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of the food. 
(hh)  Personal hygiene items purchased by a person engaged in the business of and subject to tax under Section 21.1-444 of this code if the tangible personal property is furnished without additional charge to and intended to be consumed by the person during his occupancy. 
(ii)  The diversion of gas from a pipeline by a person engaged in the business of operating a natural or artificial gas pipeline, for the sole purpose of fueling compressor equipment to pressurize the pipeline, is not a sale of the gas to the operator of the pipeline. 
(jj)  Food, beverages, condiments and accessories purchased by or for a nonprofit charitable organization that has qualified as an exempt organization under 26 U.S.C. Section 501(c)(3) and regularly serves meals to the needy and indigent on a continuing basis at no cost. For the purposes of this subsection, "accessories" means paper plates, plastic eating utensils, napkins, paper cups, drinking straws, paper sacks or other disposable containers, or other items which facilitate the consumption of the food. 
(kk)  Sales of motor vehicles that use alternative fuel if such vehicle was manufactured as a diesel fuel vehicle and converted to operate on alternative fuel and sales of equipment that is installed in a conventional diesel fuel motor vehicle to convert the vehicle to operate on an alternative fuel, as defined in A.R.S. § 1-215. 
(ll)  The storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property in the city or town by a school district or charter school. 
(mm)  Renewable energy credits or any other unit created to track energy derived from renewable energy resources. For the purposes of this paragraph, "renewable energy credit" means a unit created administratively by the Corporation Commission or governing body of a public power utility to track kilowatt hours of electricity derived from a renewable energy resource or the kilowatt hour equivalent of conventional energy resources displaced by distributed renewable energy resources. 
(nn)  Magazines or other periodicals or other publications by this state to encourage tourist travel. 
(oo)  Paper machine clothing, such as forming fabrics and dryer felts, sold to a paper manufacturer and directly used or consumed in paper manufacturing. 
(pp)  Overhead materials or other tangible personal property that is used in performing a contract between the United Stated government and a manufacturer, modifier, assembler or repairer, including property used in performing a subcontract with a government contractor who is a manufacturer, modifier, assembler or repairer, to which title passes to the government under the terms of the contract or subcontract. 
(qq)  Coal, petroleum, coke, natural gas, virgin fuel oil and electricity sold to a qualified environmental technology manufacturer, producer or processor as defined in A.R.S. Section 41-1514.02 and directly used or consumed in the generation or provision of on-site power or energy solely for environmental technology manufacturing, producing or processing or environmental protection. This paragraph shall apply for twenty full consecutive calendar or fiscal years from the date the first paper manufacturing machine is placed in service. In the case of an environmental technology manufacturer, producer or processor who does not manufacture paper, the time period shall begin with the date the first manufacturing, processing or production equipment is placed in service. 
(rr)  Machinery, equipment, materials and other tangible personal property used directly and predominantly to construct a qualified environmental technology manufacturing, producing or processing facility as described in A. R. S. Section 41-1514.02. This subsection applies for ten full consecutive calendar or fiscal years after the start of initial construction. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4997, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
[ARTICLE VII.] - REGULATIONS-PRIVILEGE AND EXCISE TAXES 

Reg. 21.1-100.1. - Brokers. 
(a)  For the purposes of proper administration of this Chapter and to prevent evasion of taxes imposed, brokers shall be wherever necessary treated as taxpayers for all purposes, and shall file a return and remit the tax imposed on the activity on behalf of the principal. No deduction shall be allowed for any commissions or fees retained by such broker, except as provided in Section 21.1-405, relating to advertising commissions. 
(b)  Brokers for vendors. A broker acting for a seller, lessor, or other similar person deriving gross income in a category upon which this Chapter imposes a tax shall be liable for such tax, even if his principal would not be subject to the tax if he conducted such activity in his own behalf, by reason of the activity being deemed a "casual" one. For example: 
(1)  An auctioneer or other sales agent of tangible personal property is subject to the tax imposed upon retail sales, even if such sales would be deemed "casual" if his principal had sold such items himself. 
(2)  A property manager is subject to the tax imposed upon rental, leasing, or licensing of real property, even if such rental, leasing, or licensing would be deemed "casual" if his principal managed such real property himself. 
(c)  Brokers for vendees. A broker acting solely for a buyer, lessee, tenant, or other similar person who is a party to a transaction which may be subject to the tax, shall be liable for such tax and for filing a return in connection with such tax only to the extent his principal is subject to the tax. 
(d)  The liability of a broker does not relieve the principal of liability except upon presentation to the Tax Collector of proof of payment of the tax, and only to the extent of the correct payment. The broker shall be relieved of the responsibility to file and pay taxes upon the filing and correct payment of such taxes by the principal. 
(e)  (Reserved). 
(f)  Location of Business. Retail sales by brokers acting for another person shall be deemed to have occurred at the regular business location of the broker, in a manner similar to that used to determine "out-of-city sales"; provided, however, that an auctioneer is deemed to be engaged in business at the site of each auction. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-100.2. - Delivery, installation, or other direct customer services. 
(a)  "Delivery Charges" exist only when the total charges to the ultimate customer or consumer include, as separately charged to the ultimate customer, charges for delivery to the ultimate consumer, whether the place of delivery is within or without the City, and when the taxpayer's books and records show the separate delivery charges. 
(1)  Identification to the customer or consumer that the listed price has "delivery included" or other similar expression is insufficient to show the delivery as a separate charge. Only the separately stated charge for the delivery shall be deemed a "delivery charge". 
(2)  Freight in. Charges for delivery from place of production or the manufacturer to the vendor either directly or through a chain of wholesalers or jobbers or other middlemen are deemed "freight-in" and are not considered delivery. 
(b)  "Installation", as used in this definition, relates only to tangible personal property. Installation to real property is deemed construction contracting in this Chapter. Examples of installation relating to tangible personal property are: installing a radio in an automobile; applying sun screens on the windows of a boat; installing cabinets, carpeting, or "built-in appliances" to a camper or motorized recreational vehicle. 
(c)  Repair of tangible personal property is not included in this definition. See Regulation 21.1-465.1. 
(d)  "Direct Customer Services " means services other than repair rendered directly to the customer. Services or labor provided by any person prior to the transfer of tangible personal property to the customer or consumer are not included in this definition. In the following examples, the requirements of subsection (e) below are referred to by the words "identify" or "identification." 
(1)  A retailer sells a customer a one hundred dollars ($100.00) "plug-in" appliance, with a twenty-five dollars ($25.00) delivery and installation charge. If the retailer identifies the twenty-five dollars ($25.00) delivery and installation charge, it is a charge for direct customer services. 
(2)  A caterer charges his customer one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the food and drink served, three hundred dollars ($300.00) for setup and site cleanup, and five hundred ($500.00) for bartender and waiters. If all charges are properly identified, only the three hundred dollars ($300.00) for set up and cleanup is a charge for direct customer services, and the one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for food and service is restauranting gross income. 
(3)  Persons engaged in engraving on wood, metal, stone, etc. or persons engaged in retouching photographs or paintings may consider such charges for labor as direct customer services. 
(4)  All charges by a photographer resulting in the sale of a photograph (sitting charges, developing, making enlargements, retouching, etc.) for services that occur prior to transfer of tangible personal property are not direct customer services. 
(5)  An equipment rental company charging twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for delivery may consider such delivery charge as a charge for direct customer service only if such charge is properly identified. 
(6)  Even if identified, charges for labor incurred in the production of any manufactured article or of a custom-made article (jewelry, artwork, tailoring, draperies, etc.) are not included in this definition, as such labor occurs prior to the transfer of property. 
(e)  Recordkeeping requirements. 
(1)  Any person who engages in transactions involving these services must: 
(A)  Separately bill, invoice, or charge the customer for such services in a manner by which the customer or consumer may readily identify the specific dollar amount of the service charge; and 
(B)  Maintain business books and records in a manner in which the separate charge for such services can be clearly identified, to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector. 
(2)  Rendering a statement to a customer for a transaction involving such services and the transfer of tangible personal property which only indicates the total amount of the charges with words such as "services included" or "charge includes labor and parts" or a similar expression does not satisfy the requirements of this subsection. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-100.3. - Retailers. 
    When in the opinion of the Tax Collector it is necessary for efficient administration of this Chapter, he may regard any salesman, representative, peddler, canvasser, or agent of any dealer, distributor, supervisor, or employer under whom he operates or from whom he obtains tangible personal property for sale, rental, lease, or license as a retailer for the purposes of this Chapter, irrespective of whether he is making sales, rentals, leases, or licenses on his own behalf or on behalf of others. The Tax Collector may also regard such dealer, distributor, supervisor, or employer as a retailer for the purposes of this Chapter. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-100.4. - Out-of-City/Out-of-State sales: Sales to Native Americans. 
    Sales to Native Americans or tribal councils by vendors located within the City shall be deemed sales within the City, unless all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The vendor has properly accounted for such sales, in a manner similar to the recordkeeping requirements for out-of-City sales; and, 
(2)  All of the following elements of the sale exist: 
(a)  Solicitation and placement of the order occurs on the reservation; and 
(b)  Delivery is made to the reservation; and 
(c)  Payment originates from the reservation. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-100.5. - Remediation contracting. 
    The following activities are considered remediation contracting and are exempt: 
(1)  Excavation, transportation, treatment, and/or disposal of contaminated soil for purposes of site remediation (rather than characterization); 
(2)  Installation of groundwater extraction and/or injection wells for purposes of groundwater remediation; 
(3)  Installation of pumps and piping into groundwater extraction wells for remediation purposes; 
(4)  Installation of vapor extraction wells for the purpose of soil or groundwater remediation; 
(5)  Construction of remediation systems, such as groundwater treatment plants, vapor extraction systems, or air injection systems; 
(6)  Connection of remediation systems to utilities; 
(7)  Abandonment of groundwater or vapor extraction wells; 
(8)  Removal/demolition of remediation systems; 
(9)  Capping/closure construction activities; and 
(10)  Service or handling charges for subcontracted remediation contracting activities. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-115.1. - Computer hardware, software, and data services. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  "Computer Hardware" (also called "computer equipment" or "peripherals") is the components and accessories which constitute the physical computer assembly, including but not limited to: central processing unit, keyboard, console, monitor, memory unit, disk drive, tape drive or reader, terminal, printer, plotter, modem, document sorter, optical reader and/or digitizer, network. 
(2)  "Computer Software" (also called "computer program") is tangible personal property, and includes: 
(A)  "Operating Program (Software)" (also called "executive program (software)"), which is the programming system or technical language upon which or by means of which the basic operating procedures of the computer are recorded. The operating program serves as an interface with user applied programs and allows the user to access the computer's processing capabilities. 
(B)  "Applied Program (Software)", which is the programming system or technical language (including the tape, disk, cards, or other medium upon which such language or program is recorded) designed either for application in a specialized use, or upon which or by means of which a plan for the solution of a particular problem is based. Typically, applied programs can be transferred from one computer to another via storage media. Examples of applied programs include: payroll processing, general ledger, sales data, spreadsheet, word processing, and data management programs. 
(3)  "Storage Medium" is any hard disk, compact disk, floppy disk, diskette, diskpack, magnetic tape, cards, or other medium used for storage of information in a form readable by a computer, but not including the memory of the computer itself. 
(4)  A "Terminal Arrangement" (also called "'on-line' arrangement") is any agreement allowing access to a remote central processing unit through telecommunications via hardware. 
(5)  A "Computer Services Agreement" (also called "data services agreement") is an agreement allowing access to a computer through a third-party operator. 
(b)  For the purposes of this Chapter, transfer of title and possession of the following are deemed sales of tangible personal property and any other transfer of title, possession, or right to use for a consideration of the following is deemed rental, leasing, or licensing of tangible personal property: 
(1)  Computer hardware or storage media. Rental, leasing, or licensing for use of computer hardware or storage media includes the lessee's use of such hardware or storage media on the lessor's premises. 
(2)  Computer software which is not custom computer programming. Such prewritten ("canned") programs may be transferred to a customer in the form of punched cards, magnetic tape, or other storage medium, or by listing the program instructions on coding sheets. Transfer is deemed to have occurred whether title to the storage medium upon which the program is recorded, coded, or punched passes to the customer or the program is recorded, coded, or punched on storage medium furnished by the customer. Gross income from the transfer of such prewritten programs includes: 
(A)  The entire amount charged to the customer for the sale, rental, lease, or license for use of the storage medium or coding sheets on which or into which the prewritten program has been recorded, coded, or punched. 
(B)  The entire amount charged for the temporary transfer or possession of a prewritten program to be directly used or to be recorded, coded, or punched by the customer on the customer's premises. 
(C)  License fees, royalty fees, or program design fees; any fee present or future, whether for a period of minimum use or of use for extended periods, relating to the use of a prewritten program. 
(D)  The entire amount charged for transfer of a prewritten ("canned") program by remote telecommunications from the transferor's place of business to or through the customer's computer. 
(E)  Any charge for the purchase of a maintenance contract which entitles the customer to receive storage media on which prewritten program improvements or error corrections have been recorded or to receive telephone or on-site consultation services, provided that: 
(i)  If such maintenance contract is not optional with the customer, then the charges for the maintenance contract, including the consultation services, are deemed gross income from the transfer of the prewritten program. 
(ii)  If such maintenance contract is optional with the customer but the customer does not have the option to purchase the consultation services separately from the storage media containing the improvements or error corrections, then the charges for the maintenance contract, including the consultation services, are deemed gross income from the transfer of the prewritten program. 
(iii)  If such maintenance contract is optional with the customer and the customer may purchase the consultation services separately from the storage media containing the improvements or error corrections, then only the charges for such improvements or error corrections are deemed gross income from the transfer of a prewritten program and charges for consultation are deemed to be charges for professional services. 
(c)  Producing the following by means of computer hardware is deemed to be the activity of job printing for the purposes of this Chapter: 
(1)  Statistical reports, graphs, diagrams, microfilm, microfiche, photo recordings, or any other information produced or compiled by a computer; except as provided in subsection (e) below. 
(2)  Additional copies of records, reports, manuals, tabulations, etc. "Additional Copies" are any copies in excess to those produced simultaneously with the production of the original and on the same printer, whether such copies are prepared by running the same program, by using multiple printers, by looping the program, by using different programs to produce the same output, or by other means. 
(d)  Charges for the use of communications channel in conjunction with a terminal arrangement or data services agreement are deemed gross income from the activity of providing telecommunication services. 
(e)  The following transactions are deemed direct customer services, provided that charges for such services are separately stated and maintained as provided by Regulation 21.1-100.2(e): 
(1)  "Custom (Computer) Programming", which is any computer software which is written or prepared for a single customer, including those services represented by separately stated charges for the modification of existing prewritten programs. 
(A)  Custom computer programming is deemed a professional service regardless of the form in which the programming is transferred. 
(B)  Custom programming includes such programming performed in connection with the sale, rental, lease, or license for use of computer hardware, provided that the charges for such are separately stated from the charges for the hardware. 
(C)  Custom computer programming includes a program prepared to the special order of a customer who will use the program to produce copies of the program for sale, rental, lease, or license. The subsequent sale, rental, lease, or license of such a program is deemed the sale, rental, lease, or license of a prewritten program. 
(2)  Training services related to computer hardware or software, provided further that: 
(A)  The provider of such training services is deemed the ultimate consumer of all tangible personal property used in training others or provided to such trainees without separately itemized charge for the materials provided. 
(B)  Training deemed a direct customer service does not include: 
(i)  Training materials, books, manuals, etc. furnished to customers for a charge separate from the charge for training services. 
(ii)  Training provided to customers without separate charge as part of the sale, rental, lease, or license of computer hardware or software, or as part of a terminal arrangement or data services agreement. 
(3)  The use of computer time through the use of a terminal arrangement or a data service agreement, but not charges for computer hardware located at the customer's place of business (for example, the terminal, a printer attached to the terminal, a modem used to communicate with the remote central processing unit over a telephone line). 
(4)  Compiling and producing, as part of a terminal arrangement or computer services agreement, original copies of statistical reports, graphs, diagrams, microfilm, microfiche, photo recordings, or other information for the same person who supplied the raw data used to create such reports. 
(f)  The purchase, rental, lease, or license for use of computer hardware, storage media, or computer software which is not deemed custom programming is deemed the use or storage of tangible personal property for the purpose of this Chapter, and the amount which may be subject to Use Tax shall be determined in the same manner as the determination of the gross income from the sale, rental, lease, or license for use of such. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-120.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2944, § 1, adopted June 23, 2015 and Res. No. 4997, § 1(Exh. A), adopted June 23, 2015, repealed Reg. 21.1-120.1, which pertained to food for home consumption: recordkeeping and reporting requirements and derived from Res. No. 4491, § 1, adopted June 14, 2011. 
Reg. 21.1-200.1. - When deposits are includable in gross income. 
(a)  Refundable deposits shall be includable as gross income of the taxpayer for the month in which the deposits are forfeited by the lessee. 
(b)  Nonrefundable deposits for cleaning, keys, pet fees, maintenance, or for any other purpose are deemed gross income upon receipt. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-250.1. - Excess tax collected. 
    If a taxpayer collects taxes in excess of the combined tax rate from any customer in any transaction, all such excess tax shall be paid to the taxing jurisdictions in proportion to their effective rates. The right of the taxpayer to charge his customer for his own liability for tax does not allow the taxpayer to enrich himself at the cost of his customers. Tax paid on an activity that is not subject to tax or that qualifies for an exemption, deduction, exclusion or credit is not excess tax collected. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-270.1. - Proprietary activities of municipalities are not considered activities of a governmental entity. 
    The following activities, when performed by a municipality, are considered to be activities of a person engaged in business for the purposes of this Chapter, and not excludable by reason of Section 21.1-270: 
(a)  rental, leasing, or licensing for use of real property to other than another department or agency of the municipality. 
(b)  producing, providing, or furnishing electricity, electric lights, current, power, gas (natural or artificial), or water to consumers or ratepayers. 
(c)  sale of tangible personal property to the public, when similar tangible personal property is available for sale by other persons, as, for example, at police or surplus auctions. 
(d)  (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-270.2. - Proprietary clubs. 
(a)  Equity requirements. In order to qualify for exclusion under Section 21.1-270, a proprietary club must actually be owned by the members. For the purposes of qualification, a club will be deemed to be member-owned if at least eighty-five percent (85%) of the equity of the total amount of club-owned property is owned by bona fide individual members whose membership is represented in the form of shares, certificates, bonds, or other indicia of capital interest. A corporation may be considered an individual owner provided that it owns a membership solely for the benefit of one or more of its employees and it is not engaged in any business activity connected with the operation of the club. 
(b)  Gross revenue requirements. In computing gross revenue for the computation of this fifteen percent (15%) rule of subsection 21.1-270(c)(1). 
(1)  The following shall be excluded: 
(A)  Membership dues. 
(B)  Membership fees which relate to the general admission to the club on a periodic (or perpetual) basis. 
(C)  Assessments. 
(D)  Special fund raising events, raffles, etc. 
(E)  Donations, gifts, or bequests. 
(F)  Gate receipts, admissions, and program advertising for not more than one tournament in any calendar year. 
(2)  The following must be included: 
(A)  Green fees, court use fees, and similar charges for the actual use of a facility or part thereof. 
(B)  Pro shop sales if the shop is owned by the club. 
(C)  Golf cart rental if the carts are owned by the club. 
(D)  Rentals, percentages, or commissions received for permitting the use of the premises or any portion thereof by a caterer, concessionaire, professional, or any other person for sales, rental, leasing, licensing, catering, food or beverage service, or instruction. 
(E)  All receipts from food or beverage sales, room use or rental charge, corkage and catering charges, and similar receipts. 
(F)  Locker and locker room fees and attendants charges if paid to the club. 
(G)  Tournament entry fees other than entry fees for the one annual tournament exempt under subsection (b)(1)(F) above. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-300.1 - (Reserved). 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 2, 12-18-14) 
Reg. 21.1-300.2 - (Reserved). 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 2, 12-18-14) 
Reg. 21.1-310.1 - (Reserved). 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 2, 12-18-14) 
Reg. 21.1-310.2. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-310.3. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-350.1 - (Reserved). 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 2, 12-18-14) 
Reg. 21.1-350.2 - (Reserved). 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 2, 12-18-14) 
Reg. 21.1-350.3 - (Reserved). 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 2, 12-18-14) 
Reg. 21.1-360.1 - (Reserved). 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 2, 12-18-14) 
Reg. 21.1-360.2 - (Reserved). 
(Ord. No. 2925, § 2, 12-18-14) 
Reg. 21.1-405.1. - Local advertising examples. 
    For the purposes of illustration only, and not by way of limitation, the following are provided as examples of local advertising subject to the tax: 
(1)  Retail sales and rental establishments doing business within the State when only one commonly designated business entity is identified by name in the advertisement. 
(2)  Financial institutions doing business within the State whether part of a national chain or local business only. 
(3)  Sales of real estate located within the State. 
(4)  Health care facilities located within the State. 
(5)  Hotels, motels, and apartments, whether a national chain or local so long as the advertisement identifies any location within the State. 
(6)  Brokers doing business within the State whether stockbrokers, real estate brokers, insurance brokers, etc. 
(7)  Nonprofit organizations, which even though tax exempt, have an office, whether national, local, or branch, within the State. 
(8)  Political activity, except United States Presidential and Vice Presidential candidates. 
(9)  Restaurants or food service establishments which have one or more branches, outlets, or franchises within the State even through the local franchisee or licensee may not be responsible for the placement of the advertisement. 
(10)  Services provided by individuals or entities within the State such as doctors, lawyers, architects, hairdressers, auto repair shops, counseling services, utilities, contractors, auction houses, etc. 
(11)  Coupons redeemable only at a single commonly designated business entity within the State. 
(12)  Theater, sports, and other entertainment events held at locations within the State. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-405.2. - Advertising activity within the city. 
(a)  In General. Except as provided elsewhere in this Regulation, a person engaged in advertising activity shall be considered to be doing business entirely within the City if all or a major portion of the dissemination facilities such as broadcasting studios, printing plants, or distribution centers are located within the City limits. Remote studios patched to an in-City studio and subject to engineering modulation or control at the in-City studio are considered studios doing business in the City. 
(b)  Billboards and other outdoor advertising companies shall be considered to be doing business within the City to the extent they have billboards or similar displays within the City. 
(c)  Publishers and distributors of newspaper and other periodicals shall be subject to the tax upon advertising imposed by Section 21.1-405 and such tax shall be allocated in the manner prescribed by subsection (e) of Section 21.1-435. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-407.1. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-415.1. - Distinction between the categories of construction contracting. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter, transactions involving improvements to, or sales of, real property are designated into one of the following categories, and these categorizations shall apply, whether or not a person designates himself as a contractor, construction manager, developer, or otherwise: 
(a)  A person performing improvements to real property is one of the following: 
(1)  An "Owner-Builder" when the work is performed by the owner or lessor or lessee-in-possession. An "owner-builder" may also be a "speculative builder". 
(2)  A "Construction Contractor" when performing work for the owner or lessor or lessee-in-possession of the real property, unless that person has provided a written declaration stating that: 
(A)  The owner-builder is improving the property for sale; and 
(B)  The owner-builder is liable for the tax for such construction contracting activity; and 
(C)  The owner-builder has provided the contractor his City Privilege License number. 
(3)  A "Subcontractor" as provided in Section 21.1-415 (c). 
(b)  An owner or lessor ("owner-builder") of improved real property is one of the following: 
(1)  A "Speculative Builder" as provided in Section 21.1-100; or 
(2)  An "owner-builder who is not a speculative builder" in all other cases. 
(c)  The terms "owner", "lessor", and "lessee-in-possession" shall be deemed to include any authorized agent for such person. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-415.2. - Distinction between construction contracting and certain related activities. 
(a)  Certain rentals, leases, and licenses for use in connection with construction contracting. Rental, leasing, or licensing of earthmoving equipment with an operator shall be deemed construction contracting activity. Rental, leasing, or licensing of any other tangible personal property (with or without an operator) or of earthmoving equipment without an operator shall be deemed rental, leasing, or licensing of tangible personal property. For example: 
(1)  Rental of a backhoe, bulldozer, or similar earthmoving equipment with operator is construction contracting. Rental of these items without an operator is rental of tangible personal property. 
(2)  Rental of scaffolding, temporary fences, or barricades is rental of tangible personal property. 
(3)  Rental of pumps or cranes is rental of tangible personal property, whether or not an operator is provided with the equipment rented. 
(b)  Distinction between construction contracting, retail, and certain direct customer service activities. 
(1)  When an item is attached or installed on real property, it is a construction contracting activity and any subsequent repair, removal, or replacement of that item is construction contracting. 
(2)  Items attached or installed on tangible personal property are retail sales. 
(3)  Transactions where no tangible personal property is attached or installed are considered direct customer service activities (for example: carpet cleaning, lawn mowing, landscaping maintenance). 
(4)  Demolition, earth moving, and wrecking activities are considered construction contracting. 
(c)  Sale of consumable goods incorporated into or applied to real property is considered a retail sale and not construction contracting. Examples of consumable goods are lubricants, faucet washers, and air conditioning coolant, but not paint. 
(d)  Installation or removal of tangible personal property which has independent functional utility is considered a retail activity. 
(1)  "Tangible personal property which has independent functional utility" must be able to substantially perform its function(s) without attachment to real property. "Attachment to real property" must include more than connection to water, power, gas, communication, or other service. 
(2)  Examples of tangible personal property which has independent functional utility include artwork, furnishings, "plug-in" kitchen equipment, or similar items installed by bolts or similar fastenings. 
(3)  Examples of tangible personal property which does not have independent functional utility include wall-to-wall carpeting, flooring, wallpaper, kitchen cabinets, or "built-in" dishwashers or ranges. 
(4)  The installation of window coverings (drapes, mini-blinds, etc.) is always a retail activity. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-415.3. - Construction contracting; tax rate effective date. 
A.  In the event of a tax rate change, the rate imposed on gross income from construction contracting shall be computed based upon the rate in effect when the contract was executed, subject to the "enactment date" as defined in this section. Gross income from a contract executed prior to the enactment date shall not be subject to the tax rate change, provided the contract contains no provision that entitles the construction contractor to recover the amount of the tax. 
B.  In the event of a rate increase, in order to qualify for the lower rate, the construction contractor shall, upon request, provide sufficient documentation, in a manner and form prescribed by the tax collector, to verify that a contract was entered into before the enactment date. 
C.  For purposes of this section, "enactment date" shall be: 
(1)  In the event an election is held, the date of election. 
(2)  In the event no election is held, the date of final adoption by the mayor and council. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the above, nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city from establishing a later enactment date. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-416.1. - Speculative builders: Homeowner's bona fide non-business sale of a family residence. 
(a)  A sale of a custom home, regardless of the stage of completion of such home shall be considered a "homeowner's bona fide non-business sale" and not subject to the tax on speculative builders if: 
(1)  The property was actually used as the principal place of family residence or vacation residence by the immediate family of the seller for the six (6) months next prior to the offer for sale; and 
(2)  The seller has not sold more than two (2) such residences (or, if the residence is a vacation residence, two (2) such vacation residences) within the thirty-six (36) months immediately prior to the offer for sale; and 
(3)  The seller has not licensed, leased, or rented the sold premises for any period within twenty-four (24) months prior to the offer for sale. 
(b)  In the event that a homeowner of a family residence contracts with a licensed construction contractor for improvements to a residence, the construction contracting on a family residence shall be presumed to be for an owner's bona fide non-business purpose and all construction contractors shall be required to report and pay the tax imposed on all such improvements. 
(c)  Purchases by a homeowner of tangible personal property for inclusion in any construction, alteration, or repair of his residence shall be subject to tax as retail sales to the ultimate consumer. 
(d)  "Owner" and "Homeowner" as used in this Regulation shall only mean an individual, and no other entity, association, or representative shall qualify; except that an administrator, executor, personal representative, or guardian in guardianship or probate proceedings, for the estate of a deceased or incompetent person or a minor, may claim "homeowner" status for such person if such person would have otherwise qualified with respect to the specific property involved. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-416.2. - Reconstruction contracting. 
(a)  "Reconstruction (of Real Property)" shall mean the subdividing of real property and, in addition, all construction contracting activities performed upon said real property; provided, however, that each of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A structure existed on said real property prior to the reconstruction activity; and 
(2)  The "prior value" of said structure exceeds fifteen percent (15%) of the "prior value" of the integrated property (land, improvements, and structure); and 
(3)  The total cost of all construction contracting activities performed on said real property in the twenty-four (24) month period prior to the sale of any part of the real property exceeds fifteen percent (15%) of the "prior value" of the real property; and 
(4)  The structure which existed on the real property prior to the reconstruction activity still exists in some form upon the property, and is included, in whole or in part, in the property sold. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) below, "prior value" means the value of the total integrated property, with improvements, as existing immediately prior to any reconstruction activity. Where, according to Title 42 of the Arizona Revised Statutes, a property's full cash value for secondary tax purposes is intended to represent the property's fair market value, "prior value" shall be the property's full cash value for secondary property tax purposes as determined by the County Assessor in the year immediately preceding the year in which the reconstruction improvement(s) are or could have been included in the County Assessor's valuation. If the County Assessor's valuation is contested or appealed, the final determination at either the administrative or judicial level shall apply. Where, according to Title 42 of the Arizona Revised Statutes, a property's full cash value for secondary property tax purposes is not intended to represent the property's fair market value, "prior value" shall be the property's fair market value prior to the reconstruction improvement(s). 
(c)  "Alternative Prior Value" shall mean that as an alternative to the "prior value" defined above, the taxpayer may use his actual cost of the reconstructed property prior to reconstruction, provided that evidence of such cost is presented to the Tax Collector and is determined by the Tax Collector, in his sole discretion, to be satisfactory. Such evidence shall consist, at a minimum, of proof of the actual, arms-length acquisition price, accompanied by a full appraisal of all property involved which appraisal shall have been performed by a real estate broker or MAI appraiser specifically for the purpose of assisting in the acquisition and further shall have been performed on behalf of the seller or a lending institution which has lent at least sixty-five percent (65%) of the acquisition price. (Only long term lending - not interim or construction financing will be considered.) This alternative value shall be used only if the property was acquired by the reconstruction taxpayer not more than thirty-six (36) months prior to a "sale" as defined below. 
(d)  A "sale" for the purpose of determining "alternative prior value" or "reconstruction" only shall be deemed to have occurred as of the date of the execution of a contract of sale or a deed (joint tenancy or warranty) whichever is earlier, to a purchaser or grantee of any single residential or other occupancy unit. In addition to the foregoing, a lease with option to purchase a single residential unit shall be considered a "sale" at the date of execution of such lease if said option is exercisable by the lessee in not later than nine (9) months. Further in the case of cooperative apartments, the sale date shall be the date of execution of the contract selling (subject or not to encumbrances, liens or security interests) of a share, or a sufficient number of shares which entitle the purchaser to the occupancy of a residential unit. In all cases a person shall include a husband and wife as a community, or any co -occupants of a single unit as joint tenants. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-425.1. - Distinction between job printing and certain related activities. 
(a)  Computerized Printing. Computerized versions of all items which would be taxable under Section 21.1-425 if performed without computerized assistance are considered taxable under that Section, and therefore, are not exempt services. 
(b)  Book publishing. The printing of books shall be deemed job printing. Sales of books shall be deemed retail sales. 
(c)  Publication of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals shall not be considered job printing for the purposes of this Chapter. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-435.1. - Distinction between publishing of periodicals and certain related activities. 
(a)  Book publishing shall not be considered publication of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals for purposes of this Chapter. Sales of books shall be deemed retail sales. The printing of books shall be deemed job printing. 
(b)  Publication of newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals shall not be considered job printing for the purposes of this Chapter. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-435.2. - Advertising income of publishers and distributors of newspapers and other periodicals. 
    Publishers and distributors of newspapers and other periodicals shall be subject to the tax upon advertising imposed by Section 21.1-405 and such tax shall be allocated in the manner prescribed by subsection (e) of Section 21.1-435. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-445.1. - (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-445.2. - (Repealed by the 1995 amendments). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-445.3. - Rental, leasing, and licensing of real property as lodging: room and board; furnished lodging. 
(a)  Room and board. 
(1)  Rooming houses, lodges, or other establishments providing both lodging and meals, shall maintain a record of the separate charges made for the lodging and the meals. 
(2)  The charge for lodging shall be subject to the tax imposed by Section 21.1-444 or Section 21.1-445. The charge for meals is subject to the tax upon restaurants and bars prescribed by Section 21.1-455. 
(b)  Furnished lodging. A person who provides lodging with furnishings shall be deemed to be only in the business of rental, leasing, and licensing of lodging, and not in the business of rental, leasing, and licensing of such furnishings as tangible personal property, unless: 
(1)  Any tenant of any lodging space may choose to rent, lease, or license such lodging space either furnished or unfurnished; and 
(2)  The lessor separately charges tenants for lodging and for furnishings; and 
(3)  The lessor separately maintains his gross income from lodging and from furnishings separately in his accounting books and records. 
If all of the above conditions are met, such person shall report both sources of income separately to the City. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-450.1. - Distinction between rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal property and certain related activities. 
(a)  Certain rentals, leases, and licenses for use in connection with construction contracting. Rental, leasing, or licensing of earthmoving equipment with an operator shall be deemed construction contracting activity. Rental, leasing, or licensing of any other tangible personal property (with or without an operator) or of earthmoving equipment without an operator shall be deemed rental, leasing, or licensing of tangible personal property. For example: 
(1)  Rental of a backhoe, bulldozer, or similar earthmoving equipment with operator is construction contracting. Rental of these items without an operator is rental of tangible personal property. 
(2)  Rental of scaffolding, temporary fences, or barricades is rental of tangible personal property. 
(3)  Rental of pumps or cranes is rental of tangible personal property, regardless of whether or not an operator is included with the equipment rented. 
(b)  Distinction between equipment rental, leasing, or licensing for use and transporting for hire. The hiring of mobile equipment (cranes, airplanes, limousines, etc.) is considered rental, leasing, or licensing of tangible personal property whenever the charge is for a fixed sum or hourly rate. By comparison, the activity of a common carrier conveying goods or persons for a fee based upon distance, and not time, shall be considered transporting for hire. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-450.2. - Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal property: membership fees; other charges. 
(a)  Membership, admission, or other fees charged by any rental club or limited access lessor are considered part of taxable gross income. 
(b)  Gross income from rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property must include all charges by the lessor to the lessee for repair, maintenance, or other service upon the tangible personal property rented, leased, or licensed. 
(c)  Sale of a warranty, maintenance, or service contract as a requirement of, or in conjunction with, a rental, leasing, or licensing contract is exempt. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-450.3. - Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of equipment with operator. 
    In cases where the tangible personal property is rented, leased, or licensed with an operator provided by the lessor, the charge for the operator shall not be includable in the gross income from the rental, lease, or license of such tangible personal property if the charge for the operator and the charge for the use of the equipment are separately itemized to the lessee and separately maintained on the books and records of the lessor. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-450.4. - Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal property: semi-permanently or permanently installed tangible personal property. 
(a)  The term "semi-permanently or permanently installed" means that the item of tangible personal property has and is expected to have at the time of installation a permanent location at the site installed, as under a long-term lease agreement, except that the person using or applying said property may eventually replace it because it has become worn out or has become obsolete or the person ceases to have the right to possession of said property. 
(b)  An item of tangible personal property is deemed permanently installed if its installation requires alterations to the premises. 
(c)  Examples of "semi-permanently or permanently installed tangible personal property" include, but are not limited to: computers, duplicating machines, furniture not of portable design, major appliances, store fixtures. 
(d)  The term does not include mobile transportation equipment or tangible personal property designed for regular use at different locations or customarily used at different locations, as under numerous short-term rental, lease, or license agreements, whether or not such property is in fact so used. 
(1)  For example, use of a mobile crane, trencher, automobile, or other similar equipment shall be considered a rental, lease, or license transaction subject to taxation only by the city or town in which such business office of the lessor is based. 
(2)  Other similar examples include, but are not limited to: camping equipment, contracting equipment, chain saw, forklift, household items, invalid needs, janitorial equipment, reducing equipment, furniture of portable design, trucks or trailers, tools, towbars, sump pumps, arc welders. 
(e)  A rental, lease, or license agreement which specifies that the item in question shall remain, under the terms of the agreement, located within the same city or town for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days shall be sufficient evidence that such rented, leased, or licensed item is "permanently or semi-permanently installed" in said city or town, except when the item is mobile transportation equipment or one of the other types of portable equipment or property described in subsection (d) above. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-450.5. - Rental, leasing, and licensing for use of tangible personal property: delivery, installation, repair, and maintenance charges. 
(a)  Delivery and installation charges in connection with the rental, leasing, and licensing of tangible personal property are exempt from the tax imposed by Section 21.1-450; provided that the provisions of Regulation 21.1-100.2 have been met. 
(b)  Gross income from the sale of a warranty, maintenance, or similar service contract in connection with the rental, leasing, and licensing of tangible personal property shall be exempt. 
(c)  Separately stated charges for repair not included as part of a warranty, maintenance, or similar service contract relating to the rental, leasing, or licensing of tangible personal property are exempt from the tax imposed by Section 21.1-450; however, such income is subject to the provisions of Sections 21.1-460 and 21.1-465, and the provisions of Regulation 21.1-465.1. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 2121-455.1. - Gratuities related to restaurant activity. 
    Gratuities charged by or collected by persons subject to the tax imposed by Section 21.1-455 may be excluded from gross income if: 
(1)  Such charge is separately stated upon the bill, invoice, etc. provided the customer, and such amounts are maintained separately in the books and records of the taxpayer; and 
(2)  Such gratuities are distributed in total to employees of the taxpayer in addition to customary and regular wages. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-460.1. - Distinction between retail sales and certain other transfers of tangible personal property. 
(a)  Charges for transfer of tangible personal property included in the gross income of the business activity of persons engaged in the following business activities shall be deemed only as gross income from such business activity and not sales at retail taxed by Section 21.1-460: 
(1)  Tangible personal property incorporated into real property as part of reconstruction or construction contracting, per Sections 21.1-415 through 21.1-418. 
(2)  (Reserved). 
(3)  Job printing, per Section 21.1-425. 
(4)  Mining, timbering, and other extraction, but not sales of sand, gravel, or rock extracted from the ground, per Section 21.1-430. 
(5)  Publication of newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals, per Section 21.1-435. 
(6)  Rental, leasing, and licensing of real or tangible personal property, per Sections 21.1-445 or 21.1-450. 
(7)  Restaurants and bars, per Section 21.1-455. 
(8)  Food for home consumption, per Section 21.1-462. 
(9)  Telecommunications services, per Section 21.1-470. 
(10)  Utility services, per Section 21.1-480. 
(111)  (Reserved). 
(b)  Distinction between construction contracting, retail, and certain direct customer service activities. 
(1)  When an item is attached or installed on real property, it is a construction contracting activity and any subsequent repair, removal, or replacement of that item is construction contracting. 
(2)  Items attached or installed on tangible personal property are retail sales. 
(3)  Transactions where no tangible personal property is attached or installed are considered direct customer service activities (for example: carpet cleaning, lawn mowing, landscape maintenance). 
(4)  Demolition, earth moving, and wrecking activities are considered construction contracting. 
(c)  The sale of sand, rock, and gravel extracted from the ground shall be deemed a sale of tangible personal property and not mining or metallurgical activity. 
(d)  Sale of consumable goods incorporated into or applied to real property is considered a retail sale and not construction contracting. Examples of consumable goods are lubricants, faucet washers, and air conditioning coolant, but not paint. 
(e)  Installation or removal of tangible personal property which has independent functional utility is considered a retail activity. 
(1)  "Tangible personal property which has independent functional utility" must be able to substantially perform its function(s) without attachment to real property. "Attachment to real property" must include more than connection to water, power, gas, communication, or other service. 
(2)  Examples of tangible personal property which has independent functional utility include artwork, furnishings, "plug-in" kitchen equipment, or similar items installed by bolts or similar fastenings. 
(3)  Examples of tangible personal property which does not have independent functional utility include wall-to-wall carpeting, flooring, wallpaper, kitchen cabinets, or "built-in" dishwashers or ranges. 
(4)  The installation of window coverings (drapes, mini-blinds, etc.) is always a retail activity. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2944, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4997, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Reg. 21.1-460.2. - Retail sales: Trading stamp company transactions. 
    A trading stamp transaction is defined as follows: the trading stamp company issues stamps to a vendor; the vendor then provides them to its customers; and the customer then exchanges the stamps for merchandise from the trading stamp company. 
    The exchange transaction for the merchandise shall be deemed a retail sale and the trading stamp company a retailer. All taxes imposed by this Chapter applicable to retail transactions are therefore applicable to such exchange transactions. 
    The rate of tax shall be the retail rate based upon the retail dollar value of the redeemed merchandise as expressed in the redemption dollar value per book of stamps or portion thereof. The tax imposition described herein is in lieu of any Privilege or Use Tax upon the business of issuing stamps, redeeming the same, or using or storing property redeemed. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-460.3. - Retail sales: Membership fees of retailers. 
    Membership, admission, or other fees charged by limited access retailers are considered part of taxable gross income of the business activity of selling tangible personal property. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-460.4. - Retail sales: Professional services. 
(a)  "Professional Services" refer to services rendered by such persons as doctors, lawyers, accountants, architects, etc. for their customers or clients where the services meet particular needs of a specific client and only apply in the factual context of the client and the final product has no retail value in itself. For example, opinion letters, workpapers, reports, etc. are not in a form which would be subject to retail sales to customers. However, transfer of items in a form which would be subject to retail sales (e.g., artwork, forms, manuals, etc.) would not be considered professional services. The issue is one of fact which must be resolved in each situation. 
(b)  Creative ("idea") labor and design labor that do not result in tangible personal property that will be or can be sold are deemed professional services and, if charged separately and maintained separately in the taxpayer's books and records, are not includable in gross income. 
(c)  "Professional services" shall be deemed to include those items of tangible personal property which are incidental to the services rendered, provided such tangible personal property is "inconsequential." 
(1)  Incidental transfers of tangible personal property shall be regarded as "inconsequential" if, 
(A)  The purchase price of the tangible personal property to the person rendering the professional services represents less than fifteen percent (15%) of the charge, billing, or statement rendered to the purchaser in connection with the transaction, and 
(B)  The tangible personal property transferred is not itself in a form which is subject to retail sale. 
(2)  In cases where the tangible personal property transferred is deemed inconsequential, the provider of the tangible personal property so transferred is deemed the ultimate consumer of such tangible personal property, and subject to all applicable taxes imposed by this Chapter upon such transfer. 
(d)  Examples: 
(1)  The transfer of paper embodying the result or work product of the services rendered by an attorney or certified public accountant is regarded as inconsequential to the charges for professional services. 
(2)  An appraisal report issued by an appraiser, reflecting such appraiser's efforts to appraise real estate, is regarded inconsequential. 
(3)  Use of a hair care product on a client's hair by a barber or beautician in connection with performing professional services is usually inconsequential. On the other hand, if the barber or beautician supplies the customer with a bottle of the product for the client's use thereafter and without the professional's assistance, the transfer of the bottle of hair care product is deemed not inconsequential. 
(4)  If a mortician properly segregates his professional services from other taxable activities on his bill (invoice, contract), his gross income would include only the income derived from the sale of tangible personal property (casket, cards, flowers, etc.) and rental, leasing, or licensing of real and tangible personal property. His charges for professional services (embalming, cosmetic work, etc.) would not be includable in gross income. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-460.5. - Retail sales: Monetized bullion; numismatic value of coins. 
(a)  "Monetized Bullion" means coins or other forms of money manufactured or minted from precious metals or other metals and issued as legal tender or a medium of exchange by or for any government authorized to do so. 
(b)  Any coin shall be considered to have been transferred or acquired primarily for its "Numismatic value" if the sale or acquisition price: 
(1)  Is equal to or greater than twice (2 times) the value of the metallic content of the coin as of the date of transfer or acquisition; and 
(2)  Is equal to or greater than twice (2 times) its face value, in the case of a coin which, at the time of transfer or acquisition, was legal tender or a medium of exchange of the government issuing or authorizing its issuance. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-460.6. - Retail sales: Consignment sales. 
    Sales of merchandise acquired on consignment are taxable as retail sales. In cases where the merchant is acting as an agent on behalf of another dealer, sales of the consigned merchandise are taxable to the principal, provided the merchant makes full disclosure to customers that he is acting only as an agent for the named principal. However, when the principal is not deemed to be a dealer, such sales are considered to be those of the merchant and are taxable to him. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-465.1. - Retail sales: Repair services. 
(a)  Fair market value of parts and labor charges. The Tax Collector may examine the reporting of all transactions covered by this Section to determine if an "arms-length" price is charged for the parts and materials. The applicable tax may not be avoided by pricing a part, which ordinarily sells to the customer at $10, at $5 and including the difference as "service" or "labor". In the absence of satisfactory evidence supplied by the taxpayer as to industry or business practice, the Tax Collector may use the cost of the part or materials to the taxpayer marked up by a reasonable profit, to estimate the gross income subject to tax. 
(b)  (Reserved). 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-465.2. - Retail sales: Warranty, maintenance, and similar service contracts. 
(a)  Gross income from sales of warranty, maintenance, and service contracts is exempt from the tax imposed by Section 21.1-460. 
(b)  Transfers of tangible personal property in connection with a service, warranty, guaranty, or maintenance agreement between a vendor and a vendee shall be subject to tax under Section 21.1-460 only to the extent of gross income received from separately itemized charges made for the items of property transferred. 
(c)  The gross income derived from a maintenance insurance agreement, which agreement is entered into between the purchaser and any person other than the seller is not subject to tax imposed by Section 21.1-460. If the provider of the maintenance insurance agreement pays for tangible personal property on behalf of the insured in the performance of the agreement, such sales are subject to all applicable taxes imposed by this Chapter. 
(d)  Charges for tangible personal property provided under the terms of a warranty, maintenance, or service contract exempted under Section 21.1-465 are subject to tax as retail sales. 
(e)  However, gross income received by a dealer from a manufacturer for work performed under a manufacturer's warranty is not taxable under Section 21.1-460. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-465.3. - Retail sales: Sale of containers, paper products, and labels. 
(a)  The sale of a container or similar packaging material which contains personal property and which is transferred to the customer with the sale of the product is not taxable as a sale for resale. Examples of such nontaxable containers include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Packaging materials sold to a manufacturer of video equipment for containment of the product during shipment. 
(2)  Cellophane-type wrap sold to a meat department or butcher for containment of the individually wrapped or contained meat. 
(3)  Bags used to contain loose fungible goods such as fruits, vegetables, and other products sold in bulk, where such bags or containers are used to contain and measure the amount purchased by the customer. 
(4)  Shopping bags and similar merchandising bags sold to grocery stores, department stores or other retailers. 
(5)  Gift wrappings and gift boxes sold to department stores or other retailers. 
(b)  Sales of non-returnable or disposable paper (and similar products such as plastic or styrofoam) cups, lids, plates, bags, napkins, straws, knives, forks and other similar food accessories to a restaurant or others taxable under Section 21.1-455 for transfer by the restaurant to its customer to contain or facilitate the consumption of the food, drink or condiment are sales for resale and not taxable. 
(c)  Where a retailer imposes a charge for gift wrapping and the charge includes the container, paper, and other appropriate materials, the wrapping charge shall be considered a sale. 
(d)  Charges for returnable containers, where the charges are imposed on the customer, are subject to tax at the time of the transaction. A credit may be taken for the amount of refund after such refund is made. 
(e)  The sale of labels to a purchaser who affixes them to a primary container is a sale for resale and not taxable. Directional or instructional material included with products sold are considered to be part of the product and a sale for resale. However, the sale of items such as price tags, shipping tags, and advertising matter delivered to the customer in connection with the retail sale is taxable to the retailer as a retail sale to it, and is not exempt as a sale for resale. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-465.4. - Retail sales: Aircraft acquired for use outside the state. 
    "Aircraft acquired for use outside the State" means aircraft, navigational and communication instruments, and other accessories and related equipment sold to: 
(a)  Any foreign government for use by such government outside of this State. 
(b)  Persons who are not residents of this State and who will not use such property in this State other than in removing such property from this State. This subsection also applies to corporations that are not incorporated in this State, regardless of maintaining a place of business in this State, if the principal corporate office is located outside this State and the property will not be used in this State other than in removing the property from this State. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-470.1. - Telecommunication services. 
(a)  Gross income from the business activity of providing telecommunication services to consumers within this City shall not include: 
(1)  Charges for installation, maintenance, and repair of telecommunication equipment which are subject to the provisions of Sections 21.1-415, 21.1-416, or 21.1-417 (construction contracting); 21.1-445 (real property rental); 21.1-450 (tangible personal property rental); or 21.1-460 (retail sales); depending upon the nature of the work performed. 
(2)  Separately billed advertising charges which are subject to the provisions of Section 21.1-405 or 21.1-435. 
(b)  Mobile equipment. In cases where the customer is being provided telecommunication services to receiving/transmission equipment designed to be mobile in nature (for example, mobile telephones, portable hand-held two-way radios, paging devices, etc.), the provider shall, for the purposes of the tax imposed by this Section, determine whether such provider's customers are "within this City" as follows: 
(1)  By the billing address of the customer, provided that such address is a permanent residence or business location of the consumer within the State. 
(2)  In all other cases, the business location of the telecommunications provider. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-475.1. - Distinction between transporting for hire and certain related activities. 
    The hiring of mobile equipment (cranes, airplanes, limousines, etc.) is deemed rental, leasing, or licensing for use of tangible personal property whenever the charge is for a fixed sum or hourly rate. By comparison, the activity of a common carrier conveying goods or persons for a fee based upon distance, and not time, shall be considered transporting for hire. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-520.1. - Reports made to the city. 
(a)  Each taxpayer shall provide, as a minimum, all of the following when reporting taxes due as provided in this Chapter: 
(1)  Legal business name of the taxpayer or his agent. 
(2)  Mailing address of the taxpayer. 
(3)  City Privilege License number of the taxpayer. 
(4)  Period of time for which the report is intended. 
(5)  For each category of income to which the taxpayer is subject, for the reporting period, as provided on the official City tax return: 
(A)  All amounts subject to, excluded from, exempt from, or deductible from the taximposed upon that category of business activity, summarized in total as "gross receipts" of that category of business activity. 
(B)  The total amount claimed as excludable, exempted, or deducted from such "gross receipts", itemized as provided on the official City tax return, and summarized in total as "total deductions" for that category. 
(C)  The difference between such "gross receipts" and "total deductions" as "net taxable" for that category. 
(D)  The tax due and payable for that category. 
(6)  That total amount subject to Use Tax, summarized as "net taxable", and the Use Tax due and payable for that reporting period. 
(7)  Any excess tax collected which is due and payable. 
(8)  Any claimed tax credits against taxes due and payable. 
(9)  Total amount remitted with the return. 
(10)  A statement verifying that the information provided on the return is accurate to the best of the preparer's knowledge. Such statement must be accompanied by a dated signature of the preparer, and also show the preparer's title or relationship to the taxpayer. 
(11)  The Tax Collector may prescribe and will notify taxpayers of alternative methods for signing, subscribing or verifying any report or statement required to be filed, including but not limited to electronic signatures and/or security codes, and such methods shall have the same validity and consequence as the actual signature or written declaration of the taxpayer or other person required to sign, subscribe or verify the return, statement or other document. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-520.2. - Change of method of reporting. 
(a)  Any taxpayer electing to change his reporting method shall be permitted to do so only upon filing a written request to the Tax Collector and after receiving written approval of the Tax Collector. The approval shall state the effective date of the change. 
(b)  The Tax Collector may postpone such approval to allow for examination of the records of the taxpayer and may further require that all tax liability be satisfied up to the effective date of the change. 
(c)  Failure of the taxpayer to notify the Tax Collector and await approval before changing the method of reporting will subject the taxpayer to interest and penalties if his original method of reporting would produce higher taxes due the City. When a person makes such change without the consent of the Tax Collector, the Tax Collector may audit his books and records to verify the tax liability as of the date of the change. 
(d)  Any taxpayer who has failed to indicate a choice of reporting method upon the application for a Privilege License shall be deemed to have chosen the accrual method of reporting. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-555.1. - Administrative request for the attendance of witnesses or the production of documents; service thereof; remedies and penalties for failure to respond. 
(a)  If a taxpayer refuses or fails to comply in whole or in part with a request to provide records authorized by Section 21.1-555, the Tax Collector may issue his written Administrative Request which shall: 
(1)  Designate the individual to provide information. 
(2)  Describe specifically or generally the information to be provided, and any documents sought to be examined. 
(3)  State the date, time, and place in which the individual shall appear before the Tax Collector to provide the information and to produce the documents sought. 
(4)  Be directed to: 
(A)  Any director, officer, employee, agent, or representative of the person sought to be examined; or 
(B)  Any independent accountant, accounting firm, bookkeeping or financial service retained or employed by such person for any purpose connected with business activity subject to taxation; or 
(C)  Any other person who, in the opinion of the Tax Collector, has knowledge of facts bearing upon any tax liability of the person or taxpayer from whom information is sought. 
(b)  The failure of a taxpayer to comply with reasonable requests for records without good reason or cause may, in the exercise of judicial discretion by a court, be held to constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Reg. 21.1-571.1. - Collection of tax in jeopardy. 
    Evidence that collection of tax due is in jeopardy shall include documentation that: 
(a)  The taxpayer is going out of business. 
(b)  The taxpayer has no City Privilege License or has no permanent business location in the State. 
(c)  The taxpayer has failed to timely pay any tax (or penalties and interest thereon) due to the City on three (3) or more occasions within the previous thirty-six (36) calendar months. 
(d)  The taxpayer has remitted payment by check, which has been dishonored. 
(e)  The taxpayer has failed to comply with a formal written request of the Tax Collector made pursuant to Regulation 21.1-555.1. 
(Res. No. 4491, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Chapter 21.2 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21.2-1. - Findings. 
(a)  The city council makes the following findings based on evidence concerning the secondary effects of sexually oriented (adult) businesses on the community presented in reports made available to the city council: 
(1)  Adult businesses cause secondary effects which are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and which are set forth in more detail in subsections (a)(2) through (a)(12) of this section. 
(2)  Adult businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities and are frequently used for unlawful sexual activities, including public sexual indecency and prostitution, and sexual encounters of a casual nature. 
(3)  Adult businesses which feature live performances or activities involving nude or semi-nude persons, including adult cabarets, escort bureaus, nude model studios, semi-nude businesses and topless bars, lend themselves to unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently largely uncontrolled by the operators of such businesses, and such businesses require special supervision from public safety agencies. 
(4)  Sexual acts and other sexual contact occur at businesses which allow live performances featuring nude or semi-nude entertainers. Such acts result from the inability or unwillingness of the operators to control sexual activity and/or the physical layout of such businesses, which generally permits one-on-one performances by entertainers whose activities are difficult for the operators to monitor. Sexual acts are especially likely at adult businesses which provide private or semi-private areas, booths or rooms for viewing live performances, and offering and providing such areas encourages sexual activities. 
(5)  The operating characteristics of adult businesses raise substantial government concerns, including health concerns over the spread of sexually transmitted and possibly fatal diseases, and should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(6)  Adult businesses require minimum standards and regulations to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)  Establishing regulations on the place and manner of activities in adult businesses by limiting live performances to locations open to public viewing and by minimizing contact between employees and patrons will serve as a deterrent to and help curb the illegal sexual activity and other casual sexual conduct occurring in adult businesses. 
(8)  Establishing a reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the operators and managers of adult businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place an incentive on operators and managers to see that adult businesses are run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensees are the actual operators and managers of the adult business, and fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(9)  The regulation of nudity and semi-nudity, and manner of entertainment, in adult businesses will further the substantial governmental interests in preventing prostitution and other sex related crimes, including illegal sex acts, and in protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
(10)  Requiring visibility, sufficient lighting and monitoring of patron activities in adult businesses will advance the substantial governmental interests in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult arcades and adult theaters and will facilitate enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and other state and local laws, thereby furthering the substantial governmental interest in protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
(11)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of adult businesses, and by employees of such businesses, will facilitate the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and other state and local laws, thereby furthering the substantial governmental interest in protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
(12)  A person who recently has been convicted of a sexually related crime is not an appropriate individual to operate, manage or be employed in an adult business. Barring such persons from the operation and management of and employment in sexually oriented businesses for a period of five (5) years serves as a deterrent to and prevents the commission of sexually related criminal acts, including conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(b)  In making the findings set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the city council has relied upon the "Adult Business Factual Record and Studies" which are on file with the tax and license division of the finance department. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-2. - Purpose. 
    It is the city council's intent in adopting this chapter to regulate adult businesses in a manner necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and of employees and patrons of such businesses; to reduce the incidence of criminal behavior which may occur at adult businesses; to place the burden of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter on operators, managers and employees of adult businesses; and to prohibit certain adult businesses which are deemed to be public nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-3. - Applicability of ordinance to existing businesses; annexation. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons and adult businesses within the city, regardless of whether such persons or businesses commenced their activities before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(b)  Any person who was operating an adult business within the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and who is required to make substantial permanent changes to his or her adult business premises by any provision of this chapter, including changes in the configuration and lighting of such premises, shall not be required to make such changes for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, provided that any such person shall be deemed to be unlawfully operating an adult business if he or she continues to operate such business without making the required changes to the premises within one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(c)  If an existing adult business is located in an area that is annexed by the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, any provisions of this chapter that require the licensing of operators, managers or employees of such business, or that require an operator of such business to make substantial permanent changes to the adult business premises, shall not apply for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the annexation. Any operator, manager or employee of such business shall be deemed to be unlawfully operating or working without a license if he or she fails to apply for and obtain all required adult business licenses and identification cards within one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the annexation. Any operator of such business who is required to make substantial permanent changes to the adult business premises shall be deemed to be acting unlawfully if he or she continues to operate such business without making the required changes within one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the annexation. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-4. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, any word, term or phrase defined in any section in this chapter shall have the same meaning throughout this chapter. The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted wherein money-operated, token-operated or credit-operated, or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine in any viewing room of one hundred fifty (150) square feet or less at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore or novelty store: Any commercial establishment: 
(a)  Which as one of its principal business uses offers for sale or rental, for any consideration, any of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed materials, which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Films, video cassettes or other video reproductions depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(3)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, excluding condoms and other birth control and disease prevention products; and 
(b)  Which regularly excludes all minors from the premises because of the sexually explicit nature of the items sold, rented or displayed therein. 
    For purposes of this definition, twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the establishment's merchandise constitutes a principal business use. 
    Adult business or sexually oriented business: Any adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult theater, escort bureau, nude model studio, semi-nude business or topless bar. 
    Adult business license or sexually oriented business license: Any license issued pursuant to this chapter, including temporary or annual licenses for operators, managers and employees of any adult business. 
    Adult cabaret: Any nightclub, bar, restaurant or other commercial establishment which features live performances or activities on the business premises that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; provided that a nude model studio is not an adult cabaret. The term "adult cabaret" is intended to apply to businesses which emphasize and seek, through the conduct of any employee or performer, to arouse or excite the patron's sexual desires. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to apply to the presentation or performance of any play, drama or ballet in any theater, concert hall, fine arts academy, school, institution of higher education or similar establishment as a form of expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise. 
    Adult cabaret performer: Any employee who provides live entertainment to patrons at an adult cabaret involving specified anatomical areas, specified sexual activities or semi-nudity. 
    Adult motel: Any hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(a)  Offers accommodations to the public for any consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of such photographic reproductions; or 
(b)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or 
(c)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
    Adult theater: Any business establishment, other than an adult arcade or adult motel, used regularly for the business of exhibiting films, video cassettes or other video reproductions depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and from which all minors are regularly excluded because of the sexually explicit nature of such films, cassettes or reproductions. 
    Consideration: Money or money's worth, in the form of any fee, charge, commission, salary, wage or other payment. 
    Contact: Any physical contact that occurs through clothing or by means of any other object. 
    Direct line of sight: A straight line between the observer and the object being observed unobstructed by any wall, curtain, partition or other physical barrier that materially obstructs a view of the object being observed. 
    Electronic benefit transfer card transaction (EBT) : The use of a credit or debit card service, automated teller machine or point-of-sale terminal or access to an online system for the withdrawal of cash assistance provided pursuant to A. R. S. Title 46, Chapter 2, Article 5, or for the processing of a payment for merchandise or a service from cash assistance provided pursuant to A.R.S. Title 46, Chapter 2, Article 5. 
    Employee: Any individual who is hired, engaged or authorized to perform any service for an adult business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether the individual is designated an employee, independent contractor or otherwise. The term "employee" does not include an individual exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the licensee, nor an attorney, accountant or other person whose primary function is to provide professional advice and assistance to the licensee. 
    Escort: Any person who for any consideration is held out to the public as available for hire to consort with or to accompany another person to social affairs, places of amusement or entertainment, within any place of public resort, or within any private quarters. 
    Escort bureau: Any person who for any consideration furnishes, refers or offers to furnish or refer escorts, or provides or offers to introduce patrons to escorts. 
    Escort runner: Any person who is not an escort and who for any consideration, as the agent for either an escort bureau or an escort patron, contacts or meets with escort patrons or escort bureaus at any location other than the established open office. 
    Establish: The opening or commencement of any adult business as a new business; the conversion of any existing business to any adult business; the addition of any adult business to any other existing adult business; or the relocation of any adult business. 
    Knowingly: With respect to conduct or to a circumstance described in this chapter as an offense, that a person is aware or believes that his or her conduct is of that nature or that the circumstance exists. It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of the act or omission. 
    Licensee: Any person to whom an adult business license is issued. 
    Manager: Any person who exercises general control over an adult business while working at the premises of such business. 
    Manager's station: Any portion of an adult business designated by the operator as an area in which a manager shall be placed to observe employee and/or patron conduct. 
    Nonporous: Excludes any wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material. 
    Nude, nudity or state of nudity: The appearance of the cleft of the buttocks, anus, genitals or areola of the female breast; or a state of dress which fails to opaquely cover the cleft of the buttocks, anus, genitals or areola of the female breast. 
    Nude model: Any employee who appears nude or semi-nude at a nude model studio. 
    Nude model studio: Any place where a person appears nude or semi-nude, and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons for any consideration. The term "nude model studio" does not include a proprietary school that is licensed by this state; a college, community college or university that is supported entirely or in part by taxation; a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, community college or university that is supported entirely or in part by taxation; or a structure to which all of the following apply: 
(a)  A sign is not visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising appears on the premises indicating that a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; 
(b)  The business does not otherwise advertise itself as an adult business; 
(c)  Where in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
(d)  Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
    Operator: Any natural person who owns an adult business or is required to be licensed under section 21.2-24 for any corporation, limited liability company, partnership, trust or other legal entity that owns an adult business. 
    Person: Any natural person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, trust or other legal entity. 
    Recklessly: With respect to a result or to a circumstance described in this chapter as an offense, that a person is aware of and consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the result will occur or that the circumstance exists. The risk must be of such a nature and degree that disregard of such risk constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of conduct that a reasonable person would observe in the situation. A person who creates such a risk but is unaware of such risk solely by reason of voluntary intoxication also acts recklessly with respect to such risk. 
    Semi-nude or semi-nudity: A state of dress which shows the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point, or which shows the male or female buttocks. This definition shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
    Semi-nude business: Any commercial establishment, other than an adult cabaret, nude model studio or topless bar, which features employees who appear semi-nude before customers on the business premises. The term "semi-nude business" is intended to apply to businesses which emphasize and seek, through the conduct of any employee or performer, to arouse or excite the patron's sexual desires. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to apply to the presentation or performance of any play, drama or ballet in any theater, concert hall, fine arts academy, school, institution of higher education or similar establishment as a form of expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion of exploitation of semi-nudity for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise. 
    Semi-nude business performer: Any employee of a semi-nude business who appears semi-nude at such business. 
    Specified anatomical areas: Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal; the appearance of the cleft of the buttocks, anus, genitals or areola of the female breast; or a state of dress which fails to opaquely cover the cleft of the buttocks, anus, genitals or areola of the female breast. 
    Specific sexual activities: Any of the following activities: 
(a)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(b)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(c)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(d)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities set forth in subsections (a) through (c) of this definition. 
    Tax and license manager: The person designated by the city to act as tax and license manager, regardless of such person's official Title with the city. 
    Topless bar: Any establishment which is required to hold a liquor license under Arizona law and which offers semi-nude performers as entertainment. 
    Topless bar performer: Any employee of a topless bar who appears semi-nude at such bar. 
    Viewing room: Any room, booth or area where a patron of an adult business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, video cassette or other video reproduction. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2945, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4998, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Sec. 21.2-5. - Compliance with administrative regulations. 
    The chief of police and the tax and license manager may adopt such rules and regulations as they deem necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter; provided that such rules and regulations are consistent with this chapter and are approved by the city manager. All persons who are required to be licensed under this chapter shall comply with all rules and regulations so adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-6. - Compliance with other laws. 
    The issuance of an adult business license shall not be construed as authority to engage in any activity which is in violation of any other law or regulation to which such activity is subject, or to conduct activities on any property in violation of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-7. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person having a duty under this chapter to recklessly or knowingly fail to fulfill that duty, or for any person to otherwise recklessly or knowingly violate any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-8. - Injunction. 
    The operation of any adult business without the required adult business license shall constitute a nuisance, and any person who operates such business without such license shall be subject to a suit for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-9. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter, all of which are hereby declared to be severable from each other. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Secs. 21.2-10-21.2-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 21.2-20. - Classification of businesses and employees. 
(a)  Adult businesses shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or novelty stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult theaters; 
(6)  Escort bureaus; 
(7)  Nude model studios; 
(8)  Semi-nude businesses; or 
(9)  Topless bars. 
(b)  Owners, operators and employees of adult businesses shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Operators; 
(2)  Managers; 
(3)  Adult cabaret performers; 
(4)  Escorts; 
(5)  Nude models; 
(6)  Semi-nude business performers; 
(7)  Topless bar performers; or 
(8)  Other employees or persons associated with adult businesses who are not defined as operators and who perform no activities as managers, adult cabaret performers, escorts, nude models, semi-nude business performers or topless bar performers. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-21. - Licenses required. 
(a)  Subject to subsections (b) and (c) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Operate an adult business without first having obtained an operator's license issued under this chapter; 
(2)  Operate an adult business at any time without the presence on the adult business premises of a manager who possesses a manager's license and identification card issued under this chapter; 
(3)  Employ a manager, adult cabaret performer, escort, nude model, semi-nude business performer or topless bar performer who does not possess a manager's, adult cabaret performer's, escort's, nude model's, semi-nude performer's or topless bar performer's license and identification card issued under this chapter; or 
(4)  Work in an adult business as a manager, adult cabaret performer, escort, nude model, semi-nude business performer or topless bar performer without having first obtained a manager's, adult cabaret performer's, escort's, nude model's, semi-nude performer's or topless bar performer's license and identification card under this chapter. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to organizations providing escort services which are exempt from licensing under section 21.2-81(a). 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply, for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to any person who was operating an adult business within the city, or who was employed as a manager, adult cabaret performer, escort, nude model, semi-nude business performer or topless bar performer within the city, prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; provided that any such operator, manager or employee shall be deemed to be unlawfully operating or working without a license if he or she fails to apply for and obtain all required adult business licenses and identification cards within one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-22. - Separate licenses and fees for separate activities required; exceptions. 
(a)  If adult businesses of more than one classification are operated at one location, each operator of such businesses shall be required to obtain a separate operator's license, and pay the application and license fees therefor, for each such classification of businesses. 
(b)  Each operator of an adult business with multiple operators shall obtain a separate operator's license for such business. Only the prime operator of an adult business with multiple operators shall be required to pay the annual license fees for such business. For billing purposes, the tax and license manager may at any time designate and re-designate one operator of an adult business as the prime operator of such business, and all other operators shall be designated as sub-operators of such business. The obligations of a prime operator and a sub-operator under this chapter are the same, except for the payment of any required fees. 
(c)  An operator of an adult business who also acts as a manager of such business shall be required to obtain separate operator's and manager's licenses for such business; provided that such operator/manager shall be required to pay only the application and license fees applicable to an operator's license for such business. 
(d)  Only one license is required for each manager of adult businesses, regardless of how many adult businesses or classifications of such businesses he or she is employed by. An adult business manager shall give written notification to the tax and license manager of any change of employment as an adult business manager, no later than ten (10) days after such change. 
(e)  Only one license, which may be designated as a "performer's/model's license," is required for each adult cabaret performer, nude model, semi-nude business performer or topless bar performer, regardless of how many adult cabarets, nude model studios, semi-nude businesses or topless bars he or she is employed by. Each such employee shall give written notification to the tax and license manager of any change of employment as a performer/model, no later than ten (10) days after such change. 
(f)  Only one license is required for each escort, regardless of how many escort bureaus he or she is employed by. Each escort shall give written notification to the tax and license manager of any change of employment as an escort, no later than ten (10) days after such change. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-23. - Issuance standards. 
(a)  No person shall be licensed under this chapter if such person: 
(1)  Recklessly or knowingly makes any false or misleading material statement in the course of applying for or renewing an adult business license, for a period of one year after making the false or misleading statement; 
(2)  Is under the age of eighteen (18) years, provided that any person who is issued a performer's/model's license shall not be permitted to use such license as a topless bar performer until such licensee is at least nineteen (19) years old. 
(3)  Has been denied an adult business license or had such license revoked in any jurisdiction, for a period of one (1) year following the final denial or revocation decision; or 
(4)  Subject to subsections (b) and (c) of this section, has been convicted of any of the following offenses under Arizona law or any offense committed under the laws of another state which would constitute one of the following offenses described in Arizona Revised Statutes, title 13, chapters 14, 32, 35 and 35.1, as amended: 
a.  Indecent exposure. 
b.  Public sexual indecency; public sexual indecency to a minor. 
c.  Sexual abuse. 
d.  Sexual conduct with a minor. 
e.  Sexual assault. 
f.  Sexual assault of a spouse. 
g.  Molestation of child. 
h.  Continuous sexual abuse of a child. 
i.  Enticement of person for purpose of prostitution. 
j.  Procurement by false pretenses of person for purposes of prostitution. 
k.  Procuring or placing persons in house of prostitution. 
l.  Receiving earnings of prostitute. 
m.  Causing spouse to become prostitute. 
n.  Taking child for purpose of prostitution. 
o.  Detention of persons in house of prostitution for debt. 
p.  Keeping or residing in house of prostitution. 
q.  Pandering. 
r.  Transporting persons for purpose of prostitution or other immoral purpose. 
s.  Child prostitution. 
t.  Production, publication, sale, possession and presentation of obscene items. 
u.  Coercing acceptance of obscene articles or publications. 
v.  Furnishing obscene or harmful items to minors. 
w.  Public display of explicit sexual materials. 
x.  Films, photographs or motion pictures of minors. 
y.  Obscene or indecent telephone communications to minors for commercial purposes. 
z.  Sale or distribution of materials harmful to minors through vending machines. 
aa.  Commercial sexual exploitation of a minor. 
bb.  Sexual exploitation of a minor. 
cc.  Portraying adult as minor. 
dd.  Admitting minors to public displays of sexual conduct. 
ee.  Attempt, solicitation, conspiracy or facilitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses. 
(b)  No person shall be licensed under this chapter for the following periods of time if such person has been convicted of any offenses specified in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  If there is only one (1) misdemeanor conviction, a period of two (2) years after the later of the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for such conviction; 
(2)  If there are two (2) or more misdemeanor convictions within a five (5)-year period, a period of five (5) years after the later of the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for any such conviction; 
(3)  If there is a felony conviction, a period of five (5) years after the later of the date of conviction or the date of release of confinement imposed for the conviction. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-24. - Licenses for businesses owned by non-natural persons. 
    If an adult business is not owned and operated as a sole proprietorship, the entity which owns such business shall not be required to obtain its own operator's license but each of the following representatives of such entity shall be licensed as an operator of such business: 
(a)  The president of an owner which is a corporation; 
(b)  Each general partner of an owner which is a general partnership, limited partnership or limited liability partnership; 
(c)  Each managing member of an owner which is a limited liability company, or if there are no designated managing members, all members; 
(d)  Each trustee of an owner which is a trust; 
(e)  For a corporate owner, any person who is the beneficial owner of at least fifty percent (50%) of the shares of the corporation; or 
(f)  For a non-corporate owner, any person who shares, directly or indirectly, at least fifty percent (50%) of any financial gain attributable to the owner's business as an owner, proprietor, beneficiary or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-25. - Background checks. 
    The chief of police or such other employee of the city as he or she may designate shall conduct a criminal history background check for each applicant for an adult business license. Each applicant shall be fingerprinted and photographed as a part of such investigation; provided that any natural person who has been fingerprinted by the city for any licensing purposes within one (1) year from the date of application for another license requiring a background check shall not be required to be fingerprinted a second time. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-26. - Application for license. 
    An application for an adult business license shall be made on forms furnished by the city and shall include the following information, to the extent such information is applicable, about the applicant: 
(a)  The name, address and telephone number of such person; 
(b)  All aliases, fictitious names and trade names used by such person. If the business is to be conducted under a name other than the legal name of the applicant, the applicant shall furnish copies of the fictitious name certificate recorded with the county recorder and any trade name registered with the Secretary of State; 
(c)  Each residence address for such person for the five (5)-year period immediately preceding the date of filing the application and the inclusive dates of each such address; 
(d)  Proof of such person's age by any of the following instruments showing a date of birth: 
(1)  An unexpired driver's license issued by any state, provided such license includes a picture of the person; 
(2)  An identification license issued pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes, section 28-3165; 
(3)  An armed forces identification card; 
(4)  An unexpired passport which is issued by a government and which contains a photograph of the person and date of birth; or 
(5)  Any other identification document issued by a government which has substantial indices of reliability. 
(e)  Height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date of birth; 
(f)  The business, occupation or employment history for the five (5)-year period immediately preceding the filing of the application; 
(g)  Whether such person has ever been denied any similar license or permit or has had any similar license or permit revoked or suspended and, if so, the name of the jurisdiction denying,revoking or suspending such license or permit and the date of and reasons for such denial, revocation or suspension; 
(h)  The issuing jurisdiction and effective date of any license or permit issued to such person relating to an adult business; 
(i)  All prior felony or misdemeanor charges, indictments or convictions for offenses specified in section 21.2-23; 
(j)  A description of all adult business services to be provided; 
(k)  If the applicant is a representative of a corporation as defined in section 21.2-24, a copy of the articles of incorporation as filed with the corporation commission; 
(l)  If the applicant is a representative of a limited liability company as defined in section 21.2-24, a copy of the articles of organization filed with the corporation commission; 
(m)  If the applicant is a representative of a general partnership as defined in section 21.2-24, a copy of any written partnership agreement; 
(n)  If the applicant is a representative of a limited partnership as defined in section 21.2-24, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership filed with the secretary of state; 
(o)  If the applicant is a representative of a limited liability partnership as defined in section 21.2-24, a copy of the statement of qualifications filed with the secretary of state; 
(p)  If the applicant is a representative of a trust as defined in section 21.2-24, a copy of any document by which such trust was created; and 
(q)  The federal employer's identification number and state tax identification number. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-27. - Operator's diagram of premises. 
(a)  This section shall apply to all adult businesses except for adult motels. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements of section 21.2-26, each application for an operator's license shall include a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of all areas of the proposed adult business premises, unless such sketch or diagram has already been provided to the city by another operator at such premises. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall: 
(1)  Be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object; 
(2)  To the extent applicable, show the location of all manager's stations, viewing rooms, video cameras and monitors installed for monitoring purposes, restrooms, general patron areas, clearly designated areas in which patrons may be present, areas in which patrons are not permitted, stage areas, and any other distinct rooms or areas on the premises; and 
(3)  Be drawn to a designated scale or with clearly marked dimensions sufficient to show the dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus one (1) foot. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-28. - Initial inspection of premises; operator's duties. 
    An applicant for an operator's license shall make the adult business premises available for inspections by proper city officials during normal work hours prior to issuance of any temporary or annual license pursuant to section 21.2-30. Such inspections may be conducted at any time agreed upon by the city after the filing of an application, regardless of whether such application is complete. If the applicant and the city cannot agree on inspection dates prior to the filing of a complete application, the applicant shall, at such time as the tax and license manager gives the applicant notice that the application is deemed to be complete, immediately give the tax and license manager written notification of at least three different dates and times during normal business hours within the next ten (10) days when the applicant will be available at the business premises for inspection purposes. Failure of an applicant to be at the premises at the times stated in such notice to the tax and license manager shall be grounds for denying an operator's license pursuant to section 21.2-30 until such time as the city is able to perform any required inspections at agreed-upon times. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-29. - Fees. 
(a)  The application and license fees for adult business licenses shall be set by resolution. The city may set different application and license fees for an applicant who has not previously been issued an adult business license for the calendar year in which he or she submits an application and an applicant who has been issued an adult business license for the calendar year in which he or she submits an application and who is required to obtain a new license due to a change in the location of his or her business. 
(b)  Each applicant for an adult business license shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the City of Glendale for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to A. R. S. § 41-1750 and Public Law (PL) 92-544. The department of safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. In addition to any other fees imposed under this article, an applicant for an adult business license issued under this article shall pay an amount necessary to cover the costs of federal fingerprint processing or federal criminal history record information checks. The specific amount of such additional fee shall be set by administrative order based upon information received by the department of public safety, as to the costs of fingerprint processing and record information checks. The additional fees collected pursuant to this subsection shall be transmitted to the department of public safety as required by Arizona Revised Statutes section 41-1750, as amended. 
(c)  No application or fingerprinting fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be returned to an applicant if his or her application is withdrawn or denied. No license fee paid pursuant to this chapter shall be returned to a licensee if his or her temporary or annual license is suspended or revoked. 
(d)  No application for an adult business license shall be deemed complete for purposes of processing the application and issuing a license under section 21.2-30 until all application, fingerprinting and license fees required by this section have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2273 § 6, 7-23-02; Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-30. - Issuance of temporary and annual licenses; expiration; renewal. 
(a)  While an application for a manager's, escort's or performer's/model's license is pending, including any appeal of a denial of such license, the applicant shall not file a second application for a license of the same classification. While an application for an operator's license is pending, including any appeal of a denial of such license, the applicant shall not file a second application for an operator's license of the same business classification for the same location. 
(b)  No adult business license shall be issued until the applicant has filed a complete application for such license and, if applicable, has complied with section 21.2-28. The tax and license manager shall notify the applicant, orally or in writing, within five (5) days after the filing of an application, whether the city deems the application to be complete or, if not, the additional information the city needs in order for the application to be complete. If an applicant submits additional information to the tax and license manager after receiving notification that his or her application is incomplete, the tax and license manager shall notify the applicant, orally or in writing, within five (5) days after the applicant has submitted all information required by this article, that the application is now deemed to be complete. 
(c)  The tax and license manager shall approve or deny an application for an adult business license within sixty (60) days after the receipt of a complete application. If the tax and license manager fails to approve or deny the application within such sixty (60)-day period, the application shall be deemed to be approved. The tax and license manager shall approve the application and issue an annual license unless any of the following requirements are not met: 
(1)  The applicant is disqualified from obtaining a license under section 21.2-23; 
(2)  The applicant fails to comply with section 21.2-28; 
(3)  The applicant is delinquent in the payment of any taxes, fees, fines or penalties imposed upon the applicant relating to any adult business activity of the applicant in the city, and such delinquency is not cured within the sixty (60)-day processing period; or 
(4)  The applicant's proposed business location is not permitted under the city's zoning ordinance or under any other applicable law. 
(d)  The tax and license manager shall, no later than fifteen (15) days after the filing of a complete application for an adult business license, issue a temporary license that is valid for a period of sixty (60) days from the date of such application, unless the tax and license manager denies the application within such fifteen (15)-day period pursuant to subsection (c)(1) of this section or denies the issuance of a temporary license pursuant to subsections (c)(2) through (c)(4) of this section. If a temporary license is denied pursuant to subsections (c)(2) through (c)(4) of this section but the applicant cures any such defects in his or her application within the sixty (60)-day processing period, the tax and license manager shall issue a temporary license for the remainder of such sixty (60)-day period at such time as the defects in the application have been cured. The temporary license shall authorize the applicant to perform the services specified in the application while the application is pending, shall expire at the end of the sixty (60)-day processing period without any further action on the city's part, and shall not be extended for any reason beyond such sixty (60)-day period. 
(e)  Whenever an adult business license is denied, the tax and license manager shall serve a notice of such denial, including the reasons therefor, on the applicant. Such notice shall be personally served on the applicant or mailed to the applicant's last known address by certified mail. The denial shall be deemed effective for appeal purposes upon service or mailing of such notice and may be appealed pursuant to section 21.2-32. If a license is denied, except for a denial of a temporary license pursuant to subsections (c)(2) through (c)(4) and (d) of this section, the applicant may reapply for an adult business license only in accordance with section 21.2-23 (a)(3). 
(f)  Any annual adult business license shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued. Each such license expires on December 31 of each year and must be renewed on or before January 31 of the following year by filing an application for renewal, paying the applicable renewal fee and submitting and additional documentation required by this chapter. The application, payment for renewal and additional required documentation must be received by the tax and license manager by January 31 to be deemed timely filed. 
(g)  Persons whose initial applications for adult business licenses are received by the city after March 31 of any year shall be subject to an initial license fee on a prorated basis as follows: 
Business 
Start Date Proration of 
License Fee April 1-June 30 75% July 1-September 30 50% October 1-December 31 25%  
    The applicable proration percentage shall be applied to the annual license fee set by resolution to determine the initial license fee. 
(h)  Any person who fails to renew an adult business license by January 31 of any year and who conducts any activity covered by such license after such date shall be deemed to be operating without a license, shall be subject to all penalties imposed under this chapter against persons unlawfully operating without a license, and shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual license fee which would have been imposed on the date on which the adult business license expired in addition to payment of the applicable license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a new adult business license is issued to such person. 
(i)  Any person who is required to obtain an adult business license and fails to do so prior to conducting any activity covered by such license shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual license fee which would have been imposed on the date on which such activities commenced in addition to payment of the applicable license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before an adult business license is issued to such person. 
(j)  No adult business license shall be renewed unless the licensee is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter at the time of renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-31. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  The tax and license manager may suspend any adult business license for a specified period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or revoke such license, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The licensee has violated or is not in compliance with sections 21.2-33, 21.2-34, 21.2-35, 21.2-40, 21.2-41, 21.2-42, 21.2-43, 21.2-44, 21.2-45, 21.2-46, 21.2-51, 21.2-52, 21.2-60, 21.2-61, 21.2-71, 21.2-72, 21.2-73, 21.2-74, 21.2-83, 21.2-84, 21.2-85, 21.2-100, 21.2-101, 21.2-102, 21.2-110, 21.2-111, 21.2-112, 21.2-113, 21.2-120, 21.2-131, 21.2-132 or 21.2-133, 21.2-134, or any applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  The licensee recklessly or knowingly gives any false or misleading material statement in the course of applying for or renewing a license. 
(3)  The licensee, or any employee of a licensee, has recklessly or knowingly allowed prostitution on the adult business premises. 
(4)  The licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 21.2-23 for which the applicable time periods for disqualification have not expired. 
(5)  For an operator or manager, if on two or more occasions within any twelve (12)-month period, any employee of an adult business has committed any of the crimes specified in section 21.2-23 on the adult business premises, and convictions for such offenses have been obtained. 
(6)  The licensee, or any employee of a licensee, has recklessly or knowingly allowed any act of "sexual intercourse," "oral sexual contact" or "sexual contact," including masturbation, to occur on the adult business premises, as such terms are defined in Arizona Revised Statutes, section 13-1401, as amended. This subsection (a)(6) shall not apply to adult motels unless a licensee, or any employee of a licensee, recklessly or knowingly allows any act of sexual intercourse, oral sexual contact or sexual contact to occur in a public place or in public view, or unless such licensee or employee recklessly or knowingly allows any act of sexual intercourse, oral sexual contact or sexual contact to occur at the motel, in exchange for any consideration paid or received by any person other than normal fees charged by the motel for room rentals. 
(7)  The licensee is delinquent for a period of more than thirty (30) days in payment to the city of any taxes or fees related to the adult business. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 2945, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4998, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Sec. 21.2-32. - Appeal from denial, revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  If the tax and license manager determines that grounds exist for revocation or suspension of an adult business license, he or she shall give written notice of the city's intent to revoke or suspend such license to the licensee, which notice shall contain the reasons for the revocation or suspension and, if applicable, the period of the suspension. Such notice shall either be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address by certified mail. The notice shall be deemed effective upon personal service of such notice on the licensee or upon mailing of such notice. 
(b)  No later than twenty (20) days after the service of a notice of denial or a notice of intent to revoke or suspend an adult business license, the applicant or licensee may provide to the tax and license manager a written response to such notice, which shall include a statement of reasons why the license should not be denied, revoked or suspended and which may include a request for an administrative hearing on the denial, revocation or suspension. If an applicant does not file a written response to a notice of denial within such twenty (20)-day period, the applicant shall be deemed to have waived any appeal rights he or she would otherwise have under subsections (c) through (i) of this section. If a licensee does not file a written response to a notice of intent to revoke or suspend within such twenty (20)-day period, the tax and license manager shall revoke or suspend the license in accordance with such notice and shall serve a final notice of revocation or suspension on the licensee. Such final notice shall be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address by certified mail. A revocation or suspension shall be deemed to be effective upon personal service of the final notice on the licensee or upon mailing of such notice. 
(c)  If the applicant or licensee files a timely written response to a notice of denial or a notice of intent to revoke or suspend an adult business license, the tax and license manager shall, within fifteen (15) days after receiving the response: 
(1)  Withdraw the notice of denial or notice of intent to revoke or suspend by sending the applicant or licensee written notice of such withdrawal, if the tax and license manager determines from the response that a notice of withdrawal is appropriate; or 
(2)  Schedule an administrative hearing before a hearing officer on the notice of denial or notice of intent to revoke or suspend, if the applicant or licensee has requested such hearing; or 
(3)  Schedule an administrative hearing before a hearing officer on the notice of denial or notice of intent to revoke or suspend, if the tax and license manager desires such hearing based on a written response which does not include a request for hearing; or 
(4)  Forward a copy of the notice of denial or notice of intent to revoke or suspend, and the applicant's or licensee's written response thereto, to a hearing officer for a ruling on the written record, if neither the applicant or licensee nor the city requests an administrative hearing. 
(d)  If a licensee files a timely written response to a notice of intent to revoke or suspend, the revocation or suspension shall not take effect until after the hearing officer issues a written ruling on such response and, if the hearing officer upholds the revocation or suspension, the city serves a final notice of revocation or suspension on the licensee. Such final notice shall be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address by certified mail. The revocation or suspension shall be deemed to be effective upon personal service of the final notice on the licensee or upon the mailing of such notice. 
(e)  If the tax and license manager fails to act in a timely manner in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, the notice of denial or notice of intent to revoke or suspend shall be deemed to be withdrawn without prejudice by the city. 
(f)  Any hearing held pursuant to subsections (c)(2) or (c)(3) of this section shall be scheduled no later than thirty (30) days after the filing of the applicant's or licensee's written response. The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct a hearing in accordance with this section. The hearing officer shall not be a member of the city's tax and license division or police department. 
(g)  Any hearing held pursuant to this section shall be conducted in an informal manner. The hearing officer shall hear such testimony and consider such evidence as is relevant to the determination of all issues relating to the applicant's or licensee's qualifications for obtaining and holding an adult business license. The hearing officer shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence or procedure in conducting the hearing. All parties to the administrative proceeding shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present witnesses and to cross-examine witnesses. The burden of proof at the hearing shall be: 
(1)  On the applicant to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he or she meets all of the requirements to obtain a new adult business license; and 
(2)  On the city to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that grounds exist for revoking or suspending an adult business license. 
(h)  The hearing officer shall render a written ruling no later than thirty (30) days after the completion of the hearing is concluded based on the evidence presented by the city and by the applicant or licensee. If neither the applicant or licensee nor the city has requested a hearing on the applicant's or licensee's written response to a notice of denial or notice of intent to revoke or suspend, the hearing officer shall render a written ruling on such response no later than thirty (30) days after such notice and response are forwarded to the hearing officer. If the hearing officer fails to render a written ruling within the thirty (30)-day period specified in this subsection, a decision in favor of the applicant or licensee shall be deemed to have been rendered. 
(i)  When the hearing officer's decision to deny, revoke or suspend an adult business license becomes final, the applicant or licensee shall have the right to seek judicial review of the decision by way of special action or other available procedure in the superior court. The city shall consent to an expedited hearing after the filing of the action and service of the appropriate documents on the city. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-33. - Non-transferability of licenses. 
(a)  No operator's license shall be transferred between persons or locations. No person shall operate an adult business at any place other than the licensed premises specified in the operator's license. 
(b)  No adult business license for a manager, adult cabaret performer, escort, nude model, semi-nude business performer or topless bar performer shall be transferred between persons. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-34. - Display of license. 
(a)  An adult business operator shall at all times display his or her adult business license in a conspicuous place at the licensed business premises. 
(b)  A manager, adult cabaret performer, escort, nude model, semi-nude business performer or topless bar performer shall have his or her adult business license readily available for inspection, on his or her person or at the adult business premises, at all times during which he or she is engaging in such licensed business activities within the city and shall display such license upon request to any law enforcement officer or any city official whose duties are related to licensing. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-35. - Identification cards for adult business employees. 
(a)  The tax and license manager shall issue to each manager, adult cabaret performer, escort, nude model, semi-nude business performer and topless bar performer an identification card containing a current photograph of such licensee. Each identification card shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued, except for temporary identification cards which specify a different expiration date. The licensee shall obtain a new identification card on or before January 31 of the following year by presenting himself or herself to the tax and license division for photographing. 
(b)  At all times that a licensee is acting as a manager, adult cabaret performer, nude model, semi-nude business performer or topless bar performer, such licensee shall have his or her identification card readily available for inspection at the adult business premises. A manager, adult cabaret performer, nude model, semi-nude business performer or topless bar performer shall display his or her identification card upon request to any law enforcement officer or any city official whose duties are related to licensing. 
(c)  At all times that a licensee is acting as an escort, such licensee shall carry his or her identification card on his or her person. An escort shall display his or her identification card upon request to any person considering doing business with such licensee or to any law enforcement officer or any city official whose duties are related to licensing. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Secs. 21.2-36-21.2-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21.2-40. - Periodic inspections. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any adult business licensee to refuse to permit any law enforcement officer or any city official whose duties are related to licensing to inspect the videotapes of monitoring required to be made and maintained under section 21.2-51, or to refuse to permit such officer or official to inspect the adult business premises, for purposes of ensuring compliance with this chapter, at any time such premises are occupied or open for business. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented to a customer for use as a temporary or permanent habitation. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-41. - Loitering; exterior lighting and monitoring requirements. 
    It shall be the duty of the operator and manager of any adult business to: 
(a)  Initiate and enforce a "no loitering" policy within the external boundaries of the real property upon which such business is located. 
(b)  Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on such property. 
(c)  Designate an employee to monitor the activities of persons on such property at all times such business is open by visually inspecting such property at least once every thirty (30) minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and monitors. Such video cameras and monitors, if used, shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business, and the monitors shall be installed within a manager's station. 
(d)  Provide adequate lighting of the exterior premises to allow visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-42. - Changes to configuration of premises. 
(a)  No operator shall make or allow to be made any material change in the configuration of the adult business premises to that configuration on file with the tax and license manager, unless such operator obtains the prior written approval of the tax and license manager for such change. The tax and license manager shall approve any proposed change to the configuration of the premises within thirty (30) days after receiving a complete, written application for such change, unless such change would result in a violation of this chapter. The application for a change in configuration must comply with the requirements of section 21.2-27(b) in order to be deemed a complete application. 
(b)  In addition to the tax and license manager's approval for changes in the configuration of the adult business premises, the operator shall obtain all building permits and approvals from other city departments that may be necessary for such changes to the business premises. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-43. - Licensee's duty to update information. 
    Any adult business licensee shall, within ten (10) days after a material change to any information provided by such license in applying for and renewing his or her license, provide the tax and license manager with a written notice of such change. Any change of address provided by the licensee pursuant to this section shall be deemed to be the licensee's last known address for purposes of serving any notices on the licensee which are required or permitted under this chapter, until such time as the licensee provides the tax and license manager with further written notices of address changes pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-44. - Operator's duty to ensure compliance by managers. 
(a)  An adult business operator shall not allow any employee to work as a manager of such business until such employee has displayed to the operator a valid adult business manager's license and identification card. The operator shall require that all persons employed as managers maintain current licenses and identification cards at all times during which such employees work at the adult business. On or before January 31 of each year, the operator shall verify with each manager that such employee has renewed his or her manager's license and identification card. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply, for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to persons who were operating adult businesses within the city prior to such effective date. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-45. - Duty to monitor restrooms. 
(a)  If any restroom on the adult business premises is open to and may be locked by patrons using such restroom, it shall be the duty of the adult business operator and manager to regularly monitor such restroom to ensure that no more than one person is using such restroom at any time and that no illegal activities take place in such restroom. 
(b)  For any restroom on the adult business premises which is not covered by subsection (a) of this section, it shall be the duty of the operator and manager to regularly monitor such restroom to ensure that no illegal activities take place in such restroom. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-46. - Operating requirements. 
    An adult business at which performers disrobe or perform in an unclothed state shall disable the ability of any automatic teller machines and point-of-sale terminals on the business' premises to accept the electronic benefit transfer card or process an electronic benefit transfer card transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2945, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4998, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Secs. 21.2-47-21.2-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ARCADES 

Sec. 21.2-50. - Non-applicability to adult motels. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to any adult motel, except to the extent that a portion of the motel premises are operated as an adult arcade in addition to the general operations of the motel. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-51. - Regulations for exhibition of explicit films by arcades. 
    Any adult arcade shall comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Restrooms shall not contain any video reproduction equipment. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator and manager to ensure that each viewing room is visible from a continuous main aisle and remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any areas of the premises which have been designated, in the operator's current diagram of the premises submitted under sections 21.2-27 and 21.2-42, as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any adult business that is required or elects to comply with the provisions of section 21.2-52. 
(c)  The interior premises, with the exception of any viewing rooms and the aisles contiguous to each viewing room, shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1) foot-candle as measured at the floor level. Each viewing room and the aisles contiguous to such viewing room shall be illuminated with lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to provide an illumination of not less than 0.75 foot-candle as measured at three (3) feet above floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator and manager to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises are open for business. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the operator and manager to ensure that no act of "sexual intercourse," "oral sexual contact" or "sexual contact," including masturbation, as defined in A.R.S. section 13-1401, as amended, occurs on the adult business premises. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the operator and manager to ensure that no more than one person is present in a viewing room at any time. No person shall enter a viewing room that is occupied by another person. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the operator, manager and any employee who discovers two or more patrons in a viewing room or discovers any person making or attempting to make an opening of any kind between viewing rooms to immediately remove such person from the premises. 
(g)  It shall be the duty of the operator, manager and any employee who discovers an opening of any kind between viewing rooms to immediately secure such rooms, and to prevent entry into them by any patron until such time as the wall between the rooms has been repaired to remove the opening. Removal and repair of openings between viewing rooms shall be in a manner that is as structurally substantial as the original wall construction. 
(h)  It shall be the duty of the operator and manager, during each business day, to regularly inspect the walls between viewing rooms for openings of any kind. 
(i)  It shall be the duty of the operator and manager to initiate and enforce a "no loitering" policy in viewing rooms. 
(j)  It shall be the duty of the operator and manager to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
(1)  That no loitering is permitted in viewing rooms. 
(2)  That the occupancy of viewing rooms is limited to one person. 
(3)  That sexual intercourse, oral sexual contact and sexual contact, including masturbation, are prohibited. 
(4)  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited. 
(5)  That violators will be required to leave the premises. 
(6)  That violations of subsections (j)(1) through (j)(4) are unlawful. 
(k)  It shall be the duty of the operator and manager to ensure that floor coverings in viewing rooms are nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
(l)  It shall be the duty of the operator and manager to ensure that all wall surfaces and seating surfaces in viewing rooms, restrooms, or other rooms or areas providing patron privacy, are constructed of or permanently covered by nonporous, easily cleanable material. 
(m)  It shall be the duty of the operator and manager to ensure that the premises are clean and sanitary at all times. Cleaning procedures shall include all of the following: 
(1)  The operator and manager shall maintain a regular cleaning schedule, documented by appropriate logs, and shall employ sufficient personnel to assure the establishment is clean. 
(2)  The operator and manager shall provide an employee to check all areas for trash, body fluids and excrement and to promptly remove such materials and clean all areas with a disinfectant. All solid waste generated by the business shall be collected from the premises for disposal at a lawful solid waste disposal facility at least once each week. Prior to collection, solid waste shall be stored in a manner that prevents access by animals or members of the public and that will not facilitate the creation of a health nuisance. 
(3)  Thorough cleaning of the entire interior of any viewing room shall be done using a disinfectant. Cleaning shall include floors, walls, doors, seating, monitors, video cameras, windows and other surfaces. 
(n)  It shall be the duty of the operator and manager to monitor the number of occupants in each viewing room. Monitoring shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  The manager shall designate employees to monitor the number of occupants in each viewing room by visually inspecting the interior of each viewing room at least once every thirty (30) minutes. A designated employee shall be on the premises at all times the business is open to the public. The manager shall make a record of the monitoring required by this subsection by use of video cameras and video recorders, which shall be operated continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The manager shall make a videotape of such monitoring that shall provide a constant and current date and time display. The manager shall maintain and, upon request by any law enforcement officer or any city official whose duties are related to licensing, make available for inspection and copying the most recent seventy-two (72) hours of videotape of the monitoring required by this subsection (n)(1). Such officer or official may use the videotapes of monitoring for law enforcement and licensing purposes only. The videotapes shall be returned to the manager within thirty (30) days after delivery to the officer or official unless the videotapes are required as evidence. If the videotapes are required as evidence, the officer or official shall make a copy of the videotapes for the manager upon the manager's request. If a video camera or video recorder is not in operation for any reason, then it shall be the duty of the operator, manager and any designated employee to immediately secure each viewing room monitored by such equipment and prevent entry into the viewing room by any patron until such time as the equipment is repaired and fully operational; or 
(2)  The manager shall designate employees to monitor the number of occupants in each viewing room by use of video cameras, video recorders and monitors that provide an ability to inspect the interior of each viewing room. A designated employee shall be on the premises at all times the business is open to the public. The monitors shall be installed within a manager's station of thirty-two (32) square feet or less of floor area. The video cameras, recorders and monitors shall be operated continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The manager shall keep a record of the monitoring required by this subsection (n)(2) by making a videotape of such monitoring that shall provide a constant and current date and time display. The manager shall maintain and, upon request by any law enforcement officer or any city official whose duties are related to licensing, make available for inspection and copying the most recent seventy-two (72) hours of videotape of the required monitoring. Such officer or official may use the videotapes of monitoring for law enforcement and licensing purposes only. The videotapes shall be returned to the manager within thirty (30) days after delivery to the officer or official, unless the videotapes are needed as evidence. If the videotapes are needed as evidence, the officer or official shall make a copy of the videotapes for the manager upon the manager's request. If a video camera, monitor or recorder is not in operation for any reason, then it shall be the duty of the operator, manager and any designated employee to immediately secure each viewing room monitored by such equipment and prevent entry into the viewing room by any patron until such time as the equipment is repaired and fully operational; or 
(3)  The operator and manager shall comply with section 21.2-52. 
(o)  It shall be the duty of the operator and manager to ensure that any seating within a viewing room is designed so as to accommodate only one person. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-52. - Configuration of premises for new adult arcades. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall apply to any adult arcade that is established after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. For purposes of this section, "established" shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  The opening of an adult arcade as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of any existing business to an adult arcade; or 
(3)  The expansion, extension or enlargement of the floor area of any viewing rooms in an adult arcade beyond the floor area previously occupied by such rooms. 
(b)  Any adult arcade that is established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section may elect to comply with section 21.2-52(c) in lieu of complying with sections 21.2-51(b) and (n). 
(c)  Any adult arcade which is specified in subsection (a) of this section shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. 
(2)  If the premises have more than one manager's station designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager's stations. 
(3)  A manager's station shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The view required by this subsection (c) must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(4)  It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one (1) manager is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the operator and manager to ensure that the view area specified in this subsection (c) remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that the business is open, and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the operator's current diagram of the premises submitted pursuant to sections 21.2-27 And 21.2-42. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Secs. 21.5-53-21.2-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOOKSTORES OR NOVELTY STORES 

Sec. 21.2-60. - No sexual conduct allowed. 
    It shall be the duty of the operator and manager to ensure that no act of "sexual intercourse," "oral sexual contact" or "sexual contact," including masturbation, as defined in A.R.S. section 13-1401, as amended, occurs on the adult business premises. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-61. - Trash. 
    It shall be the duty of the operator and manager, at least once every eight (8) hours during each business day, to inspect the outside of the adult business premises for trash and, if any trash is found, to pick up such trash for proper disposal. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Secs. 21.2-62-21.2-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CABARETS 

Sec. 21.2-70. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Clearly designated area in which patrons may be present: That portion of the adult business premises, excluding lobbies and restrooms, which is available to any member of the general public lawfully on the premises without payment of any consideration other than a cover charge or other consideration payable to gain admittance to the premises generally. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-71. - Manager's duty to ensure compliance by performers. 
(a)  An adult cabaret manager shall not allow any person to work as an adult cabaret performer on the adult business premises until such person has displayed to the manager a valid adult cabaret performer's license and identification card. The manager shall require that all persons employed as adult cabaret performers maintain current licenses and identification cards at all times during which such persons work at the adult cabaret. On or before January 31 of each year, the manager shall verify with each adult cabaret performer that such person has renewed his or her license and identification card. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply, for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to persons who were employed as adult cabaret managers or performers within the city prior to such effective date. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-72. - Regulations for businesses featuring nudity or live performances. 
    An adult business which features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities shall be operated in accordance with the following regulations: 
(a)  An employee shall not appear in a state of nudity or engage in a live performance that is characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities except upon a stage elevated at least eighteen (18) inches above floor level. All parts of the stage in which the employee appears in a state of nudity or performs shall be a distance of at least three (3) feet from all parts of the clearly designated area in which patrons may be present. The stage shall be separated from the clearly designated area in which patrons may be present by a barrier or railing, the top of which is at least three (3) feet above floor level. No employee appearing in a state of nudity or engaging in such live performance, and no patron, may extend any part of his or her body over and beyond the barrier or railing. 
(b)  No employee shall perform an act which constitutes or simulates sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
(c)  No employee may touch the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any other person. 
(d)  No patron, using any part of his or her body including the hands, may knowingly make contact with the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any employee. 
(e)  A patron may not place any money on the person or in or on the costume of an employee, provided that incidental hand-to-hand contact occurring during the act of tipping while the patron is in the clearly designated area in which patrons may be present is not prohibited. 
(f)  A person below the age of eighteen (18) years may neither observe a person in a state of nudity in a live performance on the premises of an adult business, nor appear in a state of nudity in a live performance on the adult business premises. 
(g)  A sign, in the following form, shall be posted near the entrance of the adult business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry: 
RULES AND REGULATIONS 
1.  You must be at least 18 years of age to enter these premises. 
2.  No patron may place any money on the person of, or on the costume of, an employee of this business. 
3.  Hand-to-hand tipping of employees is permitted. 
4.  No patron may touch or make contact with the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any employee of this business. 
(h)  No person may be employed who is under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(i)  All performances shall be visible to a manager in a manager's station by direct line of sight. No patron shall be permitted in a manager's station at any time. 
(j)  The adult business shall provide training to all employees which shall consist of: 
(1)  A description of the clearly designated area in which patrons may be present and the stage area in which performances may be conducted for the business. 
(2)  Written verification from each employee, to be kept on the adult business premises, that he or she has received a current copy of this chapter 21.2 from the manager or that he or she already has such current copy. 
(3)  Written verification from each employee, to be kept on the adult business premises, that he or she has received a current copy of Arizona Revised Statutes, title 13, chapters 14, 32, 35 and 35.1 from the manager or that he or she already has such current copy. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-73. - Employee index. 
    An adult cabaret operator and manager shall maintain on the adult business premises at all times an index of all adult cabaret performers employed by such business during the last two (2) years. Such index shall be made available for inspection on the business premises, upon demand, to any law enforcement officer or any city official whose duties are related to licensing. The adult cabaret may require such officer or official to complete an inspection log with name, serial or badge number, title, time, date and purpose for the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-74. - Operating requirements-Use of EBT prohibited. 
    An adult cabaret operator shall disable the ability of any automatic teller machines and point-of-sale terminals on the business' premises to accept the electronic benefit transfer card or process an electronic benefit transfer card transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2945, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4998, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Secs. 21.2-75-21.2-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ESCORT BUREAUS 

Sec. 21.2-80. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Escort patron: A customer or any person who contracts with, employs or for consideration hires an escort bureau, escort runner or escort for purposes of hiring an escort. 
    Offer to provide acts of sexual conduct: To offer to provide sexual conduct to a patron, including any conversations, advertisements and acts which would lead a reasonably prudent person to conclude that such acts were to be provided. 
    Open office: An office at the licensed escort bureau address from which escort business is transacted; to qualify as an open office it is required that: 
(a)  Business hours be established and posted and that the office be open to the public, patrons or prospective patrons during such business hours and, if different from the posted hours, during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on all days that escort services are being provided; 
(b)  Each manager has the authority to bind the bureau to escort and patron contracts and resolve patron and consumer complaints; 
(c)  All telephone lines and numbers listed to the escort bureau or advertised as escort bureau numbers terminate at the open office and at no other location; and 
(d)  All business records be kept in the open office including records of escort calls and referrals, stating the name and address, including hotel or motel room, of the patron, the date and time of referral, name of escort sent, whether the referral resulted in an escort service and the total fee received from the patron. 
    Service-oriented escort: Any escort who: 
(a)  Operates from an open office; and 
(b)  Does not employ or use any escort runner; and 
(c)  Does not advertise that sexual conduct will be provided or work for an escort bureau which so advertises; and 
(d)  Does not offer, agree to provide, or provide sexual conduct. 
    Service-oriented escort bureau: Any escort bureau which: 
(a)  Maintains an open office at an established place of business; and 
(b)  Does not employ or use any escort runner; and 
(c)  Does not advertise, offer, agree to provide, or provide sexual conduct to a patron; and 
(d)  Employs only licensed escorts. 
    Sexual conduct: Engaging in the commission of an act of sexual intercourse, oral-genital contact or the touching of the sexual organs, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast of a person for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of another person. 
    Sexually oriented escort: Any escort who: 
(a)  Employs any escort runner; or 
(b)  Is employed by or is referred to a patron by a sexually oriented escort bureau; or 
(c)  Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided, or is employed by or is referred to a patron by an escort bureau which so advertises; or 
(d)  Solicits, offers, agrees to provide, or provides acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron; or 
(e)  Accepts an offer to provide acts of sexual conduct for any consideration in addition to the consideration charged by the escort bureau. 
    Sexually oriented escort bureau: Any escort bureau which: 
(a)  Engages in advertising to make the prospective patron believe that acts of sexual conduct will be provided; or 
(b)  Uses as escorts persons known to have violated the law regarding prostitution within the last five (5) years; or 
(c)  Does not maintain an open office; or 
(d)  Employs or uses any escort runner; or 
(e)  Offers, agrees to provide, or provides acts of sexual conduct to a patron; or 
(f)  Employs or refers unlicensed escorts; or 
(g)  Does not deliver contracts to every patron; or 
(h)  Employs, refers or provides to a patron a sexually oriented escort. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-81. - Applicability to certain organizations and agencies. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the following persons are exempt from licensing pursuant to this chapter: 
(1)  Any organization which is qualified for exemption from taxation of income under Arizona Revised Statutes, sections 43-1201 (1), (2), (4), (5), (6), (7), (10) or (11), as amended; 
(2)  Any profession, occupation and business which is licensed by the State of Arizona or any political subdivision thereof pursuant to a specific statute or ordinance, which performs an escort bureau function as a service incidental to the primary function of such business and which does not hold itself out to the public as an escort bureau; and 
(3)  Any employee of any such business who performs escort functions as a service incidental to the primary function of such business and who does not hold himself or herself out to the public as an escort. 
(b)  Any employment agency licensed by the state which provides escorts must obtain a license as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-82. - Escort runners and sexually oriented escort bureaus prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, manage or be employed by a sexually oriented escort bureau within the city, regardless of any license which such person may hold, including any escort bureau's or escort's licenses issued under this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an escort runner within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-83. - Manager's duty to ensure compliance by escorts. 
(a)  An escort bureau manager shall not allow any employee to work as an escort until such escort has displayed to the manager a valid escort's license and identification card. The manager shall require that all persons employed as escorts maintain current licenses and identification cards at all times during which such escorts work for the escort bureau. On or before January 31 of each year, the manager shall verify with each escort that such licensee has renewed his or her license and identification card. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply, for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to persons who were employed as escort bureau managers or escorts within the city prior to such effective date. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-84. - Escort bureau duties; local open office required. 
(a)  An escort bureau manager shall provide to each patron a written contract and receipt of payment for services. The contract shall clearly state the type of services to be performed, the length of time such services shall be performed, the total amount of money such services shall cost the patron, and any special terms or conditions relating to the services to be performed. 
(b)  The escort bureau shall operate only from an open office located within Maricopa County. The street address of that office shall be included in all patron contracts. The escort bureau operator or manager shall not provide private rooms or booths where the patron may meet with the escort at the open office or at any other location. 
(c)  The escort bureau operator and manager, in terms of licensing consequences, are responsible for the acts of all of their employees, including managers, telephone receptionists, and escorts who are referred by such bureau while the escort is with the patron. 
(d)  The escort bureau operator and manager shall maintain at the open office at all times an index of all escorts employed by such business during the last two (2) years. Such index shall be made available for inspection, upon demand, to any law enforcement officer or any city official whose duties are related to licensing. The escort bureau may require such officer or official to complete an inspection log with name, serial or badge number, title, time, date and purpose for the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-85. - Prohibited activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the following activities within the city: 
(a)  Acting as an escort, furnishing or offering to furnish escorts, or conducting business as an escort bureau or escort under any name not listed in such person's license. 
(b)  Operating as an escort bureau on the same premises at which is located a cocktail lounge, bar, liquor store, telephone answering service, adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult theater, nude model studio, semi-nude business or topless bar, or soliciting business as an escort while on such premises. 
(c)  Providing an escort to an individual under eighteen (18) years of age unless the escort bureau or escort first obtains express written authorization for the provision of such services from such minor's parent or legal guardian. 
(d)  Publishing, disseminating or displaying, directly or indirectly, by hire, contract or otherwise, in or on any newspaper, magazine, publication, radio, television, telephone or other advertising media any oral or written statement, photograph, picture, drawing, sketch or pictorial representation which would suggest to a reasonable and prudent person that sexual conduct or nudity is offered or provided by an escort or escort bureau. 
(e)  Providing or offering to provide sexual conduct, nudity or semi-nudity as a part of the business of an escort bureau or escort. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Secs. 21.2-86-21.2-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MOTELS 

Sec. 21.2-91. - Short-term rentals; presumption of adult business. 
    Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated more than once in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as defined in section 21.2-4. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-92. - Sub-renting by non-licensees prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who rents a sleeping room in an adult motel to sub-rent such sleeping room to another patron. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Secs. 21.2-93-21.2-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - NUDE MODEL STUDIOS 

Sec. 21.2-100. - Regulations for studios featuring nudity. 
    A nude model studio which features persons who appear in a state of nudity shall comply with all regulations concerning adult cabarets set forth in section 21.2-72. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-101. - Manager's duty to ensure compliance by models. 
(a)  A nude model studio manager shall not allow any employee to work as a nude model until such employee has displayed to the manager a valid nude model's license and identification card. The manager shall require that all persons employed as nude models maintain current licenses and identification cards at all times during which such employees work for the nude model studio. On or before January 31 of each year, the nude model studio manager shall verify with each nude model that such person has renewed his or her license and identification card. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to persons who were employed as nude model studio managers or models within the city prior to such effective date. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-102. - Employee index. 
    A nude model studio operator and manager shall maintain on the adult business premises at all times an index of all nude models employed by such business during the last two (2) years. Such index shall be made available for inspection on the business premises, upon demand, to any law enforcement officer or any city official whose duties are related to licensing. The nude model studio may require such officer or official to complete an inspection log with name, serial or badge number, title time, date and purpose for the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Secs. 21.2-103-21.2-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SEMI-NUDE BUSINESSES 

Sec. 21.2-110. - Manager's duty to ensure compliance by performers. 
(a)  A semi-nude business manager shall not allow any employee to work as a semi-nude business performer until such employee has displayed to the manager a valid semi-nude business performer's license and identification card. The manager shall require that all persons employed as semi-nude business performers maintain current licenses and identification cards at all times during which such employees work for the semi-nude business. On or before January 31 of each year, the semi-nude business manager shall verify with each semi-nude business performer that such person has renewed his or her license and identification card. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply, for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to persons who were employed as semi-nude business managers or performers within the city prior to such effective date. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-111. - Semi-nude business performers; prohibited activities. 
    It is unlawful for a semi-nude business performer, while working on the adult business premises, to recklessly or knowingly: 
(a)  Use his or her hands, or any other part of his or her body, to make contact with the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any other person. 
(b)  Permit his or her breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals to make contact with any other person. 
(c)  Perform an act which constitutes or simulates sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
(d)  Display any portion of the areola of the female breast, or any portion of his or her pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(e)  Permit a patron to place any money on his or her person or on his or her costume, provided that incidental hand-to-hand contact occurring during the act of tipping shall not be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-112. - Employee index. 
    A semi-nude business operator and manager shall maintain on the adult business premises at all times an index of all semi-nude performers employed by such business during the last two years. Such index shall be made available for inspection on the business premises, upon demand, to any law enforcement officer or any city official whose duties are related to licensing. The semi-nude business may require such officer or official to complete an inspection log with name, serial or badge number, title, time, date and purpose for the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-113. - Operating requirements-Use of EBT prohibited. 
    The operator of a semi-nude business at which performers disrobe or perform in an unclothed state shall disable the ability of any automatic teller machines and point-of-sale terminals on the business' premises to accept the electronic benefit transfer card or process an electronic benefit transfer card transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2945, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4998, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Secs. 21.2-114-21.2-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - THEATERS 

Sec. 21.2-120. - Regulations for exhibition of explicit films by theaters. 
    Any adult theater shall comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Restrooms shall not contain any video reproduction equipment. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator and manager to ensure that no act of "sexual intercourse," "oral sexual contact" or "sexual contact," including masturbation, as defined in A.R.S. section 13-1401, as amended, occurs on the adult business premises. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the operator and manager to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating that sexual intercourse, oral sexual contact and sexual contact, including masturbation, are unlawful and prohibited. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the operator and manager to ensure that floor coverings in viewing rooms are nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the operator and the manager to ensure that all wall surfaces and seating surfaces in restrooms or other rooms or areas providing patron privacy are constructed of or permanently covered by nonporous, easily cleanable material. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the operator and the manager to ensure that the premises are clean and sanitary at all times. The operator and manager shall maintain a regular cleaning schedule, documented by appropriate logs, and shall employ sufficient personnel to assure the establishment is clean. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Secs. 21.2-121-21.2-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - TOPLESS BARS 

Sec. 21.2-130. - Definitions. 
    The following words, term and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    General patron area: That portion of the licensed premises, excluding lobbies and restrooms, which is available to any member of the general public lawfully on the premises without payment of any consideration other than a cover charge or other consideration payable to gain admittance to the premises generally. 
    Licensed premises or premises: The meanings as provided in Arizona Revised Statutes, section 4-101. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-131. - Topless bar performers; prohibited activities. 
(a)  It is unlawful on the licensed premises for a topless bar performer, while performing in the general patron area or upon any stage or in any other location used for performing by such performer, to recklessly or knowingly: 
(1)  Use his or her hands, or any other part of his or her body, to make contact with the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any other person. 
(2)  Permit his or her breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals to make contact with any other person. 
(3)  Perform an act which constitutes or simulates sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
(4)  Display any portion of the areola of the female breast, or any portion of his or her pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(5)  Permit a patron to place any money on his or her person or on his or her costume, provided that incidental hand-to-hand contact occurring during the act of tipping shall not be unlawful. 
(b)  It is unlawful on the licensed premises for a topless bar performer to perform anywhere other than in the general patron area or in any other location which is entirely visible by direct line of sight from the general patron area. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to work as a topless bar performer unless such person is at least nineteen (19) years old, regardless of whether such person has been issued a performer's/model's license by the city. The topless bar manager shall require all persons to be employed as topless bar performers to display to the manager valid proof of age, in the form of a document specified in section 21.2-26(d), before allowing such persons to work as topless bar performers. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-132. - Manager's duty to ensure compliance by performers. 
(a)  A topless bar manager shall not allow any person to work as a topless bar performer on the licensed premises until such person has displayed to the manager a valid topless bar performer's license and identification card. The manager shall require that all persons employed as topless bar performers maintain current licenses and identification cards at all times during which such persons work at the topless bar. On or before January 31 of each year, the manager shall verify with each topless bar performer that such person has renewed his or her license and identification card. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply, for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to persons who were employed as topless bar managers or performers within the city prior to such effective date. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-133. - Employee index. 
    A topless bar operator and manager shall maintain on the licensed premises at all times an index of all topless bar performers employed by such business during the last two (2) years. Such index shall be made available for inspection on the licensed premises, upon demand, to any law enforcement officer or any city official whose duties are related to licensing. The topless bar may require such officer or official to complete an inspection log with name, serial or badge number, title, time, date and purpose for the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-134. - Operating requirements-Use of EBT prohibited. 
    The operator of a topless bar at which performers disrobe or perform in an unclothed state shall disable the ability of any automatic teller machines and point-of-sale terminals on the business' premises to accept the electronic benefit transfer card or process an electronic benefit transfer card transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2945, § 1, 6-23-15; Res. No. 4998, § 1(Exh. A), 6-23-15) 
Sec. 21.2-135-21.2-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LIVE SEX ACT BUSINESSES 

Sec. 21.2-150. - Findings and definitions. 
(a)  Findings. 
(1)  The operation of a business for purposes of providing the opportunity to engage in, or the opportunity to view, live sex acts is declared to be a disorderly house and a public nuisance per se which should be prohibited. 
(2)  The operation of a live sex act business contributes to the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(3)  The operation of a live sex act business is found to be contrary to the public health, safety, welfare and morals. 
(4)  Evidence in support of these findings may be found in the Sex Clubs, Factual Record and the Sexually Oriented Businesses, Factual Record, Supplement. 
(b)  In this article, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  Consideration means the payment of money or the exchange of any item of value for: 
a.  The right to enter the business premises, or any portion thereof; or 
b.  The right to remain on the business premises, or any portion thereof; or 
c.  The right to purchase any item permitting the right to enter or remain on the business premises, or any portion thereof; or 
d.  The right to a membership permitting the right to enter or remain on the business premises, or any portion thereof. 
(2)  Live sex act means any act whereby one or more persons engage in a live performance or live conduct which contains sexual contact, oral sexual contact or sexual intercourse. 
(3)  Live sex act business means any business in which one or more persons may view, or may participate in, a live sex act for a consideration. 
(4)  Operate and maintain means to organize, design, perpetuate or control. Operate and maintain includes providing financial support by paying utilities, rent, maintenance costs or advertising costs, supervising activities or work schedules, and directing or furthering the aims of the enterprise. 
(5)  Oral sexual contact means oral contact with the penis, vulva or anus. 
(6)  Sexual contact means any direct or indirect touching, or manipulating of any part of the genitals, anus or female breast by any part of the body or by any object or causing a person to engage in such contact. 
(7)  Sexual intercourse means penetration into the penis, vulva or anus by any part of the body or by any object or manual masturbatory contact with the penis or vulva. 
(Ord. No. 2059, § 2, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 21.2-151. - Live sex act businesses prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate and maintain a live sex act business. 
(b)  Operation of a live sex act business is a public nuisance per se which may be abated by all means authorized by law, including an order of the Glendale municipal court as provided herein. 
(1)  The city attorney, in the name of the City of Glendale, may apply to the municipal city court for an order permitting the city to abate violations of this section. 
(2)  After notice to the operator of a live sex act business, the judge shall conduct a hearing and take evidence as to whether a live sex act business is being operated in violation of this section. 
(3)  If, at the conclusion of the hearing, the judge determines that a live sex act business is being operated in the city in violation of this section, an order shall be entered authorizing the city to abate the violation by closing the business. A copy of the order shall be delivered to the operator of the business and mailed to the owner of the property upon which the business is located. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to the non-obscene presentation, showing or performance of any play, drama, or ballet in any theater, concert hall, fine arts academy, school, institution of higher education or similar establishment as a form of expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of sex for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 2059, § 2, 1-26-99; Ord. No. 2076, § 1, 1-26-99) 
Chapter 21.3 - DOWNTOWN SIDEWALK USE AND DISPLAY PERMIT GUIDELINES 

Sec. 21.3-1. - Permit required. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision in this Code, it is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or association to use the public sidewalk for any commercial purpose of any kind without obtaining a permit. Permits will be issued only to licensed businesses owning or leasing property immediately adjacent to the sidewalk in the Pedestrian Retail District and Catlin Court Planned Area Development. Such permits may be issued at any time of the calendar year but all such permits shall expire on December 31st of the same calendar year, however such permits shall be subject to cancellation at the discretion of the city pursuant to section 21.3-7 of this Code. No permit shall be issued to any business which is not in compliance with the City of Glendale Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2165, § 1, 10-24-00) 
Sec. 21.3-2. - Application. 
    All applicants for sidewalk use and display permits must complete an application form approved by the city and submitted to the redevelopment manager. All applications shall include the following information: 
(a)  A dimensioned plan drawn to scale and done in a professional manner showing sidewalk and all public improvements such a light posts, benches, planters, trees, tree grates, location of the curb in relation to the building, and the proposed location of all display furniture, furniture described by height, color and type of materials, that are to be placed on the sidewalk. Plans must be submitted to the city on the form provided. 
(b)  Insurance requirements. Encroachment permitted in the rights-of-way must be covered by liability insurance by the permit holder. The City of Glendale must be named as an additional insured on the applicant's existing liability insurance policy (does not require a separate policy) and is to be posted with a current certificate of insurance. The certificate of insurance must clearly indicate the City of Glendale is named as an additional insured on the insurance policy of the permit holder to the encroachment(s) permitted by the city. The certificate of insurance must be attached to a cover letter that clearly states that this document is being submitted in conjunction with an application for a sidewalk use and display permit. 
The certificate of insurance shall satisfy the following requirements: 
(1)  File the certificate with the City of Glendale at the address listed below. A certificate is to be filed each time the policy renews, is replaced, expires, or is cancelled (Accord Form 25). 
(2)  The certificate must state that the issuing company will mail a written notice to the certificate holder of any changes or cancellations of the policy within thirty (30) days. 
(3)  Declare the limits of coverage in the amount not less than the minimum required: one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(4)  The certificate must state that the City of Glendale, a municipal corporation, its agents, officers, employees and volunteers are additionally insured as with respect to the permitted use. The permit number of the certificate must be clearly shown. 
(5)  This permit shall include coverage for casualty, products liability, and operations hazard coverage. 
(6)  Provide name and address of the certificate holder as: 
City of Glendale 
Risk Management Division 
6829 N. 58th Drive, Suite 204 
Glendale, AZ 85301-2599 
(c)  A signed indemnification statement on a form provided by the city. 
(d)  Furniture items (sometimes referred to herein as "items") may include the following: chairs, benches, tables, trash receptacles, ashtrays, planters, hanging baskets, or other display items of a character, nature, material, and neutral color conducive to an attractive outdoor display atmosphere as may be determined by the City of Glendale. 
(e)  All permit applications must be approved by the city's redevelopment manager and Code compliance manager prior to any item being placed on the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 2165, § 1, 10-24-00) 
Sec. 21.3-3. - Inspection. 
    An inspection of the property to document existing conditions of public improvements and verify the contents of the plan submitted shall be performed by the city prior to issuance of a permit. Applications should be filed at least two (2) weeks prior to the scheduled use to allow sufficient time for such inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2165, § 1, 10-24-00) 
Sec. 21.3-4. - Permit conditions. 
    All permit holders shall be subject to the following permit conditions: 
(a)  Items on the sidewalk shall at all times be placed in accordance with the approved plan. Any and all improvements will comply with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements (ADA Section 4.3 Accessible Routes). Any changes made without the prior approval of the city's redevelopment manager will be considered a violation of these guidelines and subject to penalty as outlined in section 21.3-7 of this Code. 
(b)  The sidewalk shall be kept clean and free of refuse and clutter at all times by the permit holder regardless of the source of such refuse and clutter, including but not limited to overflowing trash receptacles (private and public), cigarettes, paper, and other refuse. Any and all improvements will comply with Federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements (ADA Section 4.3 Accessible Routes). 
(c)  All portable items shall be removed from the sidewalk and placed indoors at the end of each business day. 
(d)  All public improvements, including but not limited to benches, light poles, and trees shall be maintained in the condition in which they existed prior to the issuance of the permit, excluding normal wear and tear. The permit holder shall immediately report any damage to the City of Glendale engineering department. The city shall replace or repair such improvement at its discretion and shall charge the cost of such replacement or repair to the permit holder, unless said damage can be clearly shown to have resulted from a cause not related to the issuance of the sidewalk use and display permit. It is entirely the permit holder's responsibility and obligation to provide any such evidence that the aforesaid damage resulted from a cause not related to the issuance of said permit. 
(e)  Operations of the sidewalk use or display shall be conducted in a manner that does not interfere with pedestrians, parking or traffic. 
(f)  The area and materials must be maintained and in good condition at all times. Items such as, but not limited to, broken, rusting, degraded, torn, or tattered items shall be removed promptly. 
(g)  Items must be made to a professional standard and may be constructed of the following materials: wood, iron, steel, clay, canvas (as in director's chairs), aluminum, or plastic. 
(h)  Prohibited materials include glass, porcelain, and other breakable materials, or any item that may pose a hazard, as may be identified by the city. 
(i)  The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place so as to be visible from an adjacent window, and the permit holder must have a copy of the approved site plan readily available to be produced upon request by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2165, § 1, 10-24-00) 
Sec. 21.3-5. - Restrictions. 
    All permit holders shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(a)  Items shall be placed so that a minimum five (5) foot unobstructed pedestrian walkway is maintained at all times; clearances will be maintained at all times. 
(b)  A five (5) foot "clear zone" shall be maintained at corner locations of two (2) public sidewalks. No item shall be placed within five (5) feet of the corner of a building on either side. 
(c)  Items shall be located immediately adjacent to the building wherever practical and may not extend beyond the permit holder's storefront on any side. 
(d)  Any items placed on display on the sidewalk may not include products that are for sale. Items being displayed are for illustrative and aesthetic purposes only to improve the nature and image of the store. Any item that may be considered signage under the City of Glendale sign code is not permitted to be placed on the sidewalk. 
(e)  All display items shall be located not more than three (3) feet from the front of the building unless otherwise specified by the city, and shall at all times maintain a minimum five (5) foot unobstructed pedestrian walkway. 
(f)  Any chairs or benches located on the sidewalk must be located immediately adjacent to the building, and may not extend more than five (5) feet from the building, and may in no instance encroach upon the minimum five (5) foot unobstructed pedestrian walkway. 
(g)  Items shall not obstruct the normal ingress and egress from the business or other property. 
(h)  No advertising signs, such as "sandwich board" signs with a company's name or logo, shall be placed on the sidewalk. All items placed on the sidewalk shall conform to the city's adopted sign regulations. 
(i)  Any hanging baskets or other items suspended from any building or awning will be secured in a fashion that will not easily be dislodged, and maintain a minimum of at least seven (7) feet clearance from below. 
(j)  All planters or hanging baskets will contain attractive plant materials, and all dead plants or weeds shall promptly be removed. 
(k)  Hours of outdoor use and display operations shall be limited to the normal business hours of the establishment. 
(l)  Alcoholic beverages are only permitted on sidewalk areas in accordance with the liquor regulations and specifications governing the establishment holding the permit. The permit holder shall be responsible for monitoring this provision. 
(m)  All items must be promptly removed upon the direction of the City of Glendale, for maintenance, repair, emergencies or other reasons including any festivals or other public events at which large numbers of people may attend. 
(n)  Amplified music and speakers shall be prohibited from sidewalk display areas. 
(o)  Items that may be easily removed such as small, easily-portable items, or items that may become a wind-blown hazard, shall not be permitted. 
(p)  Any objectionable, explicit or offensive items are not permitted. This includes the placing of items such as toilets on the public sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 2165, § 1, 10-24-00) 
Sec. 21.3-6. - Fees. 
    There shall be no charge for a sidewalk use and display permit. 
(Ord. No. 2165, § 1, 10-24-00) 
Sec. 21.3-7. - Enforcement and revocation. 
(a)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall result in revocation of the permit and/or a civil sanction (fine) of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each day on which the violation occurred or continues to occur, following notice of the violation. 
(b)  The enforcement of all other sections of this chapter including, but not limited to, the maintenance provisions and restrictions shall be the responsibility of the permit holder. Any three (3) violations of the provisions shall result in the revocation of the permit and permit holder shall be prohibited from re-application for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of revocation. 
(c)  The City of Glendale, upon determining that the method or manner of use, or conduct of such persons using such facilities, pose a threat to public health, safety or welfare shall have the power and authority to cause the items to be removed immediately and to revoke the permit. 
(d)  Any permit holder that is subject to revocation procedures may request within five (5) days of being notified of a violation an informal review by the redevelopment manager and code compliance manager, prior to having the permit revoked. If the redevelopment manager and code compliance manager find that the permit holder is in violation of the terms of the agreement, then the permit shall be immediately revoked. 
(e)  Any permit application that is denied or permit that is revoked by the city may be appealed to the assistant city manager within fifteen (15) days of said permit denial or revocation. The decision of the assistant city manager is final. 
(Ord. No. 2165, § 1, 10-24-00) 
  
  
  
  
Chapter 21.4 - MEDICAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21.4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Medical Marijuana: All parts of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, and the seed of such plants that may be administered to treat or alleviate a qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with the patient's debilitating medical condition. 
    Medical Marijuana Cultivation: The process by which a person grows a marijuana plant. A facility shall mean a building, structure or premises used for the cultivation or storage of medical marijuana that is physically separate and off-site from a medical marijuana dispensary. 
    Medical Marijuana Dispensary: A non-profit entity defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801(11) that sells, distributes, transmits gives, dispenses, or otherwise provides medical marijuana to qualifying patients. 
    Medical Marijuana Dispensary Offsite Cultivation Location: The additional location where marijuana is cultivated by a Medical Marijuana Dispensary as referenced in A.R.S. § 36-2804(B) (1) (b) (ii). 
    Medical Marijuana Establishment: Any facility required to obtain a license pursuant to this chapter. 
    Medical Marijuana Infusion (or Manufacturing) Facility: A facility that incorporates medical marijuana (cannabis) by the means of cooking, blending, or incorporation into consumable/edible goods. 
(Ord. No. 2764, § 1, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 21.4-2. - Hours of operation. 
    Medical Marijuana Dispensary hours of operation shall be in compliance with Zoning Ordinance of the City of Glendale, Arizona Sec. 7.800 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2764, § 1, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 21.4-3. - Compliance with administrative regulations. 
    The chief of police and the tax and license manager may adopt such rules and regulations as they deem necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter; provided, that such rules and regulations are consistent with this chapter. All such administrative rules and regulations are subject to the approval of the city manager. All persons who are required to be licensed under this chapter shall comply with all rules and regulations so adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2764, § 1, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 21.4-4. - Compliance with other laws. 
    The Medical Marijuana Establishment shall remain in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, including administrative regulations. The issuance of a city medical marijuana license shall not be construed as authority to engage in any business activity which is in violation of any other law or regulations to which such activity is subject, or to conduct activities on any property in violation of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2764, § 1, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 21.4-5-21.4-10. - Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2764, § 1, 2-22-11) 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 21.4-11. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct business as a medical marijuana dispensary, a medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation location or medical marijuana infusion (or manufacturing) facility within the city without having first obtained a city medical marijuana establishment license. 
(Ord. No. 2764, § 1, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 21.4-12. - Application. 
    Application for a city medical marijuana establishment license shall be made on forms furnished by the city. Every application shall be accompanied by the required application fee and valid registration certificate issued by the State of Arizona. 
(Ord. No. 2764, § 1, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 21.4-13. - Fees. 
(a)  The application and annual license fees for city medical marijuana establishment licenses shall be established by resolution. 
(b)  No application fee paid pursuant to this article shall be returned to the applicant if his or her application is withdrawn or denied. No license fee paid pursuant to this article shall be returned to a licensee if his or her city medical marijuana establishment license is canceled, suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2764, § 1, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 21.4-14. - Issuance; expiration; renewal. 
(a)  Any city medical marijuana establishment license shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued. Each city medical marijuana establishment license expires on December 31 of each year and must be renewed on or before January 31 of the following year by filing an application for renewal and paying the applicable annual license fee. The application and payment for the annual license must be received by the tax and license manager by January 31 to be deemed timely filed. 
(b)  Persons whose initial city medical marijuana establishment license is issued after March 31 of any year shall be subject to an initial license fee on a prorated basis as follows: 
Business Start Date Proration of 
License Fee April 1-June 30 75% July 1-September 30 50% October 1-December 31 25%  
The applicable proration percentage shall be applied to the annual establishment license fee set by resolution to determine the initial license fee. 
(c)  Any person who fails to renew an active city medical marijuana establishment license by January 31 of any year and who conducts any activities covered by such license after such date shall be deemed to be operating without a license, shall be subject to all penalties imposed under this chapter against persons unlawfully operating without a license, and shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual license fee that would have been imposed on the date on which the license expired in addition to payment of the applicable annual license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a new city medical marijuana establishment license is issued to such person. 
(d)  Any person who is required to obtain a city medical marijuana establishment license and fails to do so prior to conducting any activity covered by such license shall be subject to a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the annual license fee that would have been imposed on the date on which such activities commenced in addition to payment of the applicable annual license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a city medical marijuana establishment license is issued to such person. 
(e)  No city medical marijuana establishment license shall be renewed unless the licensee is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter at the time of renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2764, § 1, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 21.4-15. - Display. 
    A city medical marijuana establishment license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2764, § 1, 2-22-11) 
Secs. 21.4-16-21.4-20. - Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2764, § 1, 2-22-11) 
Chapter 22 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS, ON-SITE MANAGERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2400, § 1, adopted July 27, 2004, repealed the former Ch. 22, §§ 22-1-22-8, 22-26-22-36, and enacted a new Ch. 22 as set out herein. The former Ch. 22 pertained to Massage establishments, massage therapists, etc. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference- Licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Massage therapy or body work: The following that are undertaken to increase wellness, relaxation, stress reduction, relief and postural improvement or provide general or specific therapeutic benefits: 
(1)  The manual application of compression, stretch, vibration or mobilization of the organs and tissue beneath the dermis, including the components of the musculoskeletal system, peripheral vessels of the circulatory system and fascia when applied primarily to parts of the body other than the hands, feet and head. 
(2)  The manual application of compression, stretch, vibration or mobilization using the forearms, elbows, knees or feet or handheld mechanical or electrical devices. 
(3)  Any combination of range of motion, direction, assisted or passive movement of the joints. 
(4)  Hydrotherapy, including the therapeutic application of water, heat, cold, wraps, essential oils, skin brushing, salt glows and similar applications of product to the skin. 
    Massage establishment: Any place of business where any massage therapy or body work is practiced or administered. 
    Massage therapist: A non-medical health care practitioner who offers service to the public using massage therapy or body work in caring for clients, and has obtained a license as required by Title 32, Chapter 42 Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended. 
    Persons financially interested: For a corporation, any person who is the beneficial owner of at least fifty (50) percent of the shares of such corporation; for a limited liability company, all members; for a non-corporate business, any person who shares in, directly or indirectly, at least fifty (50) percent of any financial gain attributable to such business as in owner, proprietor or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 7-27-04; Ord. No. 2422, § 1, 1-25-05) 
Sec. 22-2. - Violations. 
    A violation of any provision of this chapter is a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 7-27-04) 
Sec. 22-3. - Compliance with rules and regulations. 
    All persons who have been issued a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall conform to and comply with such standards and regulations as may be required by administrative orders issued by such administrative departments of the city which have the responsibility of regulating licenses, provided that such regulations shall be uniform in their application for every class of license. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 7-27-04) 
Sec. 22-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2422, § 2, adopted Jan. 25, 2005, repealed § 22-4, which pertained to registration of employees and derived from Ord. No. 2400, § 1, adopted July 27, 2004. 
Sec. 22-5. - Inspection of facilities. 
    Any massage establishment, its equipment, records and methods of operation, and the register of employees, shall be open during working or business hours to inspection by representatives of the tax and license division and the police department. Every massage establishment shall have a licensed on-site manager present at all times during business hours to assist in these inspections. The chief of police and/or revenue administrator shall assign personnel to make regular inspections of such licensed establishments and a report of such inspections shall be made to the chief of police and revenue administrator in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 7-27-04) 
Secs. 22-6, 22-7. - Reserved. 
Sec. 22-8. - Administering dangerous treatments prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person subject to licensing under this chapter to provide any service or treatment to any person which may reasonably be considered to be clearly dangerous to the health or safety of such person. This section shall not apply to any treatment administered in good faith in the course of the practice or profession of any healing arts by any person licensed to practice such arts under regulatory provisions of state law. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 7-27-04) 
Sec. 22-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2422, § 2, adopted Jan. 25, 2005, repealed § 22-9, which pertained to on-site manager and derived from Ord. No. 2400, § 1, adopted July 27, 2004. 
Secs. 22-10-22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 22-26. - Licensing required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment within the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a massage establishment license pursuant to this article. 
(b)  A massage establishment shall not allow any of its employees to work as a massage therapist until such person has displayed to the massage establishment such employee's current Arizona massage therapist license to perform such work. A massage establishment shall require that all persons employed as massage therapists maintain current licenses at all times that such persons work for the massage establishment. On or before January 31st of each year, the massage establishment shall verify with each massage therapist that such person has renewed his or her license. 
(c)  No license or identification card shall be required under this article for chiropractors, naturopaths, osteopaths, physicians or medical doctors holding state licenses, nor shall the attendants or nurses serving under the direct supervision and in the same establishment as the above exempt individuals be required to hold a license. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 7-27-04; Ord. No. 2422, § 3, 1-25-05) 
Sec. 22-27. - Application. 
    An application for a license required by this article shall be made on forms furnished by the city. Every application shall be accompanied by the required application fee. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 7-27-04) 
Sec. 22-28. - Issuance standards. 
(a)  No natural person shall be licensed under this article if such person: 
(1)  Is not at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(2)  Knowingly makes any false or misleading statement in the course of applying for or renewing a license; 
(3)  Has been convicted of a felony involving dishonesty, deceit, theft, assaultive conduct or sexual misconduct within five (5) years from the date that the application is submitted; 
(4)  Lacks good moral character as set forth in section 21-4; or 
(5)  Has been denied a license or had his or her license revoked. Re-application shall not occur for a period of six (6) months following the final denial or revocation decision. 
(b)  No applicant which is not a natural person shall be licensed under this article if any of the following persons would be disqualified from being licensed under subsection (a): 
(1)  The president, or if permanently located out of state, the managing officer or agent for the in-state operations of an applicant which is a corporation; 
(2)  Each general partner of an applicant which is a partnership; 
(3)  The managing officer or agent for the in-state operations of the applicant; 
(4)  Any person financially interested in the applicant; 
(5)  Each managing member of a limited liability company, or if there are no designated managing members, all members; 
(6)  Each trustee of an applicant which is a trust. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 7-27-04) 
ARTICLE III. - INSPECTIONS/PROVISIONS 

Sec. 22-29. - Inspection of premises. 
    The application for a license required by the provisions of this article shall contain a statement by the applicant of at least three (3) different times during each business day, within a seven (7) day period, when the applicant will be available at the location to be inspected to meet with the proper city officials making such inspection. Failure of the applicant to be at such premises at the times stated in the application shall be grounds, if the revenue administrator finds that such absences were without sufficient excuse, for denial of the application. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 7-27-04) 
Sec. 22-30. - Other requirements for massage establishment licenses. 
    No massage establishment license shall be issued or renewed unless inspection by the city indicates the site of the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment. 
(2)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Construction Codes as adopted and amended by the city. 
(3)  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Construction Codes as adopted and amended by the city. 
(4)  Adequate equipment shall be provided for disinfection and sanitizing of instruments used in administering or practicing massage. 
(5)  Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
(6)  Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linens. 
(7)  Adequate bathing, dressing, wash basin, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Construction Codes as adopted and amended by the city and health department regulations. 
(8)  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, spas, showers, bath tubs, steam rooms, tables and all other physical facilities for the massage establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(9)  An adequate number of clean and sanitary linens shall be provided by the massage establishment. Each patron receiving a massage service shall receive clean and sanitary linens of adequate number and size to completely cover the patrons entire body. 
(10)  A work schedule for all licensed on-site managers and massage therapists. 
(11)  Compliance with applicable provisions of the Uniform Fire Code as adopted and amended by the city. 
(12)  A schedule or book of all persons performing and receiving a massage including names, times, dates and type of services. 
(13)  An accurate floor plan of the establishment will be submitted with the application. Any changes must be submitted within five (5) business days to the tax and license division. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 7-27-04) 
Sec. 22-31. - Fees. 
(a)  The license application and license fees which shall be paid to the city for the licenses required by the provisions of this article shall be as established by resolution. The city may set different application and license fees for an applicant who has not previously been issued a license under this article for the calendar year in which he or she submits an application and an applicant who has been issued such license for the calendar year in which he or she submits an application and who is required to obtain a new license due to a change in the location of his or her business. 
(b)  Each applicant for a license issued under this article shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the City of Glendale for the purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law (PL) 92-544. The Arizona Department of Public Safety is authorized to exchange this fingerprint data with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. In addition to any other fees imposed under this article, an applicant for a license issued under this article shall pay an amount necessary to cover the costs of federal fingerprint processing or federal criminal history record information checks. The specific amount of such additional fee shall be set by administrative order based upon information received from the Arizona Department of Public Safety as to the costs of such fingerprint processing and record information checks. The additional fees collected pursuant to this paragraph shall be transmitted to the Arizona Department of Public Safety as required by A.R.S. § 41-1750, as amended. 
(c)  No application or fingerprinting fees paid pursuant to this article shall be returned to an applicant if his or her application is withdrawn or denied. No license fee paid pursuant to this article shall be returned to a licensee if his or her license is suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 7-27-04) 
Sec. 22-32. - Issuance; expiration; renewal. 
(a)  Any license issued under this article shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued. Each license expires on December 31 of each year and must be renewed on or before January 31 of the following year by filing an application for renewal and paying the applicable renewal fee. The application and payment for renewal must be received by the tax and license division by January 31 to be deemed timely filed. 
(b)  Any person who fails to renew the license on or before January 31 of any year and who conducts any activity covered by such license after such date shall be deemed to be operating without a license, shall be subject to all penalties imposed under this chapter against persons unlawfully operating without a license and shall be subject to a penalty of fifty (50) percent of the annual license fee which would have been imposed on the date on which the license expired in addition to payment of the application license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a new license is issued to such person. 
(c)  Any person who is required to obtain a license under this article and fails to do so prior to conducting any activity covered by such license shall be subject to a penalty of fifty (50) percent of the annual license fee which would have been imposed on the date on which such activities commenced in addition to payment of the application license fee. All license fees and penalties owed by a person pursuant to this subsection must be paid before a new license is issued to such person under this article. 
(d)  No license issued under this article shall be renewed unless the licensee is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter at the time of the renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 7-27-04) 
Sec. 22-33. - Transfer. 
    Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not be transferable between persons or locations for a massage establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 7-27-04; Ord. No. 2422, § 4, 1-25-05) 
Sec. 22-34. - Display. 
    Massage establishment: All licenses required by this article for massage establishments must be displayed in a conspicuous place. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 7-27-04; Ord. No. 2422, § 4, 1-25-05) 
Sec. 22-35. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  The revenue administrator may suspend any license issued under this article for a specified period not to exceed sixty (60) days, or revoke such license, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to maintain good moral character as set forth in section 21-4; 
(2)  Conviction of any felony involving dishonesty, deceit, theft, assaultive conduct or sexual misconduct; 
(3)  When the licensee has knowingly made any false or misleading statement in any report or record required to be made or kept under this chapter; 
(4)  Any other violation of this chapter; 
(5)  Conducting business in an unlawful manner and in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public; 
(6)  Any sexual act or engaging in sexual activity with a patron; and 
(7)  Any nudity or exposure by the massage establishment personnel is prohibited. 
(b)  The city shall give written notice of the revocation or suspension to the licensee, which notice shall contain the reasons for the revocation or suspension and, if applicable, the length of the suspension. Such notice shall either be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
(c)  The licensee may request an informal hearing on such revocation or suspension by submitting a written request to the tax and license division within ten (10) days after the notice of revocation or suspension is given and shall set forth specifically the grounds for the hearing. An informal hearing before the revenue administrator shall be held within fifteen (15) days after the request for the same is received by the city unless an extension is approved by both the applicant and the city. If the licensee does not request a hearing within said ten (10) day period, the revocation or suspension shall take effect on the eleventh day after service of the notice of revocation or suspension. If a hearing is requested, the revocation or suspension shall not take effect until after the informal hearing and the service of a new notice from the revenue administrator on the licensee setting forth the revenue administrator's final decision. Such notice shall be personally served on the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. The burden of proof at the hearing shall be on the applicant or licensee to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he or she meets all of the requirements for holding a license under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 7-27-04; Ord. No. 2422, § 4, 1-25-05) 
Sec. 22-36. - Appeal from denial, revocation or suspension. 
(a)  A person who has been denied a license or whose license has been revoked or suspended after an informal hearing with the revenue administrator may appeal such decision to a hearing office. The appeal shall be requested within ten (10) days from the date on which such person is given notice of the determination from which the appeal is taken. The request shall be in writing, filed with the city manager, and shall set forth specifically the grounds for such appeal. 
(b)  The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct a hearing in accordance with this section. The hearing officer shall not be a member of the tax and license division. The hearing officer may, in his or her discretion, stay any revocation or suspension pending final determination of the appeal. 
(c)  The burden of proof at the hearing shall be on the applicant or licensee to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he or she meets all of the requirements for holding a license under this chapter. The hearing officer shall hear such testimony and consider such evidence as is relevant to the determination of such issues. The hearing officer shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence or procedure in conducting the hearing. 
(d)  The hearing officer shall render a written decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing is concluded based on the evidence presented by the city and the applicant or licensee. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2400, § 1, 7-27-04) 
Chapter 24 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1392, § 1, adopted Nov. 26, 1985, repealed Ch. 24, motor vehicles and traffic, consisting of §§ 24-1-24-8, 24-21-24-23, 24-40-24-43, 24-45-24-60, 24-161, and derived from Code 1963, §§ 18A-1-18A-3, 19-1, 19-1.1, 19-3-19-5, 19-7.1, 19-7.2, 19-7.4, 19-7.5, 19-21, 19-22, 19-24-19-37, 19-40, 19-44-19-47, 19-49, and the following legislation: 
Ord. No. Section Date 1035 1  8- 8-78 1278 1  4-24-84 1280 2  5- 1-84 1310 1(19-49) 10-23-84 1312 1, 2 11- 6-84  
Section 2 of Ord. No. 1392 added a new Ch. 24, consisting of Arts. I-XIV as herein set out, with minor, nonsubstantive additions and deletions made by the editor for purposes of clarity. 
Cross reference- Bicycles, Ch. 8; handicapped parking, § 26-3; vehicles in parks, § 27-38; traffic and horses in parks, § 27-71; police, Ch. 29; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 30; special events, § 30-81 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Definitions of words and phrases. 
    The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Section 24-3. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-2. - Motor Vehicle Laws of Arizona definitions to be used. 
    Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined but are defined in the Motor Vehicle Section of the Arizona Revised Statutes and supplements thereto, such definitions shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-3. - Specific definitions. 
(a)  Alley or alleyway. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings in urban districts and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic. 
(b)  Bicycle path. For the purposes of this chapter, a bicycle path shall be any portion of a public highway which has been designated by the city traffic engineer for the exclusive use of bicycles and has been identified by appropriate signs as a bicycle path. 
(c)  City. All the area that is said to be part of the City of Glendale, Arizona, and is under the jurisdiction of this city. 
(d)  Curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(e)  Commercial vehicle. Any vehicle that customarily is used to carry passengers or property in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise and meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Has three (3) or more axles; 
(2)  Has a length in excess of twenty-two (22) feet, inclusive of the front and rear bumpers, 
(3)  Has a declared gross vehicle weight (GVM) in excess of twenty-thousand (20,000) pounds. 
    Vehicles operated by the federal, state, county or local governments, or by political subdivisions of the state, shall be excluded from this definition. 
(f)  Council. The council of the City of Glendale. 
(g)  Crosswalk: 
(1)  That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the prolongations or connections of the lateral line of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or, in absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. 
(2)  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
(h)  Divisional island. A raised or painted island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. 
(i)  Intersection. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) streets which join one another. Where a street includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) or more feet apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event the intersecting street also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) or more feet apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of the streets shall be regarded as a separate intersection. The junction of an alley with a street shall not constitute an intersection. 
(j)  Motor vehicle. Any self-propelled vehicle except a motorized wheelchair or a motorized skateboard. 
(k)  Motorized skateboard. A self-propelled device that has a motor, a deck on which a person may ride and at least two tandem wheels in contact with the ground. 
(l)  Motorized wheelchair. A self-propelled vehicle that is designed for and used by a handicapped person. 
(m)  Parking. That portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
(n)  Passenger loading zone. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
(o)  Residential street. For the purposes of this chapter, any street other than a freeway, major arterial, or arterial street is considered to be a residential street. 
(p)  Section street. A street which is located upon a section line within the city. 
(q)  Mid-section street. A street which is located upon a mid-section line within the city. 
(r)  Stand or standing. The halting of a vehicle whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
(s)  Traffic engineering department. The department of the public works group/traffic engineering department, which duties are to engineer, install and maintain all signals, signs and markings in the jurisdiction of the City of Glendale. 
(t)  Vehicle. A device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public roadway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 1794, § 1, 12-14-93; Ord. No. 1867, § 3, 1-23-96; Ord. No. 2541, § 1, 1-23-07) 
Secs. 24-4-24-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 24-10. - Traffic direction and street closure. 
    The police department shall have the authority to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws. To expedite traffic, officers may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. Police officers may close freeways, streets, alleys and bridges when, in their judgment, such action is warranted by emergency conditions, by parade permits or pursuant to council authorized and approved special events. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-11. - Traffic engineer-Established; responsibilities. 
(a)  The office of city traffic engineer is hereby established. 
(b)  The city traffic engineer shall be responsible to the city engineer and shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, and in the traffic ordinances of the city, subject to the approval of the public works deputy city manager. The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to place and maintain official traffic control devices as set forth in this chapter and as set by state law. 
(c)  The city traffic engineer shall be named by the public works deputy city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-12. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices; to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures; to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions; to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of this city; to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions; and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. Whenever, by the provisions of this chapter, a power is granted to the city traffic engineer or a duty imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his assistants or by a person authorized in writing by him. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-13. - Experimental regulations. 
    The city traffic engineer may test traffic control devices under actual traffic conditions, and conduct research and tests on new traffic control devices not presently included in the uniform traffic control devices manual. Such devices are not to remain in force beyond a period of one hundred (100) days on an experimental basis, with the exception of devices being tested for durability. Testing of traffic control devices shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-14. - Traffic accident investigations and reports. 
(a)  The police department shall investigate all traffic accidents involving or potentially involving fatalities. 
(b)  The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports relative to those accidents that they investigate, including fatalities. Such records shall be maintained for a five-year period. Such reports shall be available for use and information of the city traffic engineer or his assistants, or by a person authorized in writing by him. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-15. - Fire department authority and responsibility. 
    The fire chief and officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire or other emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-16. - Adoption of Federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
    The following publication in its most current issue is hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length in this Code: 
Federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices issued by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, Washington, D.C. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Secs. 24-17-24-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-30. - Authority to install traffic control devices. 
    The city traffic engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control signs, signals, and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of said ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the traffic ordinances of this city or under State law. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-31. - Uniform traffic control devices. 
(a)  All traffic control devices installed and maintained by the city traffic engineer shall conform to the Federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices as adopted by the Arizona Highway Commission and issued by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, Washington, D.C. 
(b)  There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any traffic control device(s) have been placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority unless the contrary is established by competent evidence. 
(c)  There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any traffic control device(s) comply with the requirements of this chapter and Arizona Revised Statutes section 28-643 unless the contrary is established by competent evidence. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-32. - Obedience to official traffic control devices. 
    No person shall intentionally disobey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-33. - Crosswalks and safety zones. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-34. - Traffic lanes. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-35. - Unauthorized painting of curbs, sidewalks, or streets, highways and freeways. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, unless authorized by the city traffic engineer, to paint or deface any curb, sidewalk, street, highway or freeway within the jurisdiction of this city, provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinances of this city pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-36. - Traffic control barricades and signs. 
(a)  No person or public utility in the city shall erect or place any barrier or sign in the city right-of-way or public street unless approved by the city's transportation director or designee. 
(b)  All barricades and signs used in the city on public streets and rights-of-way shall meet all requirements on traffic controls for highway construction and maintenance operations of the Federal Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices as adopted by the Arizona Highway Commission and issued by the USDOT, FHWA, Washington D.C. The city shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(c)  All barricading and traffic control for work or maintenance in streets and rights-of-way of this city shall be done in accordance with the manual on uniform traffic control devices as issued by the USDOT and FHWA and in accordance with the City of Phoenix Barricade Manual and must meet the approval of the city's transportation director or designee. 
(d)  Three (3) copies of the manual on uniform traffic control devices and the Phoenix Barricade Manual including any additions by the city shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and are made public records and shall be available for public use and inspection during regular office hours. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 2558, § 2, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 24-37. - Permission to close streets, highways, freeways and alleys. 
(a)  No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall temporarily, whether partially or fully, close any city street, highway, freeway, alley or pedestrian-way without first obtaining the approval of the city traffic engineer, except: 
(1)  Under emergency conditions; or 
(2)  Pursuant to a parade permit; or 
(3)  Pursuant to council authorized and approved activities. 
(b)  Any closures shall comply with the regulations stated in the City of Phoenix Traffic Barricade Manual as named in Section 24-36 subsection (c) of this article, unless otherwise approved in writing by the city traffic engineer. 
(c)  In an emergency situation, the responsible agency shall comply with the City of Phoenix Traffic Barricade Manual as soon as practicable. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Secs. 24-38-24-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TEMPORARY WORK ZONE TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 24-44. - Temporary work zone traffic management program established. 
    There is hereby established a temporary work zone traffic management program to improve work zone safety and to manage temporary roadway restrictions in order to minimize delays and frustrations for the traveling public. The temporary work zone traffic management program is intended to enhance the planning, application and oversight of traffic control management in temporary work areas in roadways, sidewalks, and transit zones. 
(Ord. No. 2558, § 3, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 24-45. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, any word, term or phrase defined in any section in this chapter shall have the same meaning throughout this chapter. The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Active work. The presence of workers engaged in maintenance of, or construction upon public right-of-way are present in the temporary work zone, the term active shall also include those periods of time when they may be idle due to material, equipment, inspections or similar scheduling requirements. 
    Major holiday. Any holiday enumerated in A.R.S. § 1-301. 
    MUTCD. The manual on uniform traffic control devices as amended by the State of Arizona and including additions by the city. 
    NCHRP 350 Guidelines. The National Cooperative Highway Research Program Report 350. Three (3) copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and are made available for public use and inspection during regular office hours. 
    Peak travel time. Peak travel time shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding major holidays. 
    Transit zone. Those portions of the public right-of-way reserved for stopping and standing of public transit vehicles or for passengers waiting, alighting or boarding off public transit vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2558, § 3, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 24-46. - Temporary traffic control device installation and removal; annual certification. 
    Any party wishing to install and remove temporary traffic control devices within the public right-of-way shall obtain an annual certification issued by the transportation director or designee to engage in such activities. The city's transportation director or designee may, in their sole discretion, issue an annual certification upon the applicant's satisfactory completion and annual submission of the following: 
(a)  A fully completed certification application; 
(b)  A certification fee in the amount established by resolution or pursuant to Glendale City Code Section 2-3; 
(c)  Proof of insurance or an acceptable program of self-insurance for bodily injury and property damage liability in an amount required by the City of Glendale's Risk Management Department. All such insurance shall name the city as an additional insured and shall be maintained throughout the term; 
(d)  A certificate from the American Traffic Safety Services Association at the "supervisory level" or equivalent as determined by the City of Glendale's Transportation Director or designee at their sole discretion; and 
(e)  An agreement to protect, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city for a claim for damage to a person or property that may be brought against the city because of the applicant's activity conducted under the annual certification. 
(Ord. No. 2558, § 3, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 24-47. - Temporary traffic control installation and removal; certification rejection. 
(a)  Rejection of certification application. The city's transportation director or designee may reject a party's application for temporary installation and removal of traffic control devices for any one of the following: 
(1)  Failure to satisfy all of the requirements in Section 24-46; or 
(2)  Applicant's failure to pay any civil sanction for a violation of the Phoenix Barricade Manual within thirty (30) business days from the date of the notice of the sanction. 
(b)  Notice of rejection. The city's transportation director or designee will issue the notice of certification rejection to the applicant, as applicable, to such person's last known address. 
(Ord. No. 2558, § 3, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 24-48. - Temporary work zone traffic management. 
    In addition to the barricade use permit and certification requirements contained in Section 24-36 and elsewhere in this chapter, all temporary work zone barricading within the City of Glendale shall comply with the latest edition of the MUTCD, as amended by the state and the Phoenix Barricade Manual including the additions by the city, and with NCHRP 350 Guidelines. No temporary roadway restrictions shall occur during peak travel times, or on major holidays unless specifically approved by the city's transportation director or designee or in case of actual emergency. The city's director of transportation or designee may allow temporary roadway restriction in the off peak direction during peak travel times at their sole discretion. Under no circumstances shall roadways, sidewalks, or transit zones be restricted with barricades when no active work is being performed. Various city employees are authorized and directed to perform acts necessary or make sure this article is complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2558, § 3, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 24-49. - Fees; traffic manual violations; civil sanctions; enforcement; alternative remedy. 
(a)  Fees. 
(1)  In cases where traffic control is required, a traffic control plan review fee shall be collected in addition to the barricade use permit fee in the amounts established by resolution or pursuant to Glendale City Code Section 2-3. 
(2)  Public utilities may apply for and receive an annual permit for short term multiple location work for a one time annual payment in the amount established by resolution or pursuant to Glendale City Code Section 2-3. 
(3)  Barricade use permit fees shall be in the amounts established by resolution or pursuant to Glendale City Code Section 2-3. 
(4)  Permit fees and review fees shall double if the request for permit is submitted less than three (3) business days in advance of the proposed commencement of the work or if a continual closure (twenty-four (24) hours) is approved. 
(5)  The transportation director or designee may grant time extension. Costs associated with a time extension are double the rates for barricade use permits. 
(b)  Traffic barricade manual violations; civil sanctions. Civil sanctions shall be imposed for each of the following violations of this chapter: 
(1)  Presenting an imminent risk of death or injury to the public within public right-of-way: Up to one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per day. 
(2)  Restricting roadway without proper certification, a barricade permit and an approved traffic control plan for more than thirty (30) minutes: Up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day. 
(3)  Restricting traffic during peak hours without authorization of the city's transportation director or designee: Up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day. 
(4)  Failing to correct or cure violations within the time period stated in a warning notice: Up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day. 
(5)  Restricting traffic at a signalized intersection without active work occurring and without a sworn police officer present: Up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day. 
(6)  Violating restrictions, limits, times and locations of the barricade use permit: Up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. 
(7)  Missing or improper advanced-warning signs: Up to $500.00 per day. 
(8)  Missing or improper use of barricades and channelizing devices: Up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. 
(9)  Leaving advance-warning signs facing traffic after restriction has been removed, per direction: Up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day. 
(10)  Leaving traffic control in the right-of-way twenty-four (24) hours after barricade use permit has expired: Up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day. 
(11)  Rendering a bus stop inaccessible without relocating it or making other accommodations: Up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day. 
(12)  Use of unacceptable quality of traffic control as shown in the City of Phoenix Barricade Manual: Up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day. 
(c)  Civil sanctions doubled. In addition, the city may double any civil sanction under this article up to a maximum amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for continuing violations within a twenty-four (24) hour period. Each calendar day shall be considered a separate period for the purposes of issuing civil sanctions. 
(d)  Enforcement of civil sanctions. Enforcement of civil sanction set forth in this section shall be adjudicated pursuant to Chapter 13, Article II of the Glendale City Code. 
(e)  Alternative remedy. As an alternative remedy for violations of the Traffic Barricade Manual set forth in subsection (b) above, the city may suspend or terminate the subject barricade use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2558, § 3, 3-27-07) 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIFIC PARKING PROHIBITIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Parking on private property, § 26-2; disabled parking, § 26-3. 

Sec. 24-50. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing, stopping or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified or indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official control device. The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restricted provisions prohibiting or limiting the standing, stopping or parking of a vehicle in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-51. - Violation of state law. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in violation of Arizona Revised Statutes section 28-871 or 28-874, which sections are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-52. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any right-of-way for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(3)  Displaying advertising. 
(4)  Displaying commercial exhibits. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-53. - Parking upon public property. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate No Stopping, No Standing, and No Parking areas on publicly owned property. In addition, the city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to restrict parking, stopping or standing in zones on publicly owned property for the public welfare. The above authority shall include, but not be limited to, creating the following zones: 
(1)  No parking zones which prohibit parking and standing altogether; 
(2)  Zones where parking or standing is prohibited or allowed only during specified hours and/or during specified days; 
(3)  Zones where parking is prohibited for longer than the maximum time period specified at any time; 
(4)  Reserved parking zones where a person is only allowed to park or stand a vehicle where such person is a member of a designated group of persons; 
(5)  Permit parking zones where a person may only park or stand a vehicle which displays a clearly visible permit issued by the city; 
(6)  Motorcycle only zones which allow only motorcycles to park or stand therein; 
(7)  Compact vehicle only zones which only allow compact vehicles to park or stand therein (for purposes of this subsection, a "compact vehicle" is any vehicle not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) inches in length); 
(8)  Zones in front of any driveway or entrance-way or within ten (10) feet of any driveway or entrance area to any publicly owned property where parking or standing is prohibited; and 
(9)  Handicapped parking zones on publicly owned property in accordance with state law and as more specifically described in this Code. 
The city traffic engineer shall place and maintain appropriate signs and/or markings indicating such zones. No person shall park a vehicle in violation of the restrictions of such a zone. Any person parking his vehicle in a parking zone in violation of restrictions of such zone shall be subject to the penalties specified in this chapter. Such a vehicle shall be subject to tow away and impoundment by order of the chief of police or his designee. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle on publicly owned property marked for parking, except as designated by lines or markings upon the pavement or ground. No person shall park a vehicle in diagonal or at an angle parking (diagonal parking is any parking at an angle that is less than 90° from the adjacent curb, building, parking driveway aisle, wall, etc.) on publicly owned property except with the front of the vehicle headed into the curb, cement block, wall, etc., which indicates the front of the parking area. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, "publicly owned property" shall mean any lands which the city owns either in fee simple or in which it has acquired a beneficial interest by virtue of an agreement of sale or conveyance and it shall include specifically parks and other recreation property including those parks and recreation properties which are leased to private parties and all publicly owned rights-of-way for streets and alleys. For purposes of this section, "parking" shall include stopping, standing and/or parking as such terms are defined in Title 28 of the Arizona Revised Statutes. 
(d)  [Reserved.] 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 2541, § 2, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 2984, § 1, 4-12-2016) 
Sec. 24-54. - Parking limitation on corner lots. 
    No person shall park any vehicle within thirty (30) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines at any intersection of two (2) or more streets and which prevents a clear view by the operators of vehicles on the streets of traffic proceeding on the intersecting street or streets. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-55. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
    No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-56. - Parking in alleys. 
(a)  No person shall park or stand a vehicle in an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(b)  No person shall park or stand any vehicle in any alley, except commercial cars, trucks or wagons for the purpose of loading and unloading, and then not for a longer period than is actually necessary to load or unload. Vehicles displaying state "disabled parking" identifying insignia may stand or park in an alley while loading or unloading persons for a period not exceeding five (5) minutes. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-57. - Parking at roadside. 
    No person shall park any vehicle at any time in that area between the curb and the sidewalk. On those roadways without curbs, no person shall park a vehicle so as to force, or potentially force, a pedestrian to walk in the traveled portion of the roadway or private property. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-58. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  No person shall park any vehicle in a space or area set aside and identified as a fire lane by the fire department. 
(b)  The fire chief or his designee is hereby authorized to designate fire lanes on both public and private property. 
(c)  Subsection (a) of this section shall apply only to those areas that are identified with signs stating "No Parking/Fire Lane/City Code Section 24-58." The fire department through the fire chief or his designee shall determine the location of all fire lanes and shall affix a stamp of approval to all approved fire lane signs. Such stamp of approval shall consist of a one-inch by two-inch vinyl laminated sticker indicating fire lane approval. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the owner of record of private property over which the fire chief or his representative has designated a fire lane to post, at the owner's expense, approved signs prohibiting parking in the designated fire lane. Such signs shall be so placed, and be of sufficient number, that at least one (1) sign shall be visible to anyone attempting to park a vehicle at any location in the fire lane. The failure to erect signs in accordance with this subsection within thirty (30) days of receipt of a notice from the fire department specifying the designation of a space or area as a fire lane shall be a misdemeanor. 
(e)  Any sign erected in compliance with section 19-49 of the Code of the City of Glendale, 1963, and approved by the fire department while that section was valid, is deemed to be valid, approved and in compliance with this Section 24-58. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 2541, § 3, 1-23-07) 
Sec. 24-59. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-60. - Parking long vehicles in diagonal or angle parking areas prohibited. 
    No person shall park any motor vehicle on any street in the city where diagonal or at an angle parking is in force at the time when the vehicle: 
(1)  Is longer than twenty-four (24) feet; or 
(2)  Has a chassis capacity rated in excess of one (1) ton; or 
(3)  Is equipped in such a fashion that it does not allow the driver an unobstructed view of at least two hundred (200) feet to the rear of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-61. - Parking of mobile homes or travel trailers. 
(a)  No person shall park any mobile home or travel trailer on any street, alley or highway, or other public place, or on any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied, except as provided by ordinance. 
(b)  Emergency or temporary stopping or parking of a mobile home or travel trailer is permitted on any street, alley or highway for not longer than one (1) hour subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or highway. 
(c)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Mobile home" shall mean a vehicular portable home designed and built for long-term residential occupancy. A mobile home shall be not less than eight (8) feet in width and thirty-two (32) feet in length, and shall be classified as a mobile home whether or not its wheels, rollers, skids or other rolling equipment have been removed, or whether or not any addition thereto has been built on the ground, and: 
a.  Contains sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower and kitchen facilities with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems. 
b.  Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels, or on a flat-bed or other trailers or detachable wheels. Such fabrication shall include a built-in metal frame and hitch for transportation. 
c.  Arrives at the site where it is to be occupied as a complete dwelling unit, including major appliances and furniture, and ready for immediate occupancy except for incidental unpacking and minor assembly operations, such as location on foundation supports and connection to utilities. 
A prefabricated house shall not be considered a mobile home. 
(2)  "Travel trailer" shall mean a vehicular portable home designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses. Such home shall not exceed the limits set forth by the state for movement over and upon the highways without a special permit. A travel trailer shall not include a motor home, mini-motor home, recreational van, tent trailer, camper trailer, water craft on a boat trailer or a truck camper. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 4-8-86; Ord. No. 2541, § 4, 1-23-07) 
Sec. 24-62. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the direction of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  On a crosswalk: 
(6)  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
(7)  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, yield sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the director or local authorities indicate a different length by signs or markings; 
(9)  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail or a railroad crossing or within eight (8) feet six (6) inches of the center of any railroad track, while a motor vehicle with motive power attached is loading or unloading railroad cars; 
(10)  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance when properly posted; 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street: 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; 
(14)  At any place where official signs prohibit standing or stopping; and 
(15)  On a controlled-access highway as defined in Arizona Revised Statutes section 28-602 except for emergency reasons or except in areas specifically designated for parking, such as rest areas. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 2541, § 4, 1-23-07) 
Sec. 24-63. - Parking or driving on recreational trails. 
    No person shall drive or park any motor vehicle upon or within any recreational trails except for emergency purposes. This provision shall not apply to official city vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-64. - Parking in city parks. 
(a)  No person shall park any vehicle in a city park except within designated parking areas. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle overnight in a city park. 
(Ord. No. 2541, § 5, 1-23-07) 
Sec. 24-65. - Sale, storage and repair of vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall park or permit to be parked any vehicle for the purpose of sale upon any public street or private property including vacant property except where the sale of a vehicle is customary and incidental to the principal use of the property and in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Glendale, Arizona. Except as follows: 
(1)  The display of one (1) vehicle for sale is permitted at a residence when the vehicle is titled to the owner or occupant of the property, is parked on an improved parking surface on the property and is not being sold in connection with an automobile sales business. 
(2)  No more than three (3) vehicles may be displayed for sale at the same residence within a calendar year and only one (1) vehicle shall be displayed for sale at one (1) time. 
(b)  No person shall park or permit to be parked any vehicle, including but not limited to semi-tractors, semi-tractor trailers, or limousines on any property or vacant property except where the parking of such vehicles is customary and incidental to the principal use of the property and in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Glendale, Arizona. 
(c)  Vehicle covers placed on any vehicle that is visible from any public street or sidewalk must be properly maintained and made exclusively for covering vehicles. A proper cover does not include bed linen, paper, cardboard, plastic sheeting, tarps or any other item or material not manufactured specifically as a vehicle cover. The use of a vehicle cover on any abandoned or inoperable vehicle as defined in this subsection is limited to a vehicle that is stored in a carport. 
(d)  The unsheltered storage of any abandoned or inoperable vehicle, including any vehicle being repaired or restored, that is visible from any public street or sidewalk is prohibited except where the storage, repair or restoration is customary and incidental to the principal use of the property and in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Glendale, Arizona. 
(e)  An abandoned or inoperable vehicle, including any vehicle being repaired or restored, may be stored in a carport if the vehicle is covered with a properly maintained vehicle cover made exclusively for covering vehicles as described in this section. 
(f)  Within any residentially zoned district, any vehicle undergoing repair must be titled to the owner or occupant of the property. No more than three (3) vehicles shall be repaired during any calendar year. Vehicle repair work shall be performed on no more than one (1) vehicle at one (1) time. 
(g)  Within any residentially zoned district, no person shall park or store any vehicle such as but not limited to watercraft, camper shell, truck camper, or utility trailer in any portion of the side yard unless screened from the street or the surface area is improved with gravel, concrete, asphalt or paving bricks. 
(h)  No person shall leave, place or park any abandoned vehicle or inoperable vehicle upon any public street, alleyway, parking lot or other city property. 
(i)  Within any residentially zoned district, no person shall park or permit to be parked any vehicle within a front yard area except in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Glendale, Arizona. 
(Ord. No. 2541, § 5, 1-23-07) 
Sec. 24-66. - Parking on private property. 
    No person may park a vehicle in any private driveway, on private property or on private parking areas without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such premises. In addition to the enforcement provisions of this Article IV, the owner of the private driveway, private property or private parking area may have such unauthorized parked vehicles removed so long as such towing or transport complies with Article XVI of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2541, § 5, 1-23-07) 
Sec. 24-67. - Handicapped parking; stopping, standing or parking prohibited in places reserved for disabled on private property. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) hereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle within any such specially-designated and marked parking space provided in accordance with Article 14 of Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S. § 28-881 et seq.) unless the motor vehicle is transporting a person eligible for the distinguishing insignia placard or number plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol, and either: 
(1)  The motor vehicle displays the distinguishing insignia placard. 
(2)  The motor vehicle displays number plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol. 
(b)  If a law enforcement officer or a parking enforcement specialist employed by the city finds a motor vehicle in violation of this section, the person may issue a complaint to the operator or other person in charge of the motor vehicle or leave a notice of violation with the vehicle. 
(c)  Any person who is chauffeuring a physically disabled person shall be allowed, without a distinguishing insignia placard or number plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol, to park momentarily in any such parking space for the purpose of loading or unloading such disabled person. No complaint shall be issued to the driver for such momentary parking. 
(d)  This section does not apply: 
(1)  To zones where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited to all vehicles. 
(2)  If there is an ordinance that prohibits parking during heavy traffic periods such as rush hours or where parking clearly would present a traffic hazard for the general public. 
(e)  Each such parking space for physically disabled persons shall be prominently outlined with paint and posted with a permanent sign located not less than three (3) feet nor more than six (6) feet above the grade and of a color and design approved by the State Department of Transportation bearing the internationally accepted wheelchair symbol and the caption "reserved parking." 
(f)  In this section, the term "physically disabled person" shall have the meaning assigned to it in Arizona Revised Statutes § 28-881. 
(Ord. No. 2541, § 5, 1-23-07) 
Sec. 24-68. - Civil code violations. 
    Violation of any provision of this Article IV is hereby declared to be a civil code infraction which shall be adjudicated and enforced by the city court under Chapter 13, Article II of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2541, § 5, 1-23-07) 
Secs. 24-69-24-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARKING IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-80. - Owner's liability for parking offenses. 
(a)  Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered or licensed shall be prima facie responsible for any parking of the vehicle in violation of any provision of this chapter or chapter 26 relating to the parking of vehicles whether on public or private property. It shall be no defense to such charge that the vehicle is illegally parked by another unless it is shown that at such time the vehicle was being used without the consent of the registered owner thereof. 
(b)  The notice, or copy thereof, shall constitute prima facie evidence of the parking violation. 
(c)  No person shall cause or allow a vehicle to be parked in violation of any provision of this chapter or chapter 26 of this Code regulating the time, place or method of parking. Violations of any provision of this chapter or chapter 26 of this Code regulating the time, place or method of parking which are continuous in nature shall constitute a separate and distinct violation for each full hour thereof. 
(d)  Whenever a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of this chapter or chapter 26 of this Code regulating the time, place or method of parking, the owner or owners of the vehicle, the registered owner or owners of the vehicle, and the person who parked or placed the vehicle where the violation occurred shall be jointly and individually liable for the violation and for the civil sanction prescribed herein. 
(e)  A vehicle parked contrary to or inconsistent with any provision of this chapter or chapter 26 of this Code regulating the time, place or method of parking which provides that "no person" may stop, stand or park a vehicle at a designated location or contrary to any limitations, restrictions, or other provision regulating the time, place or method of parking is deemed to be parked in violation of said ordinance or provision of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 2421, § 1, 1-11-05) 
Sec. 24-81. - Parallel parking. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-82. - Civil code violations. 
    Violation of any provision of this Article V is hereby declared to be a civil code infraction which shall be adjudicated and enforced by the City Court under Chapter 13, Article II of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2541, § 6, 1-23-07) 
Secs. 24-83-24-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SPEED REGULATIONS 

Sec. 24-90. - State speed laws applicable. 
    The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city, except as this article, as authorized by state law, hereby declares and determines upon the basis of study that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-91. - Alteration of state speed limits. 
    The council may by ordinance determine that the speed permitted by state law upon any street under the jurisdiction of the city is greater or less than necessary for safe operation of vehicles thereon and may, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, declare a reasonable and safe maximum speed limit on any part of a street. The city traffic engineer shall cause speed limit signs to be erected giving notice of such speed limit and shall keep a record of all such speed limits. Three (3) copies of such record shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office and the record shall be designated as "Altered Speed Limits of the City of Glendale" which record is hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Editor's note- The following listed ordinances amended this section by adopting an updated record of "Altered Speed Limits of the City of Glendale": 
Ordinance No. Sec. Date of 
Adoption 1465 1 12-23-1986 1472 1  1-27-1987 1677 1  4- 9-1991 1697 1  7- 9-1991 1841 1  5-23-1995 2299 1  1-28-2003  
Sec. 24-92. - Minimum speed limit. 
    Whenever the council determines on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on any part of a street or highway consistently impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the council may by ordinance declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall drive a vehicle except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-93. - Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
    The city traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-94. - Unnecessary vehicle noise. 
(a)  No person shall intentionally operate any vehicle: 
(1)  At such a speed on a curve or turn as to create loud and unnecessary noise through the squealing of tires upon the public right-of-way; or 
(2)  So to accelerate or decelerate in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary noise through the squealing of tires upon the public right-of-way; or 
(3)  So as to cause damage to the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Engine braking; exceptions; violations. 
(1)  A person commits the offense of engine braking if the person is operating a motor vehicle on any public street, roadway or highway in this city and uses an unmuffled engine brake. 
(2)  Reckless and negligent violations of subsection (b) of this section shall constitute a violation and no proof of intent or knowledge of such violation is required. 
(3)  A person is not in violation of this section if the person uses an unmuffled engine brake in an emergency situation to avoid imminent danger to a person or to property. 
(4)  Violation of any provision of this section shall be deemed a nuisance. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 2186, § 3, 2-27-01) 
Cross reference- Vehicular noise, § 25-67. 
Sec. 24-95. - Limits-Generally. 
    The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city, except as this article, as authorized by state law, hereby declares and determines upon the basis of study that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event any speed in excess of any speed limit specified by an engineering and traffic investigation is prima facie evidence that the speed is too great and therefore unreasonable when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-96. - Same-City property. 
(a)  The council may determine and declare a reasonable and safe maximum speed limit upon any publicly owned property and may place and maintain signs and/or markings indicating the same. No person shall drive a vehicle on publicly owned property at a speed greater than the posted speed limit. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or other vehicle. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "publicly owned property" shall mean any lands which the city owns either in fee simple or in which it has acquired a beneficial interest by virtue of an agreement of sale or conveyance and it shall include specifically parks and other recreation property including those parks and recreation properties which are leased to private parties and all publicly owned rights-of-way for streets and alleys. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Secs. 24-97-24-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 

Sec. 24-100. - Restricted turn signals. 
    The city traffic engineer is authorized to place official traffic-control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as ascribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-101. - Limitations on turning around. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street when prohibited by sign and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety without interfering with other traffic. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Secs. 24-102-24-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS 

Sec. 24-110. - Signs required at through streets. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer may place and maintain a stop or yield sign on each street intersecting through streets described and designated in the document titled "Designation of Through Streets of the City of Glendale." This document is attached as Exhibit B to this ordinance and is hereby adopted by reference; three (3) copies of the document will be on file with the city clerk. 
(b)  At the intersection of two (2) through streets, the type of traffic control shall be determined by the city traffic engineer from a traffic engineering investigation. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Editor's note- The document above referred to as Exhibit B is not included herein but is available for inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 24-111. - Other intersections where stop or yield required. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine (a) whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required; or (b) whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required. The city traffic engineer shall maintain current records of these designations and a copy shall be kept on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-112. - Stop when traffic obstructed. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Secs. 24-113-24-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - IMMOBILIZATION AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 24-120. - Removal or impoundment of certain vehicles. 
(a)  Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove or have removed a vehicle from a street, alley, roadway or other publicly-owned property to a place of safety or to a facility designated by city removal procedure policy or maintained by the police department, otherwise maintained by the city under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
(2)  When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal; 
(3)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street, alley or roadway and is so parked as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic; 
(4)  When any vehicle is left parked upon a street, alley or roadway for a period in excess of forty-eight (48) hours; 
(5)  When any vehicle is parked in violation of Section 24-62; 
(6)  When any vehicle is parked in violation of Section 24-53(a)(1), (2), (8) or (9). 
(b)  Any unoccupied vehicle of any kind or description found violating any provisions of any of the laws of the city regulating the standing or parking of vehicles is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and such vehicle shall be taken in charge by any police officer, traffic investigator or unarmed police aide and removed from the street, alley, roadway or other publicly-owned property in accordance with the city removal procedure policy. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 2421, § 2, 1-11-05; Ord. No. 2541, § 7, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 2604, § 3, 11-27-07) 
State Law reference- Impoundment authorization, A.R.S. § 28-872. 
Sec. 24-121. - Notice of impoundment to be sent to owner. 
    Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street, alley or roadway as authorized in this article and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, the police department shall give or cause to be given as soon as possible written notice to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. The notice shall be mailed to the owner at the address given in the motor vehicle division registration records, or, if known by the officer, to the last known address. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-122. - Release of impounded vehicle. 
    The police department shall return to the owner said impounded vehicle when the owner has furnished evidence of his identity and ownership, signed a receipt and paid a towing and storage charge such vehicle has been kept in custody of the chief of police. The payment of such towing and storage charges shall not release the owner or driver of such vehicle from any other penalty imposed for violation of the traffic laws of the City of Glendale. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-123. - Immobilization devices. 
    In addition to any other authority possessed by the chief of police, the chief of police or his designee in his discretion may use immobilization devices in enforcing the city parking ordinances on publicly owned property. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Secs. 24-124-24-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CIVIL TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS; LIABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 24-130. - Unlawful parking and traffic movement and control. 
    Violation of any city ordinance or provision of this Code which regulates the time, place or method of parking on the streets or highways is hereby designated as a civil violation, and shall be subject to the provisions of Arizona Revised Statutes Title 28, Chapter 5, Article 4 (as it now reads or may be hereafter amended in the future). In addition, any other section of this chapter regulating traffic movement and control shall constitute a civil traffic violation unless the section specifically provides that the conduct is unlawful, in which case a violation shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 2421, § 3, 1-11-05) 
Sec. 24-131. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2421, § 4, adopted Jan. 11, 2005, repealed § 24-131, which pertained to collection of parking penalties and derived from Ord. No. 1392, § 2, adopted Nov. 26, 1985. 
Sec. 24-132. - Parking citations; issuance. 
(a)  In an action under this article, a copy of the notice of violation need not be personally served upon the owner or operator of the vehicle but may be served by leaving a copy on or in the vehicle. 
(b)  The notice of violation should include the date, time and location of the violation, the license number of the vehicle unlawfully parked, the state that issued the license plate, reference to the city ordinance or State Code provision violated, and notice that within fourteen (14) working days from the date on which the notice of violation was issued the parking penalty (fine) for the violation must be paid to or received by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 2421, § 5, 1-11-05) 
Sec. 24-133. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2421, § 6, adopted Jan. 11, 2005, repealed § 24-133, which pertained to response to parking notice of violation and derived from Ord. No. 1392, § 2, adopted Nov. 26, 1985. 
Sec. 24-134. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2421, § 6, adopted Jan. 11, 2005, repealed § 24-134, which pertained to contests of notices of violation and derived from Ord. No. 1392, § 2, adopted Nov. 26, 1985. 
Sec. 24-135. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2421, § 6, adopted Jan. 11, 2005, repealed § 24-135, which pertained to failure to pay parking penalty after hearing; increased penalty; finding of complaint and derived from Ord. No. 1392, § 2, adopted Nov. 26, 1985. 
Sec. 24-136. - Failure to respond to notice of violation; increased penalty; filing of complaint. 
(a)  If the owner or operator of the vehicle involved in the violation fails to respond within fourteen (14) working days from the day the notice of violation was issued, the parking penalty for the violation shall increase in accordance with the schedule of parking fines then in effect. 
(b)  If the city receives no payment within fourteen (14) days from the day the notice of violation was issued, a complaint shall be filed with the city court. 
(c)  When a complaint is commenced by summons and complaint, the complaint may be signed by any police officer or any other duly authorized agent of the city. 
(d)  A summons and complaint may be sent by regular mail to the address provided to the state department of transportation by the individual made responsible for the alleged violation by Section 24-80. Service of the summons and complaint is complete upon mailing. 
(e)  If the person served with a summons and complaint pursuant to subsection 24-136(d) fails to appear on or before the time directed to appear or at the time set for hearing by the court, the allegations in the complaint shall be deemed admitted and the court shall enter judgment for the city, and impose a parking penalty assessment. 
(f)  A person served with a summons and complaint pursuant to subsection 24-136(d) may contest the parking complaint in the manner set forth in Section 24-137. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 2421, § 7, 1-11-05) 
Sec. 24-137. - Hearing; judgment and assessment of parking penalty. 
(a)  A parking complaint may be contested in person or through an attorney only by an owner of the vehicle described in the complaint or by the person who parked the subject vehicle at the place described in the complaint. If it appears by the preponderance of the evidence that the violator is liable for the violation described in the complaint, the court shall enter judgment for the city and impose a parking penalty assessment. 
(b)  If a violator fails to appear for a duly noticed and scheduled hearing, the allegations in the parking complaint shall be deemed admitted and the court shall enter judgment for the city, and impose a parking penalty assessment. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-138. - Failure to pay civil sanction; suspension of privilege to drive; collection procedure. 
    All parking penalty assessments shall be paid within thirty (30) days from the entry of judgment, except that if payment within thirty (30) days will place an undue economic burden on the violator, the court may extend the time for payment or may provide for installment payments. If the parking penalty assessment is not paid or an installment payment is not made when due, the court may declare the entire parking penalty assessment due and may suspend the violator's operator's or chauffeur's license or driver's permit, or the privilege of a non-resident to drive a motor vehicle in this state, until such parking penalty assessment is paid. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-139. - Appeal. 
    Appeals under this article shall be made in accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes section 28-1600 (as of now reads or maybe hereafter amended in the future) and in accordance with the rules promulgated by the Arizona Supreme Court. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 2421, § 8, 1-11-05) 
Secs. 24-140-24-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - LOADING AND UNLOADING 

Sec. 24-150. - City traffic engineer to designate curb loading zone. 
    The city traffic engineer may determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and public carrier stop and stands as defined in subsection 24-153(b) and shall place and maintain appropriate signs and markings indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this article are applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-151. - Standing in passenger zone; exception. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes, except that a vehicle displaying a state disabled parking identifying insignia may stand or park in a passenger curb loading zone for a period not to exceed five (5) minutes while loading or unloading persons. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-152. - Standing in freight zone; exceptions. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a freight curb loading zone during the hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect, except: 
(1)  To load or unload freight; or 
(2)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to load or unload in such zone. Vehicles displaying state disabled parking insignia may stand or park in a freight or curb loading zone for a period not to exceed five (5) minutes while loading or unloading persons. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-153. - Standing in public carrier stops and stands. 
(a)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a public carrier, stop or stand during the hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect, except a public carrier of the type designated on the sign. 
(b)  A "public carrier stop or stand" as used in this section and Section 24-150 is any of the following: 
(1)  Bus stop; 
(2)  Bus stand; 
(3)  Taxicab stand; or 
(4)  Any other stand for a passenger public carrier. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Secs. 24-154-24-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - PEDESTRIAN'S DUTIES 

Sec. 24-160. - Crossing at right angles. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except where indicated by a crosswalk or other official traffic-control devices. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-161. - Prohibited crossing. 
    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any business district. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Secs. 24-162-24-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 24-170. - Driving restrictions; sidewalks, curbs and gutters. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle or a motorized skateboard shall not drive within any sidewalk area except for use in crossing such sidewalk to gain access to any public or private road or driveway. No driver of any vehicle shall drive across a curb or gutter unless the curb or gutter has been designed and built for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 1867, § 4, 1-23-96) 
Sec. 24-171. - New pavement and markings. 
    No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement, or freshly laid seal coating or freshly painted markings on any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement, seal coatings, or markings, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-172. - Moving overweight, oversize, and extension vehicles over streets in the city. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate or move on a street maintained by the city any equipment, vehicle or structure which exceeds the limits set forth in sections 28-1001 through 28-1031, A.R.S., as amended, relating to oversize, overweight, and extensions over the front or rear, unless a special permit is issued by the city according to section 28-1011, A.R.S., as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-173. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2627, § 1, adopted March 25, 2008, repealed § 24-173, which pertained to operation of vehicles on vacant lots and derived from Ord. No. 1392, § 2, adopted Nov. 26, 1985. 
Sec. 24-174. - Movements across raised traffic islands or medians. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle across any raised area as traffic islands, medians, or channelizing devices. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-175. - Obedience to traffic control barricades. 
    No person shall move a vehicle through or around a barricade or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this city. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-176. - Pulling from curb. 
    The driver moving a vehicle from the curb or side of the street into the traffic lane shall yield the right-of-way to all closely approaching vehicles on such street. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-177. - Signing of one-way streets and alleys. 
    The city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs on any one-way street or alley so designated by the city council. Such signs shall indicate the direction of lawful traffic movement and shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited on those streets and alleys. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-178. - Authority to restrict direction of movement on streets during certain periods. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers, or other devices to give notice thereof. The city traffic engineer may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the roadway. 
(b)  No person shall operate any vehicle in violation of such markings, signs, barriers, or other devices so placed in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85) 
Sec. 24-179. - Use of handheld mobile telephone or portable electronic device; prohibited conduct; exceptions; penalties. 
(a)  Definitions . 
(1)  "Hands-free use" means the use of a mobile communication device without the use of either hand. 
(2)  "Mobile communication device" means a wireless communication device that is designed to engage in calls; and/or receive and transmit text, images, and/or data. 
(3)  "Operating a motor vehicle" means being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle on a highway or street and includes being temporarily stopped because of traffic, a traffic light or stop sign or otherwise, but excludes operating a motor vehicle when the vehicle has pulled over to the side of the road or off a roadway and has stopped at a location in which the vehicle can safely remain stationary. 
(b)  No person shall, except as otherwise provided in this section, use a mobile communication device while operating a motor vehicle upon a street or highway, unless that device is specifically designed or configured to allow hands-free use and is used in that manner while operating a motor vehicle. A law enforcement officer may stop a motor vehicle or motor driven cycle if the officer has reasonable suspicion to believe a violation of this Section is occurring. 
(c)  Exemptions . This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The use of a mobile communication device for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following regarding an immediate emergency situation, safety hazard or criminal activity: 
a.  An emergency response operator; 
b.  An ambulance company; 
c.  Fire department and rescue service personnel; 
d.  Law enforcement personnel; 
e.  A hospital; or 
f.  A physician's office or health clinic. 
(2)  The activation, initiation or deactivation of hands-free use. 
(3)  Law enforcement and public safety personnel, and persons operating authorized emergency vehicles, using a mobile communication device for the purpose of communicating regarding official public safety duties. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this section that the driver was not operating the vehicle in a careless manner and was: 
(1)  A driver using a two-way radio or a private land mobile radio system, within the meaning of Title 47 Code of Federal Regulations Part 90 while in the performance and scope of their work-related duties and who are operating fleet vehicles or who possess a commercial vehicle license and are operating a commercial vehicle; or 
(2)  A driver holding a valid amateur radio operator license issued by the Federal Communications Commission and using a half-duplex two-way radio; 
(e)  Penalty . A person who violates subsection (b) commits a civil violation and is subject to a civil penalty of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) plus any other penalty assessments authorized by law, all in accordance with the provisions of Glendale Municipal Code Chapter 13, Article I. 
(Ord. No. O19-01, § 1, 1-8-19) 
Secs. 24-180-24-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - COMMERCIAL VEHICLE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 24-190. - Operating commercial vehicles on residential streets. 
    Commercial vehicles may not operate on residential streets except for the pickup and delivery of merchandise, materials, equipment, or passengers going to or from a specific location requiring travel on such streets. The commercial vehicle must then use the shortest and most direct route on such streets. 
(Ord. No. 1794, § 3, 12-14-93) 
Sec. 24-191. - Parking commercial motor vehicles. 
    No person shall park or stand a vehicle with a rated chassis capacity in excess of one (1) ton or a commercial vehicle on any right-of-way along any street or on any street, except when expeditiously loading, unloading, delivering or making a service call at a residence, or unless otherwise permitted by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1794, § 3, 12-14-93; Ord. No. 2541, § 8, 1-23-07) 
Secs. 24-192-24-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - CRIMINAL TRAFFIC PENALTIES 

Sec. 24-200. - Criminal penalties. 
    A violation of any section of this chapter shall, unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, be deemed a Class 1 misdemeanor and shall be punished as a Class 1 misdemeanor under state law. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 1794, § 3, 12-14-93) 
Secs. 24-201-24-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - TOWING CARRIERS AND TOWING AND STORAGE CHARGES 

Sec. 24-210. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle: A vehicle left in a private parking area for more than fifteen (15) consecutive days, when it has not been left under a written contract of storage and has not, during that period, been removed by the person leaving it. 
    Private parking area: Any office, commercial or business property not controlled by the city where the public is allowed to temporarily park or leave a vehicle. 
    Private property owner: A person who owns or is in lawful possession of private real property or the agent thereof. For purposes of this article, a private towing carrier shall not act as the agent of a private property owner. 
    Private towing carrier: Any person who offers services for a fee or charge to tow, transport or impound motor vehicles from private property without the prior permission of the owner or operator of such vehicle by means or use of a truck or other vehicle designed for or adapted to that purpose. 
    Proof of vehicle ownership: A written instrument of identification that meets the requirements of A.R.S. Section 4-241(A)(1-4) and an ownership document such as, but not limited to: (1) the most recent state-issued title; (2) any state-issued registration, whether current or not, if the vehicle is currently registered in the person's name; or (3) a vehicle purchase agreement, bill of sale, or lien holder contract if the vehicle displays temporary registration tags. A person acting as an agent for an owner may provide a signed and notarized letter from the owner along with proof of vehicle ownership. 
    Vehicle storage lot: Any business who stores motor vehicles that were removed without the permission of the vehicle owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 2604, § 4, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 24-211. - Towing rules and regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to tow or transport a motor vehicle from private property without the permission of the owner or operator of the vehicle except upon request from a law enforcement agency or the express written permission from the private property owner who has otherwise complied with this section. The private property owner shall either sign each towing order or authorize the tow or transport by a written contract that is valid for one year or less and contains a provision allowing cancellation of the contract upon thirty (30) days written notice to the private towing carrier by the private property owner. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to tow or transport a motor vehicle from private property without the permission of the owner or operator of the vehicle unless the private towing carrier carries in the tow truck and displays to an officer, upon request, a copy of at least one of the following documents: 
(1)  A signed towing order from the private property owner; or 
(2)  A current written contract between the private towing carrier and the private property owner. 
(c)  A private property owner of any private parking area shall be deemed to have given consent to unrestricted parking by the general public in such private parking area unless such private parking area is posted with signs as prescribed in this section which are clearly visible and the whole content of which is readable from every parking location within the private parking area. Such signs shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Restrictions on parking. 
(2)  Disposition of vehicles found in violation of the parking restrictions. 
(3)  Maximum cost to the violator, including storage fees and any other charges that could result from the disposition of a vehicle parked in violation of parking restrictions, which cost shall not exceed the limitations set forth in subsection (f) of this section. 
(4)  The name of the private towing carrier and the telephone number and address where the violator can locate the violator's vehicle. 
(5)  Each sign shall state "Glendale City Code Sec. 24-211". 
(d)  A private towing carrier shall not tow or transport a vehicle from a private parking area unless signs are posted as required by this section, nor shall the private towing carrier charge fees in excess of the amounts specified on the signs. 
(e)  No person shall tow or transport any vehicle without the express permission of the owner thereof, unless he notifies the police department immediately upon towing or transporting the vehicle and has provided the police department with the following information: 
(1)  The vehicle license number, vehicle identification number and description; 
(2)  The reason the vehicle is to be towed or transported without the vehicle owner's permission and from whose authority the vehicle is to be towed or transported; 
(3)  The location from where the vehicle is to be towed or transported; 
(4)  The driver's first and last name, company name and company address, company business address of the driver that intends to tow or transport the vehicle, and a phone number which will be answered by a live person twenty-four (24) hours a day, every day of the year; 
(5)  The location at which the vehicle will be stored. 
(f)  The fee which may be charged by a private towing carrier for, or in connection with, a tow or transport from any private driveway, private property or private parking area, without the express permission of the owner or operator of the vehicle shall not exceed the lesser of: 
(1)  The total charge to tow a vehicle, including all related services, which has reached the storage area, shall not exceed the maximum amount set forth by resolution of the city council pursuant to Section 2-2. 
(2)  The total charge to load, unload and transport a vehicle for which demand to release has been received at any point during transit shall not exceed the maximum amount set forth by resolution of the city council pursuant to Section 2-2. 
(3)  The total charge to open up the business after normal business hours to return a vehicle and all activities associated with that return of the vehicle after hours shall not exceed the maximum amount set forth by resolution of the city council pursuant to Section 2-2. The total charge to open up the business after normal business hours for any other reason shall not exceed the maximum amount set forth by resolution of the city council pursuant to Section 2-2. 
(4)  The charge to store the vehicle shall not exceed the maximum amount set forth by resolution of the city council pursuant to Section 2-2. For purposes of this paragraph the charge may be assessed for each calendar day or portion of a calendar day that the vehicle is stored, excluding the day of release if the day of release is subsequent to the first day of storage. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no storage charge may be made for a day for which: 
a.  The vehicle is recovered within two (2) hours of its delivery to the storage location from which it is released. 
b.  Access to the vehicle was not available for a consecutive eight-hour period. 
c.  The vehicle was not available for release for two (2) consecutive hours after the vehicle reached the storage location from which it was released. 
d.  The vehicle is recovered within the first two (2) hours that the storage was open for the recovery of that vehicle, if that day represents the first day that the vehicle was available for release for a consecutive two-hour period after it reached the storage location from which it was released. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to ask for or demand payment of a charge under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  In connection with providing such access as may be necessary to view, prepare for removal or to remove the vehicle, 
(2)  For recovery of personal items which were located inside the vehicle, 
(3)  For preparing documents to release the vehicle, 
(4)  For the removal of a license plate, 
(5)  For providing information to a lien holder, 
(6)  For providing information to an owner, family member of an owner or owner's agent who calls about a car, 
(7)  For other services necessary for the vehicle's release, or 
(8)  For opening the business during other than normal business hours so long as the person claiming the vehicle arrived at the premises during normal business hours. 
(h)  The towing carrier shall respond in a timely manner to a request from a person to retrieve an ownership document from a vehicle that is being held by the towing carrier. If the towing carrier fails to respond or does not respond in a timely manner, the towing carrier shall forfeit the storage charges from the time of the request until the vehicle is released back to the owner or the documents are given to the person making the request. 
(i)  Every private towing carrier shall post signs at the office and every entrance on every lot where vehicles are stored. Such signs shall be at least 17? × 22? in size. Such signs shall display, in a font size of one (1) inch or larger, the maximum fee which may be charged for each one of the following: 
(1)  Towing, 
(2)  Load and unloading at the tow location or while in transit, 
(3)  The daily storage charge, 
(4)  For each day of the week, the normal business hours, if any, and 
(5)  The charge for opening the business during other than normal business hours to release a vehicle. 
(j)  After owner inspection and contingent upon the transfer of possession, the private towing carrier may require any person claiming a vehicle to sign a receipt for the vehicle claimed, provided however, that such receipt shall contain only the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the person claiming the vehicle; 
(2)  The name, address and letterhead of the private towing carrier; 
(3)  The date and time at which the vehicle was claimed; 
(4)  A description, including the license number, of the claimed vehicle; and 
(5)  A statement of the unpaid balance, if any. 
(k)  The maximum towing charges set forth in subsection (f) above shall apply to the towing, transport and/or storage of a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or less. For a vehicle with a gross weight of more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds but less than or equal to twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds, the maximum towing, transport and storage fees set forth above may be increased by not more than two (2) times. For a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight in excess of twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds, the maximum towing, transport and storage fees set forth above may be increased by not more than four (4) times. 
(l)  In addition to any criminal or civil liability incurred by violation of this code, a private towing carrier demanding or charging a fee in excess of the fees permitted by this subsection shall forfeit its claim to any fee in connection with the towing, transport and/or storage of the vehicle. 
(m)  The owner, or any person authorized to represent the owner, of a vehicle being towed or transported pursuant to this section may demand the release of the vehicle at any time prior to or during the towing or transport of the vehicle to a storage area. Upon such demand, the towing or transportation of the vehicle shall be considered complete and the private towing carrier shall release the vehicle pursuant to the requirements of this section. 
(n)  Upon request from the private towing carrier, the owner, or any person authorized to represent the owner, of a towed, transported, or stored vehicle, shall provide proof of vehicle ownership prior to release of the vehicle. No private towing carrier shall hold or attempt to hold any vehicle towed without the consent of the owner of the vehicle as security for accrued towing or other charges, or require the owner of a vehicle to give any security as a condition precedent for the release of such vehicle. A private towing carrier may use proof of vehicle ownership to assist in the billing and collection of towing, transport and/or storage charges. 
(o)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an abandoned vehicle may be towed from any private parking area pursuant to a written order from the private property owner. The private property owner must sign the towing order, which shall specify each vehicle to be towed and shall not authorize the towing of an unknown vehicle at a future date. A private towing carrier shall not tow or transport an abandoned vehicle unless the towing order is in its possession. 
(p)  In addition to any criminal or civil liability incurred for violation of this code, any private towing carrier removing a vehicle under the authority of this section who fails to comply with each and every provision of this section shall forfeit its claim to a towing charge, a storage charge, or any other charge of any description whatsoever, for or in connection with that tow, transport and/or storage. 
(q)  It shall be unlawful to attempt to collect a towing charge, a storage charge, or any other charge of any description, from the owner of a vehicle, or the agent of the owner of a vehicle, that was towed in a manner that was not in full compliance with this section. 
(r)  The city court shall notify the tax and license manager of each and every conviction of a private towing carrier pursuant to this article and each and every conviction or violation of a private towing carrier pursuant to Chapter 21, Article I. Upon being notified that any private towing carrier has been convicted or found in violation two (2) or more times of any combination of violations of this Article XVI or Chapter 21, Article I, within a twenty-four (24) month period, the city tax and license manager shall revoke such private towing carrier's special regulatory license for a period of six (6) months. For purposes of this subsection, any convictions arising out of a single transaction or event shall be deemed to be one conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2604, § 4, 11-27-07) 
Chapter 25 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 6; obscenity, § 26-86 et seq.; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 33. 
State Law reference- Power of city to define nuisances, A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(21). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned or inoperable vehicle: Any vehicle which is partially or wholly dismantled, discarded, wrecked; or on blocks, stands or similar devices; or stripped or scrapped; or inoperable due to mechanical disassembly; or with a deflated tire or tires, or physically incapable of operation; or other reasons that may include an expired license plate or the absence of a license affixed or assigned thereto. This term shall apply to any vehicle being repaired or restored when such repairs or restoration take fifteen days (15) or more. 
    Animal waste: Waste from stables, kennels, pet pens, chicken coops, veterinary establishments and others of a similar nature and household pet waste. 
    Blight or blighted: Unsightly conditions of a building, structure, accessory building, fence, landscaping or property characterized by neglect, lack of maintenance, damage or any other similar conditions of disrepair, or deterioration. Examples include but are not limited to the accumulation of debris, wood, scrap iron or other metal, boxes, paper, vehicle parts, tires, inoperable equipment or vehicles, discarded appliances; or any items that may harbor insect or vermin infestation or create a fire hazard; landscaping that is overgrown, dead or damaged; fences that are broken, rotted, damaged or leaning; buildings or structures exhibiting general disrepair or dilapidation including but not limited to deteriorated shingles, peeling paint, broken doors or windows or any other evidence of neglect or lack of maintenance. 
    Camp: To use such property for living accommodation purposes such as sleeping activities, or making preparations to sleep, including the laying down of bedding for the purposes of sleeping, or storing personal belongings, or making any fire, or using any tents or shelter or other structure or vehicle for sleeping or doing any digging or earth breaking or carrying on cooking activities. The above-listed activities constitute camping when it reasonably appears, in light of all circumstances, that the participants, in conducting these activities, are in fact using the area as a living accommodation regardless of the intent of the participants or the nature of any other activities in which they may also be engaging. 
    Construction and demolition wastes: All waste building materials, rubble and spoils resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on any building or structure. 
    Construction materials: Including but not limited to, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, sand, dirt, lumber, blocks or any other materials commonly used in construction or landscaping material. 
    Debris: Substance or material of little or no apparent value, including but not limited to deteriorated lumber, old newspapers, cardboard material, scrap metal, vehicle parts, discarded furniture parts, stoves, sinks, cabinets, household fixtures, refrigerators, abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, or the scattered remains of items. 
    Deterioration: A lowering in quality of the condition of a building, structure or parts thereof including but not limited to holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting, or any other evidence of physical decay or neglect or lack of maintenance. 
    Fence (includes screen walls and/or retaining walls): Self-standing structures constructed of wood, chain link, metal, masonry or similar materials designed for and commonly used to provide semi-privacy, security, screening or bank retention between grade separations. 
    Private property: Land owned by any person other than the United States, the State of Arizona, the county or the city. 
    Sound condition: Free from decay or defects and capable of performing the task for which it was designed and in the manner it was intended. 
    Trash: All nonputrescible wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible solid waste material, excluding ashes. 
    Unsheltered: Located outside a garage or other building or structure in such a manner as to be visible to a person standing upon any public street, or sidewalk or at ground level upon any adjoining piece of property. 
    Vehicle: Every device by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn; including but not limited to automobiles, motor homes, travel trailers, utility trailers, or watercraft. Devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks are exempt. 
    Vehicle parts: Any part(s), component(s) or accessory of a vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1454, § 1, 10-21-86; Ord. No. 1643, § 1, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 2036, § 2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2186, § 4, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 2329, § 1, 7-8-03; Ord. No. 2332, § 1, 7-22-03) 
Editor's note- Prior to amendment by Ord. No. 1454, § 1, 10-21-86, § 25-1 concerned general prohibition of nuisances, as derived from Code 1963, §§ 21-19, 21-20. 
Secs. 25-2-25-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFIC ACTS, OMISSIONS AND CONDITIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Prior to amendment by Ord. No. 2186, § 6, 2-27-01, the Title of Article II was "Weeds, Debris, Etc." 

Sec. 25-20. - Property maintenance. 
(a)  General. All exterior property including yards, ground covers, trees, shrubs or other landscaping; and any exterior surfaces of any buildings or structures including but not limited to fences, walls, or roofs, or appurtenances including but not limited to windows, window frames, window screens, doors, door frames, canopies, awnings, cornices, porches, stairways, railings or similar items shall be properly maintained and shall not otherwise present a blighted or deteriorated appearance. 
(b)  Exterior windows, doors, and screens. All exterior doors, door frames, windows and window frames shall be maintained in sound condition, securely fit in their frames, be substantially weather tight and shall not otherwise present a deteriorated or blighted appearance. Window screens, if present, shall be free from excessive tears or holes or bent or broken frames. Boarded window or door openings on an occupied structure are prohibited. 
(c)  Fences, screen walls, and retaining walls. All fences, screen walls and retaining walls on the property shall be maintained in a safe and structurally sound condition; and shall not otherwise present a deteriorated or blighted appearance. This includes but is not limited to leaning or damaged fences, fences missing slats or blocks or any other materials that are otherwise broken or damaged in such amounts as to present a deteriorated or blighted appearance. All materials shall be uniform, compatible, and consistent with the design thereof. 
(d)  Landscaping. All property shall be free from any conditions that contribute to visual blight including but not limited to dirt yards, vegetation of any kind that is substantially dead or damaged or characterized by uncontrolled growth or lack of maintenance or any similar conditions. Ground cover consisting of crushed rock, gravel or similar materials shall be one quarter (1/4) inch or larger in size and be maintained at a sufficient depth that covers all exposed areas of dirt. 
(e)  Protective treatment. All exterior wood surfaces exposed to weather, except decay resistant woods, shall be protected with paint or other protective covering. 
(f)  Painted surfaces. All exterior painted surfaces shall be maintained in sound condition. Painted surfaces that represent a blighted or deteriorated appearance including but not limited to excessive peeling, flaking, chipping, or cracking shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. 
(g)  Roofs and roof coverings. Roofs and all appurtenances shall be structurally sound and maintained in a safe condition. Roof coverings shall be substantially free from broken, rotted, split or curled materials and shall not otherwise present a deteriorated or blighted appearance. All materials shall be uniform, compatible and consistent with the design thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2329, § 2, 7-8-03) 
Sec. 25-21. - Land maintenance. 
    The following acts, omissions, conditions, and things in or upon any land, building or structure in the city constitute public nuisances, the existence which are hereby prohibited and declared to be unlawful: 
(a)  No person shall place any personal property, materials, goods, wares, merchandise or similar items of any kind in or upon any public street, sidewalk, alleyway or rights-of-way. Items placed by or approved by the city are exempt from this subsection. 
(b)  No person shall attach or place any sign, placard, poster, banner or any other advertising device to any tree, public utility structure, traffic control device, streetlight standard, or any other device upon the public streets, alleyways, sidewalks or rights-of-way. Signs, banners or other devices approved by the city are exempt from this subsection. 
(c)  No person shall place, deposit or leave in or upon any public street, alleyway, sidewalk, rights-of-way, park or other city building or property any bottles, glass, cans, graffiti, handbills, posters, pieces of scrap metal, metal articles, paper or other material or items, except in proper containers for collection. 
(d)  No owner or occupant of any property shall allow or permit any trees, shrubs, or other plant growth on the property to impede, obstruct or interfere with the free passage upon any public street, sidewalk, or alleyway; or obstruct the visibility of drivers; or interfere with any traffic control device; or signs or street lighting. Tree limbs must be maintained to hang no lower than twelve (12) feet above any public street or alleyway and seven (7) feet above any public sidewalk. Trees below seven (7) feet, shrubs or other plant growth must be maintained one (1) foot from any public sidewalk. 
(e)  No person shall allow the accumulation of items such as but not limited to bottles, glass, cans, pieces of scrap wood, metal, metal articles, paper, plastic, boxes, tires, vehicle parts or other such materials or items in unsheltered areas of private property. 
(f)  No person shall place and/or store furniture, except furniture designed and placed for outdoor use, household equipment, appliances, construction or landscape material, cardboard material, plastic material, debris or any similar materials in a location that is visible to a person standing upon any public street or sidewalk. 
(g)  No person owning or occupying any property fronting on any street, alleyway, or public place in the city including the area between the property line of such property and the street shall allow thereon grass or weeds to exceed a height over six (6) inches when such conditions create a blighting condition or may harbor infestations or are likely to become a hazard to the public health or safety. 
(h)  No person owning any vacant building or vacant property within the city shall allow thereon grass or weeds to exceed a height over six (6) inches or allow the accumulation of discarded construction materials, construction waste, trash or any other debris when such conditions create a blighting condition, or may harbor infestations or are likely to become a hazard to the public health or safety. 
(i)  No person shall place any waste materials, trash, weeds, or other accumulation of debris upon any public or private property not owned or under the control of such person, other than placement of refuse for collection in accordance with chapter 18, article III of the Code of the City of Glendale. 
(j)  The storage of construction materials in unsheltered areas of the yard in which insects may breed or multiply or which provides harborage for rodents or which constitutes a hazard to the public health or safety is prohibited. This paragraph shall not apply to any construction material when a valid building permit exists for the property on which the construction material is located and the construction material is intended to be incorporated in the project for which the permit is issued. 
(k)  No person shall allow any palm tree to have an excessive accumulation of dead or dry fronds that descend downward from the base of the lowest living frond more than four (4) feet or dry fronds longer than four (4) feet and closer than seven (7) feet to the ground that may result in insect or other infestations or result in other conditions that adversely affect the public health or safety. 
(l)  Any person owning any vacant property that has been subject to illegal dumping on more than three (3) occasions within a twelve (12) month period must effectively secure the area where the illegal dumping has occurred and place "no dumping" signs. Methods such as, but not limited to permanent fencing, ditch and/or berm or four (4) foot posts at four (4) foot intervals may be used to secure the area where the illegal dumping has occurred. 
(1)  All required signage must be a minimum of twelve by eighteen (12 (18) inches in size with two-three (2-3) inch lettering mounted on durable grade vinyl, aluminum, fiberglass or similar substrate. The signage must be mounted on a steel support post a minimum of one and one-half (1-1/2) inch diameter and the support must be placed a minimum of eighteen (18) inches in ground. Metal fasteners must be used to anchor the signage to the support post. 
(2)  If the owner fails or refuses to effectively secure the area where the illegal dumping has occurred and/or place no dumping signs, the city may, at the expense of the owner, complete the work by contract and the owner shall be liable for all costs incurred. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1(13-2), 12-4-84; Ord. No. 2186, § 6, 2-27-01) 
Editor's note- Prior to amendment by Ord. No. 2186, § 6, 2-27-01, § 25-21 concerned definitions of nuisances, as derived from Ord. No. 1325, § 1(13-2), 12-4-84. 
Sec. 25-22. - Vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall park or permit to be parked any vehicle for the purpose of sale upon any public street or private property including vacant property except where the sale of a vehicle is customary and incidental to the principal use of the property and in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Glendale, Arizona, except as follows: 
(1)  The display of one (1) vehicle for sale is permitted at a residence when the vehicle is titled to the owner or occupant of the property, is parked on an improved parking surface on the property and is not being sold in connection with an automobile sales business. 
(2)  No more than three (3) vehicles may be displayed for sale at the same residence within a calendar year and only one (1) vehicle shall be displayed for sale at one (1) time. 
(b)  No person shall park or permit to be parked any vehicle, including but not limited to semi-tractors, semi-tractor trailers, or limousines on any property or vacant property except where the parking of such vehicles is customary and incidental to the principal use of the property and in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Glendale, Arizona. 
(c)  Vehicle covers placed on any vehicle that is visible from any public street or sidewalk must be properly maintained and made exclusively for covering vehicles. A proper cover does not include bed linen, paper, cardboard, plastic sheeting, tarps or any other item or material not manufactured specifically as a vehicle cover. The use of a vehicle cover on any abandoned or inoperable vehicle as defined in this subsection is limited to a vehicle that is stored in a carport. 
(d)  The unsheltered storage of any abandoned or inoperable vehicle, including any vehicle being repaired or restored, that is visible from any public street or sidewalk is prohibited except where the storage, repair or restoration is customary and incidental to the principal use of the property and in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Glendale, Arizona. 
(e)  An abandoned or inoperable vehicle, including any vehicle being repaired or restored, may be stored in a carport if the vehicle is covered with a properly maintained vehicle cover made exclusively for covering vehicles as described in this section. 
(f)  Within any residentially zoned district, any vehicle undergoing repair must be titled to the owner or occupant of the property. No more than three (3) vehicles shall be repaired during any calendar year. Vehicle repair work shall be performed on no more than one (1) vehicle at one (1) time. 
(g)  Within any residentially zoned district, no person shall park or store any vehicle such as but not limited to watercraft, camper shell, truck camper, or utility trailer in any portion of the side yard unless screened from the street or the surface area is improved with gravel, concrete, asphalt or paving bricks. 
(h)  No person shall leave, place or park any abandoned vehicle or inoperable vehicle upon any public street, alleyway, parking lot or other city property. 
(i)  Within any residentially zoned district, no person shall park or permit to be parked any vehicle within a front yard area except in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Glendale, Arizona. 
(j)  A violation of any paragraph in this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1(13-46, 13-49), 12-4-84; Ord. No. 2186, § 6, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 2541, § 9, 1-23-07) 
Editor's note- Prior to amendment by Ord. No. 2186, § 6, 2-27-01, § 25-22 concerned nuisance violations, as derived from Ord. No. 1325, § 1(13-46, 13-49), 12-4-84. 
Sec. 25-23. - Vacant or abandoned buildings. 
(a)  Any unsecured vacant or abandoned building or structure that is structurally sound, weatherproof and otherwise safe must be permanently secured to prevent entry by unauthorized persons. Any wood or similar material used to secure a building or structure must be painted a color compatible with the building or structure. 
(b)  If unauthorized entry occurs on more than one (1) occasion within a twelve (12) month period and it becomes necessary to close the building or structure by boarding-up windows or doors, all work must be in accordance with City of Glendale specifications as approved by the city manager. A copy of board-up specifications can be obtained from the Glendale Code compliance division. 
(c)  If the owner fails or refuses to properly secure the building or structure the city may, at the expense of the owner, complete the work by contract and the owner shall be liable for all costs incurred. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1(13-62), 12-4-84; Ord. No. 2186, § 6, 2-27-01) 
Editor's note- Prior to amendment by Ord. No. 2186, § 6, 2-27-01, § 25-23 concerned responsibility for removal of nuisances, as derived from Ord. No. 1325, § 1(13-62), 12-4-84. 
Sec. 25-24. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  General: No person shall erect, maintain, use, place, deposit, cause, allow, leave or permit to be or remain in or upon any private lot, building, structure or property or in or upon any public street, alleyway, sidewalk, rights-of-way or other public or private place, any condition, thing or act, to the prejudice, danger or annoyance of a neighborhood or others. 
(b)  No person shall abandon, discard, store or keep in any place accessible to children, a refrigerator or any other self-latching container of a capacity greater than one and one-half cubic feet which is outside of any dwelling unit or within any unoccupied or abandoned building or structure without removing the doors, lids, hinges, latches, or securing to prevent access. 
(c)  All property shall be maintained to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water that may cause a hazardous or unhealthy condition or breed insects. 
(d)  No person shall allow any swimming pool, architectural pool, pond or spa to remain or be maintained in a condition that may breed insects or result in insect or other infestations, is polluted or stagnant, or creates a blighting condition. 
(e)  No person shall permit or cause the discharge of water from any swimming pool, architectural pool or spa into any public street, alleyway or rights-of-way. 
(f)  No person shall keep or harbor any animal that by frequent or habitual barking, howling, yelping, crowing or the making of other noises disturbs the peace and quiet of two or more independent witnesses who are not related. For purposes of this section, "animal" means any bird or non-human mammal. 
(g)  No person who keeps or controls any animal shall cause, allow or permit any manure or liquid discharge of such animal to accumulate on private property or to be unloaded, left or dumped in or upon any ditch, street, alleyway, sidewalk, place, vacant lot or public property within the city. 
(h)  Animal waste such as but not limited to manure and droppings shall be removed from pens, kennels, stables, yards and other enclosures at least twice weekly and from the property at least once each week or more frequently if the conditions so necessitate. 
(i)  All property shall be kept free of noxious or objectionable stench or odors that disturb the sense of smell of two or more independent witnesses who are not related. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 1(13-42), 12-4-84; Ord. No. 2186, § 6, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 2802, § 1, 5-22-12) 
Editor's note- Prior to amendment by Ord. No. 2186, § 6, 2-27-01, § 25-24 concerned duty to remove weeds and debris, as derived from Ord. No. 1325, § 1(13-42), 12-4-84. 
Secs. 25-25-25-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Prior to amendment by Ord. No. 2186, § 8, 2-27-01, the title of Article III was "Abandoned Vehicles on Private Property." 

Sec. 25-36. - Enforcement-General. 
(a)  The provisions of article II of this chapter shall only apply to conditions that are visible to a person standing upon a public street or sidewalk except where the city determines that the conditions are or are likely to become a threat to the public health or safety or where the conditions are so severe they are or are likely to become a nuisance to a neighborhood. 
(b)  A violation of any of the provisions of article II of this chapter shall be considered to be a public nuisance. The city may elect to proceed either civilly or criminally against any person who is found to be responsible for causing, permitting, facilitating, or aiding or abetting any violation of any provision of article II. 
(c)  Any Code compliance inspector or police officer that observes a violation of any of the provisions of article II of this chapter is empowered to issue a citation to the alleged violator. Prior to issuing a citation, the Code compliance inspector or police officer may, in his/her discretion, issue a written notice of violation. If the violation is not remedied within the time frame specified in the notice of violation, a citation may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2186, § 8, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 25-37. - Violators liable for costs. 
(a)  If the owner or occupant of any property within the city does not remove or abate such public nuisance from said property within a reasonable period after written notice has been served by the city, said reasonable period being a maximum of thirty (30) days, or less if the interests of public safety or health so necessitate, the city may at the expense of the owner or occupant, remove or cause the removal thereof and the record owner shall be liable for all costs incurred. 
(b)  Any person who places, deposits, leaves or causes a public nuisance in or upon any public street, alleyway, sidewalk, park or other city building or property, shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city to remove or clean up such nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2186, § 8, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 25-38. - Owner of record. 
    The owner(s) of record, as recorded in the Maricopa County Recorder's Office, may be presumed to have lawful control over any building or parcel of land. 
(Ord. No. 2186, § 8, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 2432, § 1, 3-22-05) 
Sec. 25-39. - Assessment of costs. 
    When the city has effected removal or abatement of such public nuisance from any building or property pursuant to this article, the actual cost of such removal including ten percent (10%) for additional inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith, shall become an assessment upon the building or real property from which such public nuisance is removed. The owner of record of such property shall be liable for the payment of same. If the actual cost for removal, including ten percent (10%) for additional inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith, has not been paid within thirty (30) days of billing by the city by ordinary mail, such assessment shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. From the date of the recording it shall be a lien on such building or property until paid. Such liens shall be prior and superior to all other liens, obligations, mortgages or other encumbrances, except liens for general taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2186, § 8, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 25-40. - Subsequent assessments. 
    A prior assessment against the building or property shall not be a bar to a subsequent assessment or assessments for such purposes, and any number of liens on the same property may be enforced in the same action. 
(Ord. No. 2186, § 8, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 25-41. - Right of owner of record to appeal. 
    The owner of record of such building or property shall have the right to appeal to the city council on the notice within thirty (30) days of the receipt thereof and the assessment within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice thereof. The decision of the city council on such appeal shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2186, § 8, 2-27-01) 
Secs. 25-42-25-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKING POLLUTION CONTROL 

Sec. 25-50. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Smoking Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1483, § 1, 3-10-87) 
Sec. 25-51. - Findings of fact; purpose. 
    The smoking of tobacco and other weeds or plants is a health danger to those persons exposed to the smoke and is a source of annoyance and discomfort to those who are present in confined areas where such smoke is present. For these reasons, the purpose of this article is to regulate smoking in enclosed public places and in places of employment. 
(Ord. No. 1483, § 1, 3-10-87) 
Sec. 25-52. - Definitions. 
    In this article, unless otherwise expressly provided or as required by the context: 
    Bar means an area devoted primarily to the serving of alcoholic beverages, to which food service is only incidental. 
    Designated smoking area means any area within an enclosed public place where smoking is specifically permitted. No designated smoking area shall exceed in area and size any nonsmoking area within the enclosed public place and any designated smoking area must be so situated as to allow nonsmoking individuals to conduct normal activity in a reasonably smoke-free environment. 
    Employee means any person who is employed by any employer for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
    Employer means any person or entity employing the services of at least one person. 
    Enclosed public place means any area enclosed by a roof and walls with one or more openings for ingress and egress, which is available to and customarily used by the public. Enclosed public places governed by this article shall include, but shall not be limited to, public areas such as elevators, waiting rooms, reception areas, lobbies, restrooms, restaurants, retail stores, retail service establishments, grocery stores, convenience markets, drug stores, shopping malls, theaters, auditoriums, public and private schools, offices of health care professionals, pharmacies, indoor sports facilities and their lobbies, public transportation vehicles and terminals, airport service lines, airport waiting lounges, taxicabs or other means of public transit, community centers, child care centers, public or common areas of hotels and motels, financial institutions, all indoor facilities and any public places already regulated by Arizona Revised Statutes, section 36-601.01. A private residence is not an enclosed public place. 
    Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a private or public employer, which is intended for occupancy by employees during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, offices, employee lounges, conference and meeting rooms, employee cafeterias and lunchrooms, classrooms, auditoriums, hallways, stairways, waiting areas and restrooms. A private residence is not a place of employment. 
    To smoke or smoking means burning or carrying any lighted cigarette, cigar, tobacco or any other weed or plant or placing any burning tobacco, weed or plant in an ashtray or other receptacle and allowing smoke to diffuse into the air. 
(Ord. No. 1483, § 1, 3-10-87) 
Sec. 25-53. - Regulation of smoking in city-owned enclosed public places. 
    All enclosed public places owned, controlled, occupied or managed by the City of Glendale shall be subject to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1483, § 1, 3-10-87) 
Sec. 25-54. - Regulation of smoking in enclosed public places. 
(a)  Smoking is prohibited in restrooms, public buses, the public areas of grocery stores, convenience markets, drug stores, pharmacies, and in waiting or checkout line areas within other enclosed public places. 
(b)  Smoking is prohibited in all other enclosed public places, except in a designated smoking area. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the ability of the owner, operator or manager of an enclosed public place to declare the whole or any portion of that enclosed public place to be smoke free. 
(Ord. No. 1483, § 1, 3-10-87) 
Sec. 25-55. - Smoking optional areas. 
    Other provisions of this article to the contrary notwithstanding, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this article: 
(1)  Private residences. 
(2)  Bars, pool or billiard rooms and bowling centers. 
(3)  Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests. 
(4)  Retail stores that deal exclusively in the sale of tobacco products and smoking paraphernalia. 
(5)  On-stage smoking as a part of a stage production, ballet or similar exhibition. 
(6)  Hotel and motel conference or meeting rooms, and all other public and private conference or meeting rooms, while these places are being used exclusively for private functions. 
(7)  A private residence which serves as a place of employment. 
(8)  Private clubs and private recreation facilities. 
(9)  Public areas of restaurants that conspicuously post a notice outside each public entrance that the restaurant does not provide nonsmoking areas in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1483, § 1, 3-10-87) 
Sec. 25-56. - Regulation of smoking in places of employment. 
(a)  Within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article, each employer in each place of employment within the city shall adopt, implement and maintain a written smoking policy containing at a minimum the following provisions and requirements: 
(1)  Prohibition of smoking in employer conference and meeting rooms, classrooms, auditoriums, restrooms, waiting areas, medical facilities, hallways, stairways and elevators. 
(2)  Provision and maintenance of a separate nonsmoking area of not less than one-half of the seating capacity and floor space in cafeterias, lunchrooms and employee lounges. 
(b)  Any employee may object to his or her employer about smoke in his or her work area. The policy required by the preceding subsection shall include a definition of work area. Using already available means of ventilation, separation or partition of office space, the employer shall attempt to reach a reasonable accommodation of the preference of both smoking and nonsmoking employees. An employer is not required by this provision, however, to make any expenditures or structural changes to the place of employment. 
(c)  If no reasonable accommodation satisfactory to all affected nonsmoking employees can be reached in a given work area, the preference of the nonsmoking employee shall prevail and the employer shall prohibit smoking in that work area. Where the employer prohibits smoking in a work area, it shall clearly mark that area with appropriate "no smoking" signs and, upon request, shall provide signs to employees for use in designating their areas. 
(d)  The employer shall announce its policies regarding smoking as required by this section within ninety (90) days from the effective date of this article. The policies shall be announced to all the employer's employees in the city and the employer shall post its written policies conspicuously in any place of employment under the employer's jurisdiction in the city. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent or limit an employer's right to designate any place of employment, or a portion thereof, as a nonsmoking area. 
(f)  No employee shall be terminated or subject to disciplinary action solely as a result of his or her complaint about smoking or nonsmoking in his or her place of employment. 
(Ord. No. 1483, § 1, 3-10-87) 
Editor's note- This article became effective on April 10, 1987. 
Sec. 25-57. - Posting and compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Any person or employer who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to this article has the responsibility to properly: 
(1)  Designate required "no smoking" areas. 
(2)  Post signs as required by this section or elsewhere in this article. 
(b)  "Smoking" or "no smoking" signs, as appropriate, or the international "no smoking" symbol (consisting of a picture of a burning cigarette inside a red circle with a red bar diagonally across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted by the owner, operator, manager, employer or other person in control in every place where smoking is controlled by this article. 
(c)  Any owner, manager, operator or employee of any establishment to which this article applies shall, upon either observing or being advised of a violation of section 25-54, have the obligation to inform the violator of the requirements of this article and request immediate compliance. 
(Ord. No. 1483, § 1, 3-10-87) 
Sec. 25-58. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this article is a petty offense. An individual convicted of a violation of this article may be punished by a sentence to pay an amount, fixed by the court, of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). The court shall, in all instances, impose a mandatory minimum fine of ten dollars ($10.00) on an individual so convicted. An enterprise, as defined by Arizona Revised Statutes, section 13-105, convicted of a violation of this article may be punished by a sentence to pay an amount, fixed by the court, of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The court shall, in all instances, impose a mandatory minimum fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) upon an enterprise so convicted. 
(b)  Each day that a violation continues constitutes a separate offense and may be charged accordingly. In the event that two (2) or more violations are consolidated for trial, a person or enterprise convicted of two (2) or more offenses may be fined separately for each, up to the maximum permissible under the preceding subsection. The mandatory amounts required by the preceding subsection, however, shall be no more than twice the mandatory minimum in the aggregate. 
(Ord. No. 1483, § 1, 3-10-87) 
Secs. 25-59, 25-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NOISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Animal noise, § 6-5.1; unnecessary vehicle noise, § 24-94. 

Sec. 25-61. - Purpose. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Glendale to prohibit excessive, unnecessary and annoying noises from all sources subject to its police power. At and above certain levels, noises are detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizens of the city and it is in the best interest that such noises be systematically eliminated. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2, 11-8-88) 
Sec. 25-62. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency vehicle: Vehicles of the fire, police and public service departments and legally authorized ambulances and emergency vehicles of state departments or any political subdivisions thereof and vehicles of public service corporations. 
    Emergency work: Any work performed to prevent or alleviate physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency which has or may result in a disruption of service and which is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of persons or property. 
    Motor vehicle: Any self-propelled vehicle operated within the city, including but not limited to licensed or unlicensed vehicles, automobiles, mini-bikes, go-carts and motorcycles. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2, 11-8-88) 
Sec. 25-63. - Penalty. 
    A violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed and is declared to be a public nuisance and any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day a violation continues or exists shall be a separate offense subject to punishment as a separate misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2, 11-8-88) 
Sec. 25-64. - Excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make or continue, or cause or permit to be made or continued, any excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise that disturbs the peace and quiet or that causes discomfort or annoyance to two or more independent witnesses who are not related. 
(b)  This article is intended to reduce the amount of return visits by law enforcement. Subsequent visits by law enforcement will be cause for abatement of such disturbance, and will require a mandatory restitution assessment for the law enforcement subsequent response services as a term of the sentencing. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2, 11-8-88; Ord. No. 2186, § 10, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 2802, § 2, 5-22-12) 
State Law reference- Disturbing the peace, A.R.S. § 13-2904. 
Sec. 25-65. - Exemptions from noise level regulations. 
    The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the provisions contained in this article: 
(1)  Heating and cooling equipment when it is functioning in accordance with manufacturer's specifications and is in proper operating condition provided that no unit may create an excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise causing annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity within any sleeping or living area inside any dwelling unit; 
(2)  Landscape maintenance equipment when it is functioning in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and with all mufflers and noise-reducing equipment in use and in proper operating condition; 
(3)  Nonamplified crowd noises resulting from activities such as those planned by school, governmental or community groups, or organized sports; 
(4)  Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves; 
(5)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency; 
(6)  Noises resulting from emergency work as defined in section 25-62; 
(7)  Noises from the normal operation of railroad trains; 
(8)  Noises from church chimes; 
(9)  Power plant equipment during normal operation; 
(10)  Noise created by any city vehicle, equipment or facility while being operated for official use; 
(11)  Operation of agricultural equipment in connection with farming operations; 
(12)  Any aircraft operated in conformity with, or pursuant to, federal law, federal air regulations or air traffic control instructions issued pursuant to or within duly adopted federal air regulations, together with any noise created by aircraft operated under, or pursuant to, declaration of an emergency under federal air regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2, 11-8-88) 
Sec. 25-66. - Loud radios, sound sets, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a radio receiving set, phonograph or sound producing or sound reproducing mechanism within the city, at any time in such a manner as to permit the same to be heard at a distance of more than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the premises where such radio receiving set, phonograph, or sound producing or sound reproducing mechanism is located, when the sound of such radio receiving set, phonograph, or sound producing or sound reproducing mechanism is operated in such a manner as to create an excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise that a reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated any radio receiving set, phonograph, or sound producing or sound reproducing mechanism, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within the city in such a manner that the sound from such radio set, phonograph, sound producing or sound reproducing mechanism may be heard off of the premises upon which it is operated in such a manner as to create an excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise that a reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a radio receiving set, phonograph, or sound producing or sound reproducing mechanism continuously for more than two and one-half (2-1/2) hours without an intermission of not less than thirty (30) minutes when the sound from the radio receiving set, phonograph or sound producing or sound reproducing mechanism can be heard off of the premises upon which it is being operated in such a manner as to create an excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise that a reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance. 
(d)  An event being held pursuant to a city-issued special event and/or event permit shall be exempt from the provisions of this section provided that the event is operating in accordance with the conditions of that permit. 
(Code 1963, §§ 21-16-21-18; Ord. No. 1567, §§ 1, 2, 11-8-88; Ord. No. 2899, § 1, 6-24-14) 
Cross reference- Amplified sound in Thunderbird Park, § 27-93. 
State Law reference- Disturbing the peace, A.R.S. § 13-2904. 
Sec. 25-67. - Vehicular noise; violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within any residential area of this city to repair, rebuild or test any motor vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day in such a manner as to create an excessive, unnecessary or offensive noise that a reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance. 
(b)  No person shall operate or cause to operate any motor vehicle unless the exhaust system of such vehicle: 
(1)  Is free from defects which may cause sound level magnification; 
(2)  Is equipped with a muffler; 
(3)  Has not been modified in such a manner which will amplify or increase the sound level emitted by the motor of such vehicle above that emitted by a muffler originally installed on the vehicle as manufactured for initial sale. 
(c)  Sound amplification systems in vehicles; limitations on use. 
(1)  Except as authorized by law, no person shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system in or on a vehicle which: 
(A)  Can be heard outside the vehicle from fifty (50) or more feet; or 
(B)  Annoys or disturbs the quiet, comfort or repose of any reasonable person in the vicinity; unless the system is being operated to request assistance of an emergency nature or to warn of a hazardous situation. 
(2)  In addition to other specific exemptions authorized by this chapter, subsection (c) of this section shall not apply to: 
(A)  A vehicle operated by a gas, electric, communications, water utility company, or governmental entity; or 
(B)  A vehicle used for advertising in a parade or in a political or other special event permitted by the city. 
(d)  For the purpose of subsection (c) above, "sound amplification system" means any device, instrument or system, whether electrical, mechanical or otherwise for amplifying sound or for producing or reproducing sound, including but not limited to any radio, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph, or sound or musical recorder or player. 
(e)  A violation of any provision of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with state law. Each day a violation continues or exists shall be a separate offense subject to punishment as a separate misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2, 11-8-88; Ord. No. 2186, § 11, 2-27-01) 
Cross reference- Unnecessary vehicle noise, § 24-94. 
Sec. 25-68. - Construction of buildings and other projects. 
(a)  Noise limitations: Subject to the provisions of section 25-64, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate equipment or perform any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures or projects, or to operate any pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, power hoist or any other construction type device except within the time periods specified below unless an appropriate permit has been obtained beforehand from the city. 
(b)  Construction start/stop times: 
(1)  Concrete work: From April fifteenth to October fifteenth, inclusive, concrete may be poured each day between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or at such other times as authorized by permit. From October sixteenth to April fourteenth, inclusive, concrete may be poured each day between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. or at such times as authorized by permit. 
(2)  Other type construction (residential zones): From April fifteenth to October fifteenth, inclusive, all other construction or repair work shall not begin prior to 6:00 a.m. and must stop by 7:00 p.m. each day in, or within five hundred (500) feet of, a residential zone or at such other times as authorized by permit. From October sixteenth to April fourteenth, inclusive, all other construction or repair work shall not begin prior to 7:00 a.m. and must be stopped by 7:00 p.m. each day in, or within five hundred (500) feet of, a residential zone or at such other times as authorized by permit. 
(3)  Other type construction (Commercial and industrial zones): Construction and repair work in commercial and industrial zones, not within five hundred (500) feet of a residential zone, shall not begin prior to 5:00 a.m. and must stop by 7:00 p.m. or at such other times as authorized by permit. 
(4)  Weekends and holidays excluded: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, construction or repair work shall not begin prior to 7:00 a.m. and must stop by 7:00 p.m. and concrete pouring should not begin prior to 6:00 a.m. and must stop by 7:00 p.m. on any Saturday, Sunday or state or federal holiday, unless such other times are authorized by permit. 
(c)  Permits: Construction and repair work may be conducted at different times and at higher noise levels than otherwise permitted, if upon written application, a permit is obtained beforehand from the city manager or his designee. The permit shall be kept on the work site and shown to city officials on request. In granting such permit, the city manager or his designee shall consider if construction noise in the vicinity of the proposed work site would be less objectionable at night than during the daytime because of different population levels or different neighboring activities; if obstruction and interference with traffic, particularly on streets of major importance, would be less objectionable at night than during the daytime; if the kind of work to be performed emits noises at such a low level as to not cause significant disturbance in the vicinity of the work site; if the neighborhood of the proposed work site is of such a character wherein sleep could be disturbed; if great economic hardship would occur if the work was spread over a longer time; if the work will abate or prevent hazards to life or property; if proposed early morning or night work is in the general public interest; and, he shall prescribe such conditions, working times, types of construction equipment to be used, and permissible noise emissions as he deems to be required in the public interest. No permit shall be required to perform emergency work as defined in section 25-62. 
(d)  Revocation of permits: The city manager or his designee may revoke any permit granted hereunder upon complaint based upon substantial evidence that the construction activity caused significant disturbance in the vicinity of the work site. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 2, 11-8-88) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9. 
Sec. 25-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DAMAGED BUILDINGS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9. 

Sec. 25-70. - Purpose. 
    Buildings or appurtenant structures in the City of Glendale which have been damaged by fire flood, wind, earthquake or other sudden natural causes and which are in a dilapidated state contribute to urban blight, adversely affect property values in the city, serve as attractive nuisances for children and transients and adversely impact the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Glendale. Therefore, such buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 1673, § 1, 3-26-91) 
Sec. 25-71. - Definitions. 
    The following terms shall have the following respective meanings whenever used in this article: 
(a)  Owner shall mean the holder(s) in fee simple title of the real property to which a building or appurtenant structure is attached. 
(b)  Parties in interest shall mean all persons and entities who have legal or equitable interests of record in a building or appurtenant structure or who are in possession thereof. 
(c)  Damaged building shall mean any building which is intended to be used for human habitation or for commercial activity, including any garage, shed, or other appurtenant structure, and which has been damaged by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other sudden natural causes to the extent that such building or structure fails to provide the amenities essential for the intended use of such building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 1673, § 1, 3-26-91) 
Sec. 25-72. - Nuisance. 
    All damaged buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired or demolished as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 1673, § 1, 3-26-91) 
Sec. 25-73. - Repair or demolition of damaged buildings. 
    The owner(s) of a damaged building shall repair or demolish such damaged building pursuant to the requirements of section 25-74 and remove all debris and waste materials generated by the repair or demolition. 
(Ord. No. 1673, § 1, 3-26-91) 
Sec. 25-74. - Duties of building safety director. 
(a)  The building safety director (director) shall inspect any building or appurtenant structure about which a complaint is filed by any person to the effect that such building or structure is in violation of this article. 
(b)  If the director determines that a building or appurtenant structure is a damaged building, the director shall notify the owner of the damaged building and all parties in interest, by certified mail or by personal service, that: 
(1)  The building or structure has been determined to be a damaged building pursuant to this ordinance; 
(2)  The owner must repair or demolish the damaged building within three (3) months from the date of such notice; 
(3)  Other parties in interest may, at their own risk, repair or demolish the damaged building within three (3) months of the date of such notice. 
(c)  The notice required by section 25-74(b) shall include a description of the damaged building and a statement of the particulars which make the building or structure a damaged building. 
(d)  The director shall cause to be posted on all damaged buildings a notice stating that he has determined the building to be a damaged building in violation of this code and that he has ordered the damaged building to be repaired or demolished. It shall be misdemeanor for any individual to remove any sign posted pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1673, § 1, 3-26-91) 
Sec. 25-75. - Appeal; hearing officer. 
(a)  If the damaged building is not repaired or demolished as required by the notice provided for in section 25-74, the building safety director shall give written notice to the owner of the damaged building and other parties in interest, by certified mail or personal service, to appear before a hearing officer at a designated time and place to show cause why the damaged building has not been repaired or demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the notice provided for in section 25-74. The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer who shall conduct the hearing in accordance with this section. 
(b)  The hearing officer shall hear such testimony as the building safety director, owner and other parties in interest may offer relevant to the condition of the damaged building and the failure to repair or demolish the same. 
(c)  The hearing officer shall make written findings of fact from the testimony offered pursuant to subsection 25-75(b) as to whether or not the building in question is a damaged building as defined in this article and whether good cause exists for the failure to repair or demolish the damaged building. 
(d)  If the hearing officer finds the building to be a damaged building and if the owner of the damaged building or other parties in interest fail to show good cause why the damaged building should not be demolished forthwith, the hearing officer shall authorize the building safety director to cause the damaged building to be demolished. The costs of such demolition shall be charged against the real property on which the damaged building existed as an assessment. Such assessment shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and shall be a lien on such real property from the date of its recording until paid. Such lien shall be subject and inferior to a lien for general taxes and to all prior encumbrances of record. 
(e)  If the hearing officer finds the building to be a damaged building and that good cause exists to grant the owner or other parties in interest additional time to complete the repair or demolition of the damaged building, the hearing officer shall order that such repairs or demolition be completed with diligence and before a date certain, provided that no extension of time longer than nine (9) months shall be granted to complete the repairs or demolition. If an extension of time to complete repairs or demolition of the damaged building is granted but the owner and other parties in interest do not complete the repair or demolition of the damaged building within the extension of time granted, the building safety director, upon the expiration of the extension granted, shall cause the damaged building to be demolished forthwith. The costs of such demolition shall be charged against the real property on which the damaged building existed as an assessment. Such assessment shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and shall be a lien on such real property from the date of its recording until paid. Such lien shall be subject and inferior to a lien for general taxes and to all prior encumbrances of record. 
(f)  Any determination by the hearing officer may only be appealed to the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 1673, § 1, 3-26-91) 
Sec. 25-76. - Notice by publication. 
    If the whereabouts of any person entitled to notice under this article cannot be ascertained by the city in the exercise of reasonable diligence, service of such notice may be made by publishing the notice in a newspaper printed and published in the city for two (2) consecutive weeks. 
(Ord. No. 1673, § 1, 3-26-71) 
Secs. 25-77-25-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GRAFFITI 

Sec. 25-80. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program for abatement of graffiti from public and private property to reduce blight and deterioration within the city, protect public safety, and to expedite removal of graffiti from structures on both public and private property. The city council finds and determines as follows: 
(a)  The increase of graffiti, on both public and private property, is creating a condition within the city which results in blight and deterioration of property values and of the comfortable enjoyment of life and property for adjacent and surrounding residents and owners, and contributes to the overall detriment of the city. 
(b)  Graffiti constitutes a public nuisance and a threat to public safety which must be abated to alleviate the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the city, and to prevent the further spread of graffiti. 
(c)  Certain categories of graffiti which incite violence, are especially harmful and must be removed as quickly as possible to avoid or minimize harm to persons and the whole community. 
(Ord. No. 1993, § 1, 2-24-98) 
Sec. 25-81. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint. 
    Broad tip marker means any marker or similar implement which has a writing surface which is one-half (1/2) of an inch or greater and containing anything other than a solution which can be removed with water after the solution dries. 
    Graffiti means a drawing or inscribing a message, slogan, sign or symbol or mark of any type that is made on any public or private building, structure or surface, and that is made without permission of the owner. 
    Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, broad tip marker, paint stick, graffiti stick or bleeder. 
    Nonprofit organization means any organization which has registered or filed as a nonprofit corporation or organization with a state or federal agency. 
    Paint stick, graffiti stick, or bleeder means an implement containing paint, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance. 
    Responsible party means an owner, occupant, lessor, lessee, manager, licensee, or other person having the right to control such property. 
(Ord. No. 1993, § 1, 2-24-98) 
Sec. 25-82. - Possession of graffiti implements prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly possess any graffiti implement with the intent to use the implement for the purpose of committing criminal damage. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age to possess a graffiti implement unless (1) such person is under the direct supervision of a parent, legal guardian or teacher, or (2) such person is within the scope and course of such person's employment or involvement with an activity sanctioned by a school, church or nonprofit organization. 
(c)  Violation of this section by an adult is a class 1 misdemeanor, punishable by a term of not less than forty-eight (48) hours in jail and not less than eighty (80) hours of community service. Violation of this section by a juvenile is a class 1 misdemeanor, punishable as provided for in title 8, Arizona Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1993, § 1, 2-24-98) 
Sec. 25-83. - Limiting access to graffiti implements. 
(a)  No person other than a parent or legal guardian shall sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  Evidence that a person, his or her employee, or agent demanded and was shown acceptable evidence of majority and reasonably acted upon such evidence in a transaction or sale shall be a defense to any prosecution under this section. Acceptable evidence of majority shall include, but is not limited to, driver's license, state-issued identification or military identification. 
(c)  This section does not apply to the transfer of graffiti implements from parent to child, guardian to ward, employer to employee, teacher to student or in any other similar relationship when such transfer is for a lawful purpose. 
(d)  Violation of this section is a civil offense and shall be punishable by a fine of $50 and twenty (20) hours of community service. 
(Ord. No. 1993, § 1, 2-24-98) 
Sec. 25-84. - Storage and display of graffiti implements. 
(a)  No person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a business, where aerosol paint containers or broad tip markers are sold, nor any person who sells or offers for sale aerosol paint containers or broad-tipped markers, shall store or display, or cause to be stored or displayed, such aerosol spray paint containers and broad tip markers in an area that is accessible to the public without employee assistance in the regular course of business pending legal sale or other disposition. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall preclude the storage or display of aerosol paint containers and broad tip markers in an area viewable by the public so long as such items are not accessible to the public without employee assistance. 
(c)  A violation of this section is a civil offense. A first offense shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). A second offense within any twenty-four (24) month period shall be subject to a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00). A third and subsequent offense within any twenty-four (24) month period shall be subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 1993, § 1, 2-24-98) 
Sec. 25-85. - Graffiti prohibition and removal. 
(a)  Graffiti prohibited. All sidewalks, walls, buildings, fences, signs, and other structures or surfaces shall be kept free from graffiti when the graffiti is visible from the street, right-of-way or other public or private property. 
(b)  Notice of violation. If it is determined by the city that graffiti exists on property in violation of this article, the city may, in writing, notify the responsible party with a notice of violation. The notice may be served by certified mail, personal service, or by posting the subject property and publishing the notice in the official city newspaper. 
(c)  Contents of notice of violation. The notice of violation shall identify the property in violation, shall generally describe the location of the graffiti, and shall direct that the graffiti be abated within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of the notice. The notice shall state that in the event the responsible party fails to abate the graffiti within the time period specified in the notice of violation, the city may abate the graffiti and bill the responsible party for the costs. The notice shall state that the responsible party may appeal the notice by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager before the time period for abating the graffiti expires. The receipt date of the notice of violation shall be the date received if delivered in person or sent by certified mail, or the date of first publication, if the alternate method of service is used. 
(d)  City's authority to abate. If the responsible party fails to abate the graffiti as required by the notice of violation, the city may proceed to abate the graffiti and bill the responsible party for the costs thereof. The city or its authorized private contractor is expressly authorized to enter private property and abate graffiti thereon in accordance with this section. The city police department shall assist in the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1993, § 1, 2-24-98) 
Sec. 25-86. - Penalties. 
    A judge shall not suspend any part or all of the imposition of any jail time, community service, or fine required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1993, § 1, 2-24-98) 
Secs. 25-87-25-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MISCELLANEOUS NUISANCES 

Sec. 25-90. - Camping prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to camp upon any public or private land, whether or not such camping takes place in a motor vehicle. A violation of this paragraph shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor punishable in accordance with Glendale City Code section 1-7. 
(b)  The following activities shall not be punishable under section 25-90(a): 
(1)  Camping on own property. Landowners or family members of landowners who camp on such land for their own private use and enjoyment; 
(2)  Camping authorized by permit. Any organized and supervised camping activity, on public or private land, which has secured prior permission of the city manager or his designee; or 
(3)  Tailgating. Any camping which occurs for twenty-four (24) or less consecutive hours in the parking lots of any stadium or arena with a seating capacity of more than fifteen thousand (15,000) and owned or operated by a public entity or agency. 
(4)  No criminal sanction shall be imposed against individuals sleeping outdoors on public property when no alternative shelter is available to them. 
(Ord. No. 2332, § 2, 7-22-03; Ord. No. O18-77, § 1, 10-23-18) 
Secs. 25-91-25-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FUGITIVE DUST 

Sec. 25-100. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote public health, general welfare and safety by reducing particulate matter generated by fugitive dust particulates that contribute to air pollution and to comply with state legislation directing certain local actions pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes §§ 9-500.04 and 9-500.27, as may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2627, § 2, 3-25-08) 
Sec. 25-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearing indicates a different meaning: 
    Dustproof method: Asphalt concrete, cement concrete, penetration treatment of bituminous material and seal coat of bituminous binder and mineral aggregate, pavers designed for vehicular travel, crushed rock or gravel no smaller than one-quarter (1/4) inch and no larger than three-quarters (3/4) of an inch permanently maintained to a depth of two (2) inches and contained within a permanent border. 
    Excepted property: An unpaved surface that is a public or private road, street or lawful easement. 
    Landscape materials: As defined under Glendale City Code, chapter 19, article I, section 19-2 and any dust, debris or trash connected with the processing or maintenance of landscape materials. 
    Leaf blower: Any device that generates a stream of air that is designed or used to move landscape materials. 
    Parking area: A public or private lot or other property provided for parking of vehicles. 
    Vacant lot: Includes open area or lot, un-subdivided or an undeveloped tract of land or a subdivided lot, developed or partially developed, that contains no approved or permitted buildings or structures. 
    Vehicle: A motorized device on or by which a person or property is or may be transported on either a public highway or on off highway all-terrain surfaces, excluding devices moved by human power or used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 2627, § 2, 3-25-08) 
Sec. 25-102. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall utilize a leaf blower to move landscape materials into a public roadway. 
(b)  No property owner shall allow parking, maneuvering, ingress and egress areas that serve commercial, industrial or more than four (4) residential units unless the surface is permanently maintained with a dustproof method. 
(c)  No property owner shall allow parking, maneuvering, ingress and egress areas that are three thousand square feet (3,000 sq. ft.) or greater in size and that serve residential buildings with four (4) or less units unless the surface is permanently maintained with a dustproof method. 
(d)  No person shall park or use a vehicle on an unpaved vacant lot unless the surface actually utilized is excepted property or is permanently maintained with a dustproof method. 
(e)  No person shall operate a vehicle on any unpaved surface that is closed by the landowner by rule or regulation of a federal agency, the State of Arizona, Maricopa County, the city or by proper posting of a private land owner. 
(Ord. No. 2627, § 2, 3-25-08) 
Sec. 25-103. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this article is guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor, or as an alternative law enforcement penalty, the person may be issued a civil violation and be subject to enforcement under Glendale City Code, Chapter 13, Article II. 
(b)  In addition to or in lieu of a fine pursuant to this article, a judge may order the person to perform at least eight (8) but not more than twenty-four (24) hours of community restitution or to complete an approved safety course related to the off-highway operation of vehicles, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2627, § 2, 3-25-08) 
Sec. 25-104. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Glendale City Code Section 25-102(e) does not apply to vehicles used in the normal course of business or normal course of governmental operations. 
(b)  This article shall not apply during a period of emergency or if the operation is directed by a peace officer or other public authority. 
(Ord. No. 2627, § 2, 3-25-08) 
Sec. 25-105. - Effective dates. 
(a)  Glendale City Code Section 25-102(b) shall be effective October 1, 2008. 
(b)  Glendale City Code Section 25-102(c) shall be effective October 1, 2009. 
(c)  All remaining provisions of this article shall be effective March 31, 2008. 
(Ord. No. 2627, § 2, 3-25-08) 
Chapter 26 - OFFENSES-MISCELLANEOUS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2186, § 12, 2-27-01, repealed § 26-1, concerning handbills, derived from Code 1963, §§ 21-1 and 21-2. 
Sec. 26-2. - Parking on private property. 
    No person may park a vehicle in any private driveway, on private property or on private parking areas without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such premises. A violation of this paragraph shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Code 1963, § 19-41; Ord. No. 2541, § 10, 1-23-07) 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 24-62. 
Sec. 26-3. - Handicapped parking; stopping, standing or parking prohibited in places reserved for disabled; violation. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) hereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle within any such specially designated and marked parking space provided in accordance with Article 14 of Title 28, Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S. § 28-881 et seq.) unless the motor vehicle is transporting a person eligible for the distinguishing insignia placard or number plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol, and either: 
(1)  The motor vehicle displays the distinguishing insignia placard. 
(2)  The motor vehicle displays number plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol. 
(b)  If a law enforcement officer or a parking enforcement specialist employed by the city finds a motor vehicle in violation of this section, the person may issue a complaint to the operator or other person in charge of the motor vehicle or leave a notice of violation with the vehicle. 
(c)  Any person who is chauffeuring a physically disabled person shall be allowed, without a distinguishing insignia placard or number plates bearing the international wheelchair symbol, to park momentarily in any such parking space for the purpose of loading or unloading such disabled person. No complaint shall be issued to the driver for such momentary parking. 
(d)  This section does not apply: 
(1)  To zones where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited to all vehicles. 
(2)  If there is an ordinance that prohibits parking during heavy traffic periods such as rush hours or where parking clearly would present a traffic hazard for the general public. 
(e)  Each such parking space for physically disabled persons shall be prominently outlined with paint and posted with a permanent sign located not less than three (3) feet nor more than six (6) feet above the grade and of a color and design approved by the State Department of Transportation bearing the internationally accepted wheelchair symbol and the caption "reserved parking." 
(f)  In this section, the term "physically disabled person" shall have the meaning assigned to it in Arizona Revised Statutes § 28-881. 
(g)  A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Code 1963, § 19-48; Ord. No. 1061, § 1, 1-23-79; Ord. No. 1392, § 3, 11-26-85; Ord. No. 2541, § 11, 1-23-07) 
Cross reference- Specific parking prohibitions, § 24-50 et seq. 
State Law reference- Handicapped parking, A.R.S., § 28-881 et seq. 
Sec. 26-4. - Sale of goods on streets and near schools prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, either for immediate delivery or for future delivery, on or upon any street, avenue, thoroughfare, alley or public place within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any goods, wares or merchandise, either for immediate or future use or consumption, on any public street, alley or public way of the city within five hundred (500) feet of any public or private school. 
(Code 1963, § 26-1) 
Sec. 26-5. - Sale or possession of unwholesome or contaminated food substances. 
    No person shall bring into the city or have in his possession for sale any decayed or damaged meat or vegetable substance whatever. 
(Code 1963, § 15-9) 
Secs. 26-6-26-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-21. - False, misleading, etc., reports to police. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully to make to the police department any false, fraudulent, misleading or unfounded report or statement, to furnish in such report any false or fictitious address or any address other than a true address or intended address, or wilfully to misrepresent any fact for the purpose of interfering with the orderly operation of the police department or with the intention of misleading any police officer. 
(Code 1963, § 21-10) 
State Law reference- False statements as to financial condition or identity, A.R.S., § 13-2107; false reports to law enforcement officers, A.R.S., § 13-2907.01. 
Sec. 26-22. - Obstructing police. 
    Any person who shall knowingly or willfully obstruct by fleeing from, delaying, resisting or opposing any police officer in the performance or attempted performance of any official duty shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. One cannot be in violation of this section by the utterance of words alone regardless of how offensive or obscene they may be. 
(Code 1963, § 21-21.1; Ord. No. 2874, § 1, 1-28-14) 
State Law reference- Resisting arrest, A.R.S., § 13-2508; obstructing government operations, A.R.S., § 13-2402. 
Sec. 26-23. - Interfering with police dogs. 
(a)  While a police service dog is being caged, kenneled, transported, exhibited, exercised, or engaged in discharging or attempting to discharge any lawful duty or function, it is unlawful to and no person shall either: 
(1)  Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly kill, injure, strike, interfere with or bait, or attempt to recklessly kill, injure, strike, interfere with or bait a police service dog; or 
(2)  Cause or direct any animal to attack or otherwise interfere with the police service dog. 
(b)  A police officer may destroy an animal attacking a police service dog if no lesser means are reasonably available to prevent injury to the police service dog. 
(c)  A "police service dog" as used in this section shall mean any dog which is a member of the police department K-9 unit. 
(Ord. No. 1416, § 1, 5-6-86) 
Secs. 26-24-26-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ESCAPE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Escape, A.R.S. § 13-2502 et seq. 

Sec. 26-36. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Confinement: Any limits or conditions placed by a jailer or other authorized person upon the movement, liberty or actions of any prisoner by any means whatever, and shall include, but shall not be limited to, confinement in any jail, hospital, building, structure or other area. 
    Escape: The unlawful departure of a prisoner from the limits or conditions of his custody or confinement and shall include, but shall not be limited to, the voluntary leaving of the enclosure or limits of the city jail or other place of confinement, within or without the city jail contrary to any law or the instructions of a jailer or other authorized person, the violation of the instructions of a jailer or other authorized person to return when released for a temporary period of time, the violation by a jail trustee or other prisoner given limited or conditional liberties of the limits and conditions imposed upon such trusty or prisoner, the voluntary assumption by any prisoner of any freedom or liberty, not expressly permitted by any law or the instructions of a jailer or other authorized person. 
(Code 1963, § 21-9.1) 
Sec. 26-37. - Prohibited. 
    Any person, while a prisoner in the city jail or in any other place where prisoners are confined, or who is otherwise in the custody of and confined by the city, who escapes or attempts to escape shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1963, § 21-9.2) 
Sec. 26-38. - Rescue or assistance of prisoner. 
    A person who rescues or attempts to rescue, or aids another person in rescuing or attempting to rescue a prisoner from the city jail or other confinement, or assists in the escape or attempt to escape of a prisoner from the city jail or other confinement, or from any officer or person having him in lawful custody, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1963, § 21-9.3) 
Secs. 26-39-26-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY AND ORDER 
DIVISION 1. - CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS 

Sec. 26-52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. 
    Guardian: A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by an authorized agency or court; or at least twenty-one (21) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
    Insufficient control: Failure to exercise reasonable care and diligence in the supervision of the juvenile. 
    Minor: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
    Parent: A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step parent of another person. 
(Ord. No. 1834, § 1, 2-28-95) 
Sec. 26-53. - Offenses. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years to be in, about, or upon any place in the city away from the property where the youth resides between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any minor sixteen (16) years of age or older and under the age of eighteen (18), to be in, about, or upon any place in the city away from the property where the child resides between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(c)  It is unlawful for the parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control, allow a minor to violate subsection (a) or (b) as listed above. 
(d)  It is unlawful for a parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or supervision of the minor to fail or refuse to take custody of the minor after such demand is made upon him by a law enforcement officer who arrests the minor for violation of subsection (a) or (b) as listed above. 
(Ord. No. 1834, § 1, 2-28-95) 
Sec. 26-54. - Defenses/exceptions. 
    It is a defense to prosecution under section 26-53, including section 26-53(c), of this division that the minor was: 
(a)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(b)  With prior permission of the parent or guardian, in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(c)  With prior permission of the parent or guardian, in an employment activity or going to or returning from an employment activity without any detour or stop by the most direct route; 
(d)  Involved in an emergency; 
(e)  With prior permission of a parent or guardian, was engaged in reasonable, legitimate, and specific business and/or activity. Examples include, but are not limited to, a juvenile with prior permission of the parent or guardian, attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults who take responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults who take responsibility for the minor; 
(f)  With prior permission of the parent or guardian, engaged in a reasonable and legitimate exercise of First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution; 
(g)  Married and sixteen (16) years of age or over, or in the military; 
(h)  On the sidewalk abutting their residence or on the next door neighbor's property with the consent of the neighbor. 
(Ord. No. 1834, § 1, 2-28-95) 
Sec. 26-55. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall attempt to ascertain the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based upon the circumstances, the minor's responses and minor's conduct, no defense as provided in section 26-54 is probably present. 
(b)  In addition to any other powers he/she may have, any law enforcement officer who arrests a minor for violating any of the provisions of section 26-53(a) or section 26-53(b) is also hereby empowered to demand of the parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or supervision of the minor that such parent, guardian or other person come and take the minor into custody. The law enforcement officer is also empowered to take the minor to a designated location where arrangements can be made for a parent, guardian or other appropriate party to take the minor into custody. Should there be a failure of the parent, guardian or other person to take custody of such minor, the officer may then be empowered to take the minor home. 
(Ord. No. 1834, § 1, 2-28-95) 
Sec. 26-56. - Penalty. 
(a)  A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this division shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. This offense is designated an incorrigible offense for minors under the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. 
(b)  Each violation of the provisions of section 26-53(a), (b), (c) or (d) shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1834, § 1, 2-28-95) 
DIVISION 2. - FIREARMS/WEAPONS 

Sec. 26-57. - Possession of firearms by minors; exceptions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Firearm" means any loaded or unloaded pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun or other weapon which will or is designed to or may readily be converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive or expanding gases, except that it does not include an air rifle, air pistol, BB gun, or a firearm in permanently inoperable condition. 
(2)  "Minor" means a person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a minor within the City of Glendale who is not accompanied by a parent, grandparent or guardian, or certified hunter safety instructor or certified firearms safety instructor acting with the consent of the minor's parent, grandparent or guardian, to knowingly possess or carry on the minor's person, within the minor's immediate control or in or on a means of transportation any firearm in any place that is open to the public or on any street or highway or on any private property except private property that is owned or leased by the minor or the minor's parent, grandparent or guardian. However, this section shall not apply to a minor fourteen (14) years of age or older who is engaged in any of the following activities: 
(1)  Lawful hunting or shooting events or marksmanship practice at established ranges or other areas where the discharge of a firearm is not prohibited. 
(2)  Lawful transportation of an unloaded firearm for the purpose of lawful hunting. 
(3)  Lawful transportation of an unloaded firearm between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. for the purpose of shooting events or marksmanship practice at established ranges or other areas where the discharge of a firearm is not prohibited. 
(4)  Any activity that is related to the production of crops, livestock, poultry, livestock products, poultry products or ratites or storage of agricultural commodities. 
(c)  Any firearm possessed by a minor in violation of this section shall be subject to forfeiture in the same manner as authorized by Arizona Revised Statutes, title 13, chapter 39. 
(Ord. No. 1730, § 1, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 2155, § 1, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 26-58. - Discharging weapons. 
(a)  No person shall, within the limits of the city, fire or discharge any air gun, BB gun, pellet gun, dart gun, gas operated gun, spring gun or other similar gun or instrument. 
(b)  The prohibition of subsection (a) shall not apply to the use of any such gun or instrument by: 
(1)  A law enforcement officer or other duly authorized public official or employee in the performance of any official duty; 
(2)  Licensed shooting galleries; 
(3)  Any person to whom a license, permit or authorization is issued by the chief of police for the use of such gun or instrument for a valid and proper purpose and for use in a manner not likely to harm any person, animal or property; or 
(4)  Any person when used only for the necessary protection of property, habitation, or person in a manner authorized by the laws of the state or under or within rights guaranteed by the constitution of the state or the United States. 
(c)  Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall forfeit to the city such gun or instrument so fired or discharged. 
(Ord. No. 206 (N.S.), § 1) 
State Law reference- Weapons, A.R.S. § 13-3101 et seq. 
Secs. 26-59-26-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TICKET SELLING AND RESELLING 

Sec. 26-65. - Ticket selling and reselling prohibited except from certain locations; penalties. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arena: The Glendale Arena located at 9400 West Maryland Avenue, Glendale. 
    Event: Any revenue or non-revenue producing sports, entertainment, cultural or civic event or any other activity (including related event set-up and take-down) held at the Arena or Stadium. If such event or activity is presented in its entirety more than once during a given day, each such presentation shall be considered a separate event. An event is one event, even if the event or activity commences on a given day so long as it is completed within the four (4) hours immediately following the end of such day. 
    Stadium: The Arizona Tourism and Sports Authority Multi-Purpose Facility located at 6300 North 95th Avenue, Glendale. 
(b)  Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, resell, expose for sale or resale, or offer to or attempt to either sell or resell any ticket of admission or other evidence of right of entry to an Event. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not include or apply to the: 
(1)  Sale of such tickets at or from any ticket office, booth or other similar place regularly and permanently established and maintained therefor with the express permission and authorization of the person or governmental agency in charge, care or control of the property on or at which such office, booth or place is located; or 
(2)  Ticket resale area of the Arena which is a posted and identified area adjacent to or on the Arena grounds at which tickets may be bought and sold without violating subsection (b) of this section; or 
(3)  Ticket resale areas of the Stadium which are posted and identified areas adjacent to or on the Stadium grounds at which tickets may be bought and sold without violating subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Should an officer arrest or cite a person for a violation of this section, the officer is hereby authorized to seize every ticket offered for sale. Should an officer arrest or cite a person for a violation of this section and have probable cause to believe the ticket sold or offered for sale is counterfeit, the officer is hereby authorized to search the person and their belongings and seize every ticket in their possession which is for the same Event as that ticket. Any ticket or tickets seized shall be held in police custody until the criminal matter against the person is dispositioned in court or until the ticket or tickets are ordered released by the court. 
(Ord. No. 2359, § 1, 12-16-03) 
Secs. 26-66, 26-67. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INTERFERENCE WITH ATHLETIC CONTESTS AND EXHIBITIONS 

Sec. 26-68. - Athletic contests and exhibitions-Invading playing area. 
    For any athletic contest or exhibition at a venue with a fixed seating capacity of ten thousand (10,000) persons or more and where admission is charged or tickets are required for admission, it shall be unlawful for any person to invade the playing field of any athletic contest or exhibition at any time while such contest or exhibition is in progress; or during intermissions or delays of such contest or exhibition; or for two (2) hours before and after such contest or exhibition; provided that this section shall not apply to the participants or officials in such contests or exhibition or other persons authorized to be on the playing field by a designated person of the organizer, sponsor or promoter of such sporting event. 
(Ord. No. 2546, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 26-69. - Same-Throwing of bottles, cans, other objects prohibited. 
    For any athletic contest or exhibition at a venue with a fixed seating capacity of ten thousand (10,000) persons or more and where admission is charged or tickets are required for admission it shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw, hurl or fling bottles, cans, receptacles or any other object that could cause injury or harm to any person in the spectator area where any athletic contest or exhibition is conducted or onto the playing field or into or upon the area used for the conduct of such contest or exhibition while the same is in progress; or during intermissions or delays of such contests or exhibitions or for two (2) hours before and after such contest or exhibition. 
(Ord. No. 2546, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 26-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FIREWORKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 017-18, § 1, adopted May 9, 2017, added a new Div. 5 to Art. III of Ch. 26, in effect repealing and reenacting said division as set out herein. Former Div. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2801, § 1, adopted April 24, 2012. 

Sec. 26-70.1. - Purpose. 
    The city council hereby recognizes that the desert environment of Arizona has unique fire risks and adopts this division to enhance the public safety and welfare of its citizens and the community by prohibiting the use of fireworks within the city. 
(Ord. No. 017-18, § 1, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 26-70.2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City permit: A permit issued by the city fire chief or designee. 
    Display fireworks: Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601. 
    Expenses of an emergency response: The reasonable costs directly incurred by public agencies including but not limited to the city fire, police and public works departments or other first responders including but not limited to private ambulance companies that make an appropriate emergency response to an incident. 
    Fireworks: Display fireworks, consumer fireworks and permissible consumer fireworks as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601. 
    Novelty items: Federally deregulated novelty items that are known as snappers, snap caps, party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices and sparklers. 
    Permissible consumer fireworks: Those fireworks as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601 that may be sold within a municipality even where the use of those items has been prohibited. 
    Reasonable costs: The costs of providing police, fire fighting, clean-up, rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of an incident and the salaries of the persons who respond to the incident. 
    Supervised show: A monitored performance of display fireworks open to the public authorized by city permit. 
(Ord. No. 017-18, § 1, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 26-70.3. - Use of fireworks. 
(a)  The use of permissible consumer fireworks within the city is prohibited except on days other than June 24 through July 6, and December 24 through January 3 of each year. 
(b)  No person shall sell, possess, authorize or manufacture consumer or display fireworks unless authorized by state law or city permit. 
(c)  The use of fireworks on public or city property is prohibited at all times. 
(d)  Nothing in this section or division shall be construed to prohibit the use of novelty items or the carrying out of a supervised show or possession of display fireworks authorized by city permit. 
(Ord. No. 017-18, § 1, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 26-70.4. - Sale of fireworks. 
(a)  No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible consumer fireworks to a person who is under sixteen (16) years of age. 
(b)  No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible consumer fireworks in conflict with state law. 
(c)  No person shall sell, possess, authorize or manufacture consumer or display fireworks unless authorized by state law or city permit. 
(Ord. No. 017-18, § 1, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 26-70.5. - Posting of signs by persons engaged in the selling of permissible consumer fireworks; civil penalty. 
(a)  Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks, every person engaged in the selling of permissible fireworks shall prominently display signs indicating the following: 
(1)  The use of all fireworks, including permissible consumer fireworks as defined under state law, within the city, is prohibited except as authorized by Glendale Municipal Code section 26-70.3. 
(2)  Consumer fireworks authorized for sale under state law may not be sold to persons under the age of sixteen (16). 
(b)  Signs required under this section shall be placed at each cash register and in each area where fireworks are displayed for sale. 
(c)  In accordance with state law, the city fire chief or designee shall develop regulations concerning the size and color of the required signs and develop a model sign. The required sign regulations and model sign shall be posted on the city's website and filed with the city clerk's office. 
(d)  Failure to comply with subsections (a) or (b) above is a civil offense punishable by a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 017-18, § 1, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 26-70.6. - Authority to enforce violations of this division; means of enforcement. 
(a)  The city fire chief or designee, a Glendale police officer or the city attorney may issue civil complaints to enforce violations of this division designated as civil offenses. 
(b)  Any person authorized pursuant to this section to issue a civil complaint may also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be taken and the time in which they are to be taken to avoid issuance of a civil or criminal complaint. 
(c)  A Glendale police officer or the city attorney may issue criminal complaints to enforce this division. 
(Ord. No. 017-18, § 1, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 26-70.7. - Penalties. 
    The penalty for violating any prohibition or requirement imposed by this division is a class one misdemeanor with a minimum fine of two hundred seventy-five ($275.00) unless another penalty is specifically provided for. 
(Ord. No. 017-18, § 1, 5-9-17) 
Sec. 26-70.8. - Liability for emergency responses related to use of fireworks. 
(a)  A person who uses, discharges or ignites fireworks is liable for the expenses of any emergency response that is required by such use, discharge or ignition. The fact that a person is convicted or found responsible for a violation(s) of this division is prima facie evidence of liability under this section. 
(b)  The expenses of an emergency response are a charge against the person liable for those expenses pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and may be collected proportionately by the public agencies or other first responders that incurred the expenses. The liability imposed under this section is in addition to and not in limitation of any other liability that may be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 017-18, § 1, 5-9-17) 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY AND MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-71. - Glue, etc. 
(a)  As used in this section the phrase "glue containing a solvent having the property of releasing toxic vapors or fumes" shall mean and include any glue, cement, or other adhesive containing one or more of the following chemical compounds: Acetone, an acetate, benzene, butyl alcohol, ethyl alcohol, ethylene dichloride, isopropyl alcohol, methyl alcohol, methyl ethyl ketone, pentachlorophenol, petroleum ether, or toluene. 
(b)  No person shall breathe, inhale or drink: 
(1)  Any glue containing a solvent having the property of releasing toxic vapors or fumes; or 
(2)  Any other solvent, aerosol, vapor or gas; 
for the purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication, stupefaction, depression, giddiness, paralysis or irrational behavior, or in any manner changing, distorting or disturbing the auditory, visual or mental processes. This subsection shall not apply to anesthetic substances administered for a valid medical or dental purpose. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly sell or offer for sale, deliver or give to any person under eighteen (18) years of age, any glue containing a solvent having the property of releasing toxic vapors or fumes which will induce an intoxicated condition, as defined herein. 
(d)  A person making a sale or transfer of possession of a glue containing a solvent having the property of releasing toxic vapors or fumes shall require adequate identification and shall record the name, address, sex and age of the person to whom the sale or transfer is made; records required by this subsection shall be kept in a permanent register available for inspection by the chief of police for a period of at least one (1) year; provided that this subsection shall not apply to a sale or transfer made to a person intending to use such glue for manufacturing or industrial purposes. 
(e)  No person, except a person who is, at the time of such sale, actually employed by or engaged in operating a bona fide commercial establishment at a fixed location, shall sell to any other person any glue containing a solvent having the property of releasing toxic vapors or fumes, and all sales of such product not made in or from such an establishment are hereby prohibited. 
(f)  All glues containing a solvent having the property of releasing toxic vapors or fumes being held for sale by a bona fide commercial establishment at a fixed location shall be kept in such a place as to be unavailable to any customer without the assistance of an employee or owner of such establishment. 
(g)  Nothing contained in this section shall be applicable to the transfer of a tube or other container of glue from a parent to his child, or from a guardian to his ward. 
(h)  No person shall be found in any public place under the influence of: 
(1)  Any glue containing a solvent having the property of releasing toxic vapors or fumes; or 
(2)  Any other solvent, aerosol, vapor or gas; 
in such a condition that he is unable to exercise care for his own safety or the safety of others, nor shall any person, by reason of his being under the influence of any aforementioned substance, interfere with, obstruct or prevent the free use of any street, sidewalk or other public way. 
(Code 1963, § 21-13.1) 
State Law reference- Glue sniffing, etc., A.R.S. § 13-3403. 
Sec. 26-72. - Prohibited public activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate upon any of the public sidewalks or crosswalks in the city or upon any public path, by-way or highway, or upon the floor or interior of any bus or other public conveyance, or in or on any public place or park or on private property in a location that is or may be visible to other persons. 
(Ord. No. 1617, § 1, 8-29-89) 
Cross reference- Penalty for violations, § 1-7. 
Secs. 26-73-26-85. - Reserved. 
Chapter 26.5 - OUTDOOR LIGHT CONTROLS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1464, § 1, adopted Dec. 9, 1986, added provisions designated as Ch. 26A to the Code. In order to maintain the numbering system used herein, said provisions have been codified as Ch. 26.5, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 26.5-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    This chapter is intended to restrict the permitted use of outdoor artificial illuminating devices, control light trespass, minimize the detrimental effect artificial outdoor lighting has on astronomical observations and encourage good lighting practices such that lighting systems are designed to conserve energy and costs, while providing for nighttime safety, utility, security and productivity. 
(Ord. No. 1464, § 1, 12-9-86) 
Sec. 26.5-2. - Conformance with applicable codes; conflict. 
(a)  All outdoor artificial illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this chapter and any building code now in effect or which may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  If any provision of this chapter conflicts with any other section of this Code or any other ordinance of the city, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 1464, § 1, 12-9-86) 
Cross reference- Technical codes, § 9-16 et seq. 
Sec. 26.5-3. - Approved materials and methods of installation; new technology. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall not prevent the use of any alternate material or method of installation not specified in this chapter, or new lighting technology. The alternate must be approved by the city engineer prior to its use within the city. 
(b)  The city engineer may approve any alternate material or method of installation or new lighting technology ff he finds such material, method or technology: 
(1)  Provides approximate equivalence to those specific requirements of this chapter; or 
(2)  Satisfactorily complies with the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1464, § 1, 12-9-86) 
Sec. 26.5-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Filtered: The use of an outer lens which services to control the spectral distribution from a light source. The outer lens shall be glass, acrylic or some other translucent enclosure. Quartz glass does not comply with this requirement. 
    Individual: Any private individual, tenant, lessee, owner, or any commercial entity, including but not limited to companies, partnerships, joint ventures or corporations. 
    Installed: The initial installation of outdoor light fixtures defined herein. 
    Outdoor light fixtures: Outdoor artificial illuminating devices, lamps and other devices, permanent or portable, used for illumination or advertisement. Such devices shall include, but shall not be limited to, search, spot or flood lights for buildings and structures, recreational areas, parking lot lighting, landscape lighting, billboards and other signage and street lighting. 
    Shielded fully (fixtures): Fixtures that are shielded in such a manner that light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted. 
    Shielded, partially (fixtures): Fixtures that are shielded in such a manner that the bottom edge of the shield is below the plane of the center line of the lamp reducing light above the horizontal. 
(Ord. No. 1464, § 1, 12-9-86) 
Sec. 26.5-5. - General requirements for shielding and filtration. 
(a)  All outdoor illuminating devices, except those exempt from this section by section 26.5-7, shall be shielded as set forth below: 
(1)  High pressure sodium, metal halide, fluorescent, tungsten, halogen, incandescent and mercury vapor type lamp fixtures shall be fully shielded. 
(2)  Fluorescent type lamp fixtures used to illuminate outdoor advertising signs shall be mounted at the top of the sign structure and shall be partially shielded. 
(b)  A filter shall be used for all metal halide, fluorescent and mercury vapor type lamp fixtures. 
(c)  Other types of lamp fixtures not specified in this section, and not specifically exempt from this section by section 26.5-7 shall be shielded and/or filtered as determined by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1464, § 1, 12-9-86) 
Sec. 26.5-6. - Restrictions and prohibitions on use of specific outdoor light fixtures. 
(a)  Except for emergency purposes, no person shall operate a search light within the city without obtaining a permit to do so from the city. No search light shall be operated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and sunrise. 
(b)  No shielded fixture, fully or partially, shall be directed upward toward the sky. 
(c)  No outdoor recreational facility, public or private, shall be illuminated after 11:00 p.m. by lighting fixtures which do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, except to conclude a recreational or sporting event or other activity in progress prior to 11:00 p.m. 
(d)  Low wattage, unshielded lighting devices shall not be installed in a manner which will direct light into adjacent properties. Flood and spot lights shall be aimed so the high beam of the light does not exceed a point on the ground adjacent to the structure supporting the flood or spot light, the distance of said point from the structure being equal to the height of the flood or spot light above the ground. 
(Ord. No. 1464, § 1, 12-9-86) 
Sec. 26.5-7. - Exemptions. 
    The shielding and filtration requirements set forth in section 26.5-5 shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Low pressure sodium fixtures. 
(2)  Outdoor lighting fixtures installed prior to the effective date of this chapter [January 1, 1987]. However, such fixtures, when exempted, shall be extinguished, either automatically or manually, between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise. Street lights and parking lot lights installed prior to the effective date of this chapter are not required to be extinguished between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise. 
(3)  Fossil fuel light, produced directly or indirectly by the combustion of natural gas or other utility-type fossil fuels. 
(4)  Incandescent fixtures of one hundred fifty (150) watts or less, and other sources of seventy (70) watts or less. Tungsten halogen lamps are not considered an incandescent light source for purposes of this exemption. 
(5)  Airport navigational lighting systems. 
(6)  Outdoor advertising signs of the type constructed of translucent material and wholly illuminated from within. 
(Ord. No. 1464, § 1, 12-9-86) 
Sec. 26.5-8. - Procedures for compliance with this chapter. 
(a)  Applications. Any individual applying for an electrical, building or use permit and intending to install outdoor lighting fixtures shall, as a part of said application, submit evidence to the city engineer that the proposed work will comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Contents of application or submission. The submission shall contain, but shall not necessarily be limited to the following (all or part of which may be part of or in addition to the information required elsewhere in the zoning regulations upon application for the required permit): 
(1)  Plans indicating the location of the outdoor lighting fixture(s) on the premises and the type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, and other devices intended to be used. 
(2)  Description of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports and other devices, etc. This description shall include, but is not limited to, manufacturers' catalog cuts and/or drawings (including sections where required) and shall include detailed photometric data. 
(3)  These plans and descriptions shall be sufficiently complete to enable the city engineer to determine whether compliance with the requirements of this chapter will be secured. If the city engineer is unable to make such a determination from the plans and descriptions, he may request the applicant to submit evidence of compliance by certified test reports as performed by a recognized testing laboratory. All test reports shall comply with procedures established by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IES) for testing of luminaries. 
(Ord. No. 1464, § 1, 12-9-86) 
Sec. 26.5-9. - Violations. 
(a)  A violation of this chapter shall be a civil infraction and a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) a day shall be imposed for each day the violation exists after expiration of the abatement period provided for in this section. 
(b)  When a violation of this chapter is discovered by the city, a notice of violation shall be served upon, or sent by certified mail to, the owner, lessee or other person in control of the premises. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation and shall order the responsible party to abate the violation within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 1464, § 1, 12-9-86) 
Sec. 26.5-10. - Effective date; application; non-conforming devices. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall become effective on January 1, 1987. 
(b)  Outdoor light fixtures installed prior to January 1, 1987, shall not be altered, replaced, relocated or recreated unless brought into compliance with this chapter. This provision shall not apply to reasonable and normal repairs and maintenance to the fixtures which are necessitated by ordinary wear, weather or accident. In addition, no change in use, replacement, structural alteration or restoration shall be permitted for any fixture which has not been used for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, unless it is brought into compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1464, § 1, 12-9-86) 
Chapter 27 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements, Ch. 5; library, Ch. 20; sale, lease, etc., of city property, § 2-166 et seq.; art in public projects, § 2-226 et seq.; parking or driving on recreational trails prohibited, § 24-63; special events, § 30-81 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 27-1. - Parks and recreational facilities and programs; statement of purpose. 
(a)  The city has established parks and recreational facilities and programs for the use and enjoyment of its residents, believing that the provision of such parks, facilities and programs is necessary to meet significant social, physical and mental health needs of the community. 
(b)  To the extent possible, the city has provided parks, facilities and programs without directly imposing fees for such parks, facilities and programs. In order to continue providing parks, facilities and programs for the use and enjoyment of the community at a high level of quality, it may be necessary to charge fees to those persons who most directly benefit from certain parks, facilities and programs. 
(c)  Fees and charges imposed for the use of parks, facilities and programs may be established at levels that permit the city to recover its costs of providing such parks, facilities and programs to the community. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 1, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-2. - Fees. 
(a)  The city council may, by resolution, set all fees for the use of the city's parks and recreational facilities and programs. The city council may set different fees for city residents and for nonresidents using or participating in the same parks, facilities and programs. 
(b)  Unless such fees have otherwise been set by the city council, the parks and recreation director may set fees for the use of the city's parks and recreational facilities and programs. However, except for special events, nothing in this section shall be construed as granting the parks and recreation director the authority to impose a general fee for the use and enjoyment of city parks by the public. Any such fee shall be approved by the city council. The parks and recreation director may set different fees for city residents and for nonresidents using or participating in the same parks, facilities or programs. 
(c)  No fees paid pursuant to this chapter for the use of any city park or recreational facility or program shall be refunded if: 
(1)  The person requesting a refund uses or participates in the park, facility or program for which the fee has been paid, even if such use or participation is not as extensive as such person was entitled to; or 
(2)  The person fails to request a refund in a timely manner which permits the city to avoid incurring unnecessary costs or losing replacement revenues as a result of issuing a refund. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 1, 5-27-97 
Sec. 27-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bicycle: Any device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride having two tandem wheels either of which is more than twelve (12) inches in diameter or having three (3) wheels in contact with the ground any of which is more than twelve (12) inches in diameter. 
    Downtown redevelopment area: The area bounded by Orangewood Avenue on the north, Maryland Avenue on the south, 51st Avenue on the east and 63rd Avenue on the west. 
    Food: Any article, solid or liquid, sold for human consumption and the sale of which is not prohibited by any federal, state or local law, rule or regulation. 
    In-line skates: Shoes that have attached to their soles a row of wheels which are used for gliding with alternate movement of the legs on a surface other than ice. 
    Motorized skateboard: A self-propelled device which has a motor, a deck on which a person may ride and at least two (2) tandem wheels in contact with the ground. 
    Parks and recreation director: The person designated by the city to act as parks and recreation director, regardless of such person's official title with the city. 
    Pushcart: Any device which is on wheels, is propelled solely by an individual pushing it while he or she walks and is specifically designed for the sale of inflated balloons or fresh flowers or for storage and preservation of food items for a short time. Any device which may be transported from one (1) place to another by hitching it to a motor vehicle, except for a device using a detachable hitch, shall not be deemed to be a pushcart. 
    Road or roadway: Any portion of a street improved, designed or primarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. If a street includes two (2) or more separate roadways, "roadway" refers to such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Rollerskates: Shoes that have attached to their soles two (2) parallel sets of wheels which are used for gliding with alternate movement of the legs on a surface other than ice. 
    Sidewalk: Any portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Skateboard: A human-propelled device which has a deck on which a person may ride and at least two (2) tandem wheels in contact with the ground. 
    Tax and license manager: The person designated by the city to act as tax and license manager, regardless of such person's official title with the city. 
    Vehicle: A device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public roadway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 1, 5-27-97) 
Secs. 27-4-27-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Appointive boards and commissions, Art. V; ex officio members, Art. V, § 2. 
Cross reference- Parks, boards, commissions generally, § 2-266 et seq. 

Sec. 27-16. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a parks and recreation commission of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 21A-7) 
Charter reference- Authority to create boards, commissions, etc., Art. V, § 1. 
Sec. 27-17. - Members. 
(a)  The commission shall have nine (9) members, who shall be residents of the city and who shall be appointed by the city council. The chairperson of the commission shall be appointed by the city council. Two (2) of the nine (9) members of the commission shall be students attending high school at the time of their appointment by the city council. The student members of the commission shall be full voting members of the board. 
(b)  The mayor, city manager and parks and recreation director shall be ex officio members, without voting privileges, of the commission. 
(c)  The student members of the board shall be appointed for one-year terms and may be re-appointed for a second one-year term. The non-student members of the board shall be appointed for a two-year term. All members shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1963, §§ 21A-8-21A-10; Ord. No. 1627, § 1, 12-5-89; Ord. No. 1644, § 1(7), 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1849, § 6, 7-25-95; Ord. No. 1944, § 2, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2158, § 2, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 27-18. - Staff liaison. 
    The parks and recreation director shall serve as the staff liaison to the commission and see that such municipal services and facilities are made available so that the commission can carry forth its purpose. 
(Code 1963, § 21A-11; Ord. No. 1944, § 2, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-19. - By-laws. 
    The commission shall establish written by-laws and rules for the conduct of its meetings, and said by-laws and rules shall be forwarded to the council for approval by motion and vote. 
(Code 1963, §§ 21A-12, 21A-13(b); Ord. No. 1644, § 4, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1944, § 2, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-20. - Meetings and quorum. 
    The commission shall establish a time, by vote, for regular meetings, which shall be held at least once each month if there is business to transact. A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of a majority of the commission members present at a meeting shall be required for passage of any matter before the commission. 
(Code 1963, § 21A-13(a), (c); Ord. No. 1505, § 1, 7-28-87; Ord. No. 1849, § 6, 7-25-95; Ord. No. 1944, § 2, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2158, § 2, 7-25-00)) 
Sec. 27-21. - Functions. 
    The powers and duties of the commission shall be advisory in nature, and all acts thereof shall be subject to review by the city council. The primary powers and duties of the commission shall be to advise the city council on the following matters: 
(1)  Establishment of policies, rules and regulations relating to the planning, acquisition, disposition, operation, use, care and maintenance of areas and structures owned, leased or otherwise acquired by the city for use as parks and recreational centers. 
(2)  Development of a continuing plan for the city's park system and its recreation program. 
(3)  Establishing priorities at budget time for those items other than administrative functions relating to park acquisition, development and recreation programs. 
(4)  Such other matters as the mayor and city council may direct. 
(Code 1963, § 21A-13(c)-(j); Ord. No. 1944, § 2, 5-27-97) 
Secs. 27-22-27-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARK RULES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1944, § 3, adopted May 27, 1997, amended former Art. III, §§ 27-36-27-71, relative to park rules, and enacted a new Art. III to read as herein set out. The provisions of former Art. III derived from Code 1963 §§ 21A-1-21A-6, 21A-14, 21A-15(a)-(2) and Ord. 1753. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 27-36. - Adoption of rules and regulations by council and director. 
(a)  The city council may adopt rules of conduct for persons using city parks and recreational facilities. Such rules may be established or amended by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  The parks and recreation director may adopt such rules and regulations as he or she deems necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of this article and article V of this chapter; provided that such rules and regulations are consistent with this chapter and with all rules and regulations adopted by the city council pursuant to subsection (a). All administrative rules and regulations adopted by the parks and recreation director are subject to the approval of the city manager. All persons using city parks or recreational facilities or programs shall comply with all administrative rules and regulations so adopted. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-37. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  The violation of any provision of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted by the city council pursuant to section 27-36 shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Each day a violation is allowed to exist shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  The violation of any provision of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted by the city council pursuant to section 27-36 may be treated as a civil code infraction pursuant to Glendale City Code, chapter 13, article II, provided that the provisions contained in section 13-22(b) shall not apply to any enforcement action under this article. 
(c)  In addition to any penalties imposed pursuant to subsections (a) and (b), the parks and recreation director may prohibit any person from future use of city parks and recreational facilities and programs if the parks and recreation director determines, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing before the director, that the person has committed a serious violation, or repeated violations, of any provisions of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to section 27-36. The length of any such prohibition shall not exceed twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-38. - Enforcement by park rangers. 
    Any rules and regulations adopted by the city council pursuant to this article and any other ordinances adopted by the city council which are applicable in or to city parks shall be enforced by city police officers and park rangers, both of whom shall have authority to issue citations or to file civil code infraction complaints for violations of such rules, regulations and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Secs. 27-39-27-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 27-41. - Obstructing city officials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person using a city park to knowingly: 
(a)  Furnish any false information to any park ranger or other city official performing any official duty in a park; or 
(b)  Obstruct or interfere with any park ranger or city official in the performance of such person's official duties in a park. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-42. - Order to leave park; unlawful refusal to comply. 
    A city police officer or park ranger may order any person who has violated any park rule or regulation or any other federal, state or local law to immediately leave the park in which such violation has occurred. No person shall remain in a park or return to such park on the same day after such person has been ordered to leave the park by a police officer or park ranger. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-43. - Hours of operation; modification by director. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), city parks shall be open to the public each day from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. No person shall use any portion of a park, except for public roadways located therein, during the hours in which such park is closed. 
(b)  The parks and recreation director may at any time: 
(1)  Modify the regular days and hours during which any city park is open to the public by posting the hours of operation at such park. 
(2)  Temporarily extend the times during which a city park is open for special events. 
(3)  Temporarily close any portion of a park for such time as the parks and recreation director deems necessary. 
(c)  Any regular or temporary modification to the days and hours during which a park is open may be made effective as to all uses or only specified uses of the park. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-44. - Damaging or changing park property prohibited. 
    Without the express written consent of the parks and recreation director, no person shall: 
(a)  Damage, tamper with, disfigure, improperly use or remove any city park property, including any vegetation, landscaping, playground equipment, picnic tables, benches, grills, paving, fountains, restrooms, signs, markers, monuments, statues, fences, utilities, lights or any other natural resources or improvements of any kind. 
(b)  Plant any seed or vegetation in or perform any landscaping improvements to any city park. 
(c)  Construct any sign, gate, fence, trail, structure or other improvement in a city park. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-45. - Vehicles, bicycles, skateboards, etc. 
(a)  No person shall operate or use any vehicle, bicycle, unicycle, motorized skateboard, skateboard, rollerskates or in-line skates in a city park except on public roadways or at such other locations as are specifically designated for such use. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the proper use of motorized wheelchairs. 
(b)  No person operating or using a vehicle, bicycle, unicycle, motorized skateboard, skateboard, rollerskates or in-line skates in a city park shall operate or use such vehicle or equipment in any unsafe manner. All persons operating or using such vehicle or equipment in a park shall yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians. 
(c)  No person shall operate or use a vehicle, bicycle, unicycle, motorized skateboard, skateboard, rollerskates or in-line skates in a city park at a speed greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour or any other posted speed limit. 
(d)  No person shall perform any maintenance of or repairs to any vehicle in a city park, except for emergency repairs required to remove such vehicle from the park. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2541, § 12, 1-23-07) 
Sec. 27-46. - Weapons prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall bring into any city park any weapon or firearm, including any handguns, rifles, shotguns, BB guns, CO2 or pellet gun, knives with blades longer than three and one-half (31/2) inches, explosives, fireworks, slingshots or bows and arrows, unless otherwise authorized herein or by written permission of the parks and recreation director. 
(b)  Persons who possess a valid concealed weapons permit are permitted to possess a firearm within a city park, unless the city park is operated pursuant to a joint use agreement with a school and the school is in session. 
(c)  A knife longer than three and one-half (31/2) inches may be possessed in a city park provided the knife is used solely in connection with serving or preparing food. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2155, § 2, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 27-47. - Animals; hunting, harassing and fishing prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall hunt, harm, harass or threaten any animals in a city park. 
(b)  No person shall angle for, catch or take any fish from any body of water in a city park except in such areas as are specifically designated for such use. 
(c)  No person shall remove any animal from a city park except for the removal of dogs, cats, horses, donkeys and mules by their owners or for removals expressly authorized by the parks and recreation director. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-48. - Animals; control; abandonment prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall bring any animal into a city park except for dogs or cats restrained by a lease no more than six (6) feet in length, or for horses, donkeys or mules using trails pursuant to section 27-49. Any person bringing a dog or cat into a park shall maintain actual physical control of such animal at all times and shall immediately remove any fecal matter of such animal from the park property for proper disposal. 
(b)  No person shall introduce any animal into or abandon any animal in a city park without the express consent of the parks and recreation director. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-49. - Horses, donkeys and mules. 
(a)  No person shall bring any horse, donkey or mule into a city park, or ride such animal in any location in a park, except on designated bridle or multi-use trails. No person shall bring or ride any horse, donkey or mule on a bridle or multi-use trail unless such animal is thoroughly broken, restrained and ridden with due care. 
(b)  No person shall hitch his or her horse, donkey or mule to any rock, vegetation, fence or other improvement in a city park, except for such improvements as are intended to be used for such purpose. 
(c)  No person shall permit his or her horse, donkey or mule to be unattended or to graze in a city park. 
(d)  Persons riding horses, donkeys or mules on a bridle or multi-use trail in a city park shall have the right-of-way over any pedestrians or persons using vehicles, bicycles, motorized skateboards, skateboards, rollerskates or in-line skates on such trail. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-50. - Swimming; boating; polluting waters. 
(a)  No person shall swim, wade or bathe in any body of water in a city park, except in such areas as are specifically designated for such use. Any person swimming, wading or bathing in any city park shall comply with all rules which are posted regulating such activities. 
(b)  No person shall operate any boat, raft or other water craft of any kind upon any body of water in a city park, except in such areas as are specifically designated for such use. Any person operating a boat, raft or other water craft in a city park shall comply with all rules which are posted regulating such activities. 
(c)  No person shall discard or discharge any substance or object which may pollute water near or into any body of water in a city park. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-51. - Prohibition of miscellaneous recreational activities. 
    Except in such areas as are specifically designated for such use, no person shall engage in any of the following activities in a city park: 
(a)  Golfing. 
(b)  Climbing trees. 
(c)  Hiking in areas not designated for such use, if designated hiking trails are provided. 
(d)  Bringing into a park, using or operating any radio-controlled model airplanes, boats, cars or similar objects. 
(e)  Bringing into a park or launching any model rockets or similar objects. 
(f)  Bringing into a park, using or operating any airplane, helicopter, glider, hot air balloon, parachute or other devices used to navigate or travel by wind or air. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-52. - Littering, glass containers, and fires prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, cans, ashes, paper, boxes, garbage or other waste in a city park, except for the disposal of such materials in proper receptacles provided by the city for such disposal. If no such receptacles are provided, all such materials shall be removed from the park by the person responsible for their presence in the park. 
(b)  No person in a city park shall have in his or her possession any glass container, unless such person is expressly authorized by the parks and recreation director to use such containers in designated areas or facilities. 
(c)  No person shall start or sustain a fire in any city park, except for the use of charcoal in grills designed for such use. No person shall build any fire in violation of any fire restrictions posted by the parks and recreation director. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-53. - Disturbing others, advertising and vending prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall unreasonably disturb or interfere with other persons using a city park or participating in a city recreational program. 
(b)  No person shall sell or advertise for sale any goods or services, to be furnished or performed immediately or in the future, in any city park, except for such vendors as are licensed pursuant to article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-54. - Smoking in facilities prohibited. 
    Smoking in any enclosed facility in a city park is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-55. - Noise. 
    The provisions of chapter 25, article V of this Code shall not apply to persons participating in city-sponsored, special events in a city park, but such participants shall comply with all noise restrictions imposed by the parks and recreation director for such events. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Secs. 27-56-27-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LIQUOR REGULATIONS AND BEER PERMITS 

Sec. 27-71. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in Murphy Park. The parks and recreation director shall not issue any permit authorizing the selling, furnishing, possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in Murphy Park. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in any other city park except for: 
(1)  A person who possesses or consumes beer pursuant to a permit issued by the parks and recreation director. 
(2)  The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages pursuant to a liquor license issued by the Arizona Department of Liquor Licenses and Control. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-72. - Beer permits; application; issuance. 
(a)  Any person wishing to obtain a beer permit for a city park shall submit an application to the parks and recreation director for such permit. The application shall include all information which the parks and recreation director deems necessary. 
(b)  The parks and recreation director may issue a beer permit on such terms and conditions as he or she deems necessary. Each beer permit shall be valid only for the date and times specified, the park (or portion thereof) specified, and the persons, group or entity specified in the permit. Each beer permit shall specify at least one (1) person who shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with the terms and conditions of the beer permit and all liquor laws, rules and regulations. The parks and recreation director may deny any application for a beer permit on any reasonable grounds, including prior violations of any park rules and regulations or any false information on the application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-73. - Revocation. 
    The parks and recreation director may revoke any beer permit at any time if the permittee violates any of the city's park rules and regulations or any law, rule or regulation concerning alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-74. - Nontransferability. 
    No beer permit shall be transferable between persons or locations. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-75. - Beer containers to be clearly marked. 
    All cups or containers used for the consumption of beer in a city park shall be clearly identified as beer containers. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Secs. 27-76-27-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPECIAL PERMITS FOR GROUP ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 27-81. - Reservation of facilities; permits; applications; issuance; fees. 
(a)  Any person wishing to reserve any portion of a city park or recreational facilities for group activities shall submit an application to the parks and recreation director for such reservation. The application shall include all information which the parks and recreation director deems necessary. "Group" under this section shall mean an activity at which the applicant anticipates less than five hundred (500) attendees. Group activities involving five hundred (500) or more attendees shall be governed by Glendale City Code, Chapter 29.2, Special Events. 
(b)  The parks and recreation director may issue a permit for the reserved use of a city park or recreational facility on such terms and conditions as he or she deems necessary. Each group permit shall be valid only for the dates and times specified, the park or facility (or portion thereof) specified, the persons, groups or entities specified, and the types of activities specified in the permit. Each group permit shall specify at least one (1) adult person who shall be responsible for any cleanup of or damage to the park or facility, and such person shall be present at all times during which the park or facility is being used pursuant to the permit. Each group permit shall also specify the maximum number of persons who are authorized to use the reserved park area or facility at any time. The parks and recreation director may deny any application for a group permit on any reasonable grounds, including any prior violation of the city's park rules and regulations or any false information on the application for a permit. 
(c)  A group permit may authorize the repeated reserved use of a city park or recreational facility, but no group permit shall be granted for a period of more than six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 2591, § 1, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 27-82. - Bond; insurance; security. 
    As a condition of issuing a group permit, the parks and recreation director may require the permittee to: 
(a)  Post a cash or performance bond in such amount as is necessary to ensure the permittee's compliance with all terms and conditions of the permit and all provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Maintain insurance, in such amounts and of such types as are necessary to protect the city's interests. 
(c)  Hire, at the permittee's own cost, such control or security personnel as the parks and recreation director deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-83. - Supervision of activities; reimbursement of expenses. 
    The parks and recreation director may require city employees to supervise the activities authorized by a group permit, and the costs of such employee supervision may be added to any other fees required for the use of the park or facility. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-84. - Clean up and repairs to facilities. 
(a)  The permittee shall be responsible for any clean up of the reserved area or facility. The activities in the reserved area or facility shall be scheduled so that the permittee has adequate time to properly clean up the reserved area or facility and to vacate the same by the time stated in the permit. If the permittee fails to perform any required clean up work in a timely manner, the city may arrange for such clean up itself, in which case the permittee shall be responsible for all of the city's costs of cleaning up the reserved area or facility. 
(b)  The permittee shall be responsible for the costs of any repairs to the reserved area or facility which result from the permittee's reserved use of the same. The permittee shall immediately report to the parks and recreation director any damage to the reserved area or facility arising out of the permittee's use of the same. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-85. - Indemnification. 
    The permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and any of its elected or appointed officials, agents, employees, boards or commissions from any claims for personal injury to or death of any person or any loss of or damage to private property arising out of the permittee's use of the reserved area or facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-86. - Use of special equipment. 
    The permittee shall not allow any special equipment or furniture to be brought into the reserved area or facility unless such equipment or furniture is expressly authorized by the permit. Any special equipment or furniture used pursuant to the permit shall be removed from the reserved area or facility by the time stated in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-87. - Attaching materials to facilities prohibited. 
    The permittee shall not allow any materials, signs or other objects to be attached to any reserved area or facility without the express approval of the parks and recreation director. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-88. - Revocation. 
    The parks and recreation director may revoke any group permit at any time if the permittee violates any of the city's park rules and regulations or any terms and conditions of the group permit. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-89. - Nontransferability. 
    No group permit shall be transferable between persons and locations. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 3, 5-27-97) 
Secs. 27-90-27-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PRIVATE USAGE OF CITY FACILITIES AND CABLE EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 27-101. - Usage and regulations. 
    Usage of city buildings and facilities for private, profit or nonprofit, seminars, workshops, meetings and other group functions may be permitted in the discretion of the city manager or his or her designee and pursuant to any rules and regulations adopted by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1478, § 1, 1-27-87; Ord. No. 1944, § 4, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-102. - Fees. 
    The fees for private usage of city buildings and facilities pursuant to section 27-101 shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1478, § 1, 1-27-87) 
Sec. 27-103. - Rental of city's mobile production equipment. 
(a)  The city manager, or his or her designee, may, in his or her discretion, enter into agreements for the rental to third parties of the city's mobile production equipment. 
(b)  The fee for the rental of the mobile production equipment shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1518, § 1, 11-10-87; Ord. No. 1944, § 4, 5-27-97) 
Secs. 27-104-27-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VENDING OPERATIONS WITHIN CITY PARKS AND DOWNTOWN REDEVELOPMENT AREA[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1546, § 1, adopted June 14, 1988, added provisions designated as Ch. 27, Art. IV, §§ 27-101-27-113; said provisions have been redesignated as Art. V., §§ 27-111-27-123, in order to avoid duplication of article and section designations with existing material, at the editor's discretion. 
In addition, Ord. No. 1944, § 5, adopted May 27, 1997, amended former Art. V, §§ 27-111-27-123 (except § 27-113) relative to vending operations, and enacted a new Art. V to read herein as set out. The provisions of former Art. V derived from Ord. No. 1546. 

Sec. 27-111. - Vending permit and peddler's license required; waiver for special events. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any vending operation within any city park or from any city property within the downtown redevelopment area without having first obtained a peddler's license and a peddler's identification card pursuant to chapter 21, article I of this Code and a vending permit pursuant to this article. The vending permit may be included as a part of the peddler's license or identification card and shall specify all city parks in which the permittee is authorized to conduct vending operations. 
(b)  The city manager or his or her designee may waive any of the requirements of this article for vending operations being conducted in connection with special events sponsored or approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 5, 5-27-97) 
Cross reference- Licenses generally, Ch. 21. 
Sec. 27-112. - Issuance standards; restrictions on number and location of park vendors. 
(a)  No person shall be issued a vending permit if such person: 
(1)  Knowingly makes any false or misleading statement in the course of applying for or renewing a vending permit. 
(2)  Is not also qualified for and the holder of a peddler's license. 
(3)  Intends to use any pushcart which has not been approved by the city. 
(4)  Has been denied a vending permit based on the applicant's personal qualifications, or had such permit revoked for cause, for a period of six (6) months following the final denial or revocation decision. 
(b)  The parks and recreation director may, in his or her discretion, limit the number of vending permits issued at any one (1) time for any particular park, the number of parks in which any particular vendor may operate, the locations in parks within which vendors may operate, and the hours during which park vendors may operate. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 5, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-113. - General regulations for vendors. 
    The following restrictions shall apply to all vendors operating in a city park or from city property located within the downtown redevelopment area: 
(a)  No vendor shall conduct any vending operations other than the sale of food items for immediate consumption, fresh-cut flowers or inflated balloons. 
(b)  No vendor shall conduct any vending operations from any device or vehicle other than a pushcart. All pushcarts must comply with a design review, and the city may, in its discretion, prohibit the use of any pushcart on any reasonable grounds, including aesthetic or safety reasons. 
(c)  Pushcarts used by vendors shall not: 
(1)  Be left unattended at any time. 
(2)  Be parked or placed within fifteen (15) feet of any intersection. 
(3)  Be parked or placed within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any other vendor. 
(4)  Be parked or placed within twenty-five (25) feet of the entrance or exit to any park. 
(5)  Be permitted a permanent or proprietary location on city property. 
(6)  Be permitted to operate in any area where the pushcart might impede or inconvenience the public. 
(7)  Be permitted at any location within a city park other than the sidewalk or other area designated by the parks and recreation director. 
(8)  Be parked or placed within twenty-five (25) feet of the entrance or exit to any building. 
(d)  No sales of food items in glass containers shall be permitted. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  No vendor shall ring bells, play chimes, play an amplified musical system or make any other noise to attract attention to its business while operating upon city property. 
(g)  Each vendor shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance, in a form and amount approved by the city's risk manager, which shows in force general liability and products liability coverage and names the City of Glendale as an additional insured. Such insurance shall not be cancellable except on thirty (30) days notice to city. In addition, each vendor shall agree to indemnify the city for any loss caused by any act or omission of the vendor. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 5, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-114. - Application; change of address. 
(a)  An application for a vending permit shall be made on forms furnished by the tax and license manager. The applicant must submit an application for a peddler's license with the application for a vending permit if such applicant has not already applied for or been issued a peddler's license. The application for a vending permit shall include the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant is or will be employed or directed by a peddler business, the name, address and telephone number of such business. 
(2)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the items to be sold. 
(3)  The applicant's peddler's license number. 
(4)  The applicant's transaction privilege license number. 
(5)  If the applicant will be using any pushcart on city property, photographs of such pushcart showing all of its sides. If such pushcart will be used but does not yet exist, the applicant shall submit an isometric drawing showing all sides of the proposed pushcart and of any logos, printing or signs which will be incorporated in the design. 
(6)  Any additional information necessary for the city to clearly visualize the design and appearance of any pushcart to be used. 
(b)  An applicant for or a holder of a vending permit shall notify the tax and license division of any change of address from that which is listed on the application within forty-eight (48) hours of such change of address. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 5, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-115. - Issuance; expiration; renewal. 
    Any vending permit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued. Each vending permit expires on December 31 of each year and must be renewed by January 31 of the following year by filing an application for renewal. No vending permit shall be renewed unless the permittee is in compliance with all provisions of this article and all regulations concerning peddlers at the time of renewal. The issuance of a vending permit shall not entitle the permittee to any automatic renewal of such permit for any subsequent year. All renewals shall be subject to the provisions of sections 27-112 and 27-116. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 5, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-116. - Cancellation or suspension of permits without cause. 
(a)  Upon seven (7) days notice, the parks and recreation director may, without cause, suspend all vendors' permits for any particular park for a specified period not to exceed seven (7) days. Such notice shall be personally served on the permittees or mailed to the permittees' last known addresses. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. The city shall not be liable to any permittee for any damages or lost income resulting from such suspension. The suspension shall automatically terminate on the date specified in the notice. 
(b)  Upon seven (7) days notice, the city may, without cause, cancel all vending permits which have been issued for any particular park. Such notice shall be personally served on the permittees or mailed to the permittees' last known addresses. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. The city shall not be liable to any permittee for any damages or lost income resulting from such cancellation. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 5, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-117. - Nontransferability. 
    No vending permit shall be transferable between persons or locations. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 5, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-118. - Display of license, permit and identification card. 
    At all times that a vendor is operating on city property, such vendor shall carry on his or her person, or attached to his or her pushcart in a conspicuous place, his or her peddler's license, vending permit and peddler's identification card. Such vendor shall display such license, permit and identification card upon request to any person considering doing business with the vendor or to any police officer, law enforcement official, park ranger or city official whose duties are related to licensing. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 5, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-119. - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
(a)  The tax and license manager may suspend any vending permit for a specified period not to exceed sixty (60) days, or revoke such permit, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  When the permittee has knowingly made any false or misleading statements in any document required to be made or kept by the permittee. 
(2)  When the permittee's peddler's license is suspended or revoked. 
(3)  When the permittee violates any park rules and regulations in conducting vending operations in a park. 
(4)  When the permittee conducts vending operations in a park for which the permittee is not authorized to conduct such operations. 
(b)  The notice of revocation or suspension shall be in writing setting forth specifically the grounds for such revocation or suspension and shall be delivered to the permittee either in person or by mail to the permittee's last known address. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
(c)  The permittee may request an informal hearing on such revocation or suspension by submitting a written request to the tax and license manager within ten (10) days after the notice of revocation or suspension is given. An information hearing before the tax and license manager shall be held within fifteen (15) days after the request for the same is received by the city. If the permittee does not request a hearing within said 10-day period, the revocation or suspension shall take effect on the eleventh day after the service of the notice of revocation or suspension. If a hearing is requested, the revocation or suspension shall not take effect until after the informal hearing and the service of a new notice from the tax and license manager setting forth the tax and license manager's final decision. Such notice shall be personally served on the permittee or mailed to the permittee's last known address. Service of the notice shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 5, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-120. - Appeal from denial, revocation or suspension. 
(a)  An applicant who has been denied a vending permit based on personal qualifications or a permittee whose permit has been revoked or suspended for cause after an informal hearing with the tax and license manager may appeal such decision to a hearing officer. The appeal shall be requested within ten (10) days from the date on which such person is given notice of the determination from which the appeal is taken. The request shall be in writing, shall be filed with the city manager and shall set forth specifically the grounds for the appeal. 
(b)  The city manager shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct a hearing in accordance with this section. The hearing officer shall not be a member of the tax and license division or of the parks and recreation department. The hearing officer may, in his or her discretion, stay any revocation or suspension pending final determination of the appeal. 
(c)  The burden of proof at the hearing shall be on the applicant or permittee to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he or she meets all of the requirements for holding a vending permit. The hearing officer shall hear such testimony and consider such evidence as is relevant to the determination of such issue. The hearing officer shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence or procedure in conducting the hearing. 
(d)  The hearing officer shall render a written decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing is concluded based on the evidence presented by the city and the applicant or licensee. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 5, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 27-121. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  The violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Each day a violation is allowed to exist shall be a separate offense. 
(b)  The violation of any provision of this article may be treated as a civil code infraction pursuant to Glendale City Code, chapter 13, article II, provided that the provisions contained in section 13-22(b) shall not apply to any enforcement action under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1944, § 5, 5-27-97) 
Chapter 28 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9; floodplain management, Ch. 17; landscaping, Ch. 19; mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 31; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference- Municipal planning generally, A.R.S. § 9-461 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect article II of chapter 16 of The Code of the City of Glendale, 1963, and such article is hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 28-2. - Design guidelines for site development and infrastructure construction. 
(a)  It is deemed in the best interest of the City of Glendale and the citizens thereof that the City of Glendale Design Guidelines for Site Development and Infrastructure Construction, 1990 Edition, are hereby adopted by reference as if set forth at length herein. Three (3) copies of said guidelines are now on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Glendale. 
(b)  Substantive changes to the City of Glendale Design Guidelines for Site Development and Infrastructure Construction, 1990 Edition, or any amendments to the fees set forth therein shall be in the amount established by resolution of the city council or pursuant to Glendale City Code Section 2-3. 
(Ord. No. 1635, § 1, 3-13-90; Ord. No. 2260, § 4, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 28-3. - Miscellaneous planning, building safety, development services, engineering and traffic engineering improvement fees. 
    The community development group, engineering department and traffic engineering department are authorized to charge and there shall be collected fees for processing miscellaneous requests related to planning, building safety, development services and engineering improvements in the amount established by resolution or pursuant to Glendale City Code Section 2-3. 
(Ord. No. 1717, § 1, 5-26-92; Ord. No. 1773, § 1, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 2260, § 4, 6-11-02) 
Secs. 28-4-28-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Appointive boards and commissions, Art. V. 
Cross reference- Boards, commission, etc., generally, § 2-266 et seq.; zoning, App. A. 

Sec. 28-16. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a planning and zoning commission. 
(Code 1963, § 2-23; Ord. No. 1425, § 1, 5-27-86) 
Charter reference- Authority to create boards, commission, etc., Art. V., § 1 
State Law reference- Authority to establish planning commission, A.R.S., § 9-461.01. 
Sec. 28-17. - Members. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the council for terms of two (2) years each, which terms may be changed or abolished by the council. 
(b)  The members of the planning and zoning commission shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  Any two (2) consecutive unexcused absences by a member from meetings of the planning and zoning commission shall create a vacancy on the commission. Change of residence from the city of a member shall create a vacancy on the commission. 
(Code 1963, §§ 2-23-2-26; Ord. No. 1425, § 1, 5-27-86; Ord. No. 1644, § 1(8), 5-22-90) 
Charter reference- Ex officio members, Art. V, § 2. 
State Law reference- Planning commission membership, A.R.S. § 9-461.02. 
Sec. 28-18. - Recommendations to be in writing. 
    All recommendations made to the council by the planning and zoning commission shall be submitted in writing. 
(Code 1963, § 2-30; Ord. No. 1425, § 1, 5-27-86) 
Sec. 28-19. - Officers. 
    The council shall select a chairman of the planning and zoning commission who shall serve as such chairman for a term of one (1) year, and who shall preside at all meetings and be the head of the commission. The council shall also select for a one-year term a vice-chairman to act in the absence of the chairman. The planning and zoning commission shall select or appoint a secretary, who may or may not be a member of the commission, whose duties will be to keep accurate minutes of the proceedings and such other duties as may be assigned to him by the commission. 
(Code 1963, § 2-32; Ord. No. 1425, § 1, 5-27-86) 
Sec. 28-20. - Powers and duties-Generally. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall have all the powers which are now or may hereafter be given it by the general laws of the state and of the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 2-27; Ord. No. 1425, § 1, 5-27-86) 
Sec. 28-21. - Same-Study of development of city for unified plan. 
    The general duties of the planning and zoning commission shall be to study the development of the city and from time to time as may be necessary place before the council its recommendation for the better development of the city and contiguous areas surrounding the city, with the intent that a complete and unified plan may be achieved. 
(Code 1963, § 2-28; Ord. No. 1425, § 1, 5-27-86) 
Sec. 28-22. - Same-Specific recommendations. 
    In addition to the general duties specified, it shall be the duty of the commission to make recommendation to the council on all matters relating to the following: 
(1)  The boundaries of various zones and districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein; 
(2)  The opening, widening, vacation or other changes in streets and other public rights of way, and the establishment of setback lines. 
    The commission shall make a preliminary report on such proposed matters to the council as it sees fit, and make a final report after holding public hearings as may be deemed necessary. 
(Code 1963, § 2-29; Ord. No. 1542, § 2, 5-24-88) 
Sec. 28-23. - Meetings. 
    Four (4) members of the city planning and zoning commission shall constitute a quorum. The city planning and zoning commission may make and alter rules and regulations for its government and procedure consistent with the laws of the state and with the City Charter and Ordinances, and shall meet at least once a month, at such time and place as may be fixed by the commission. 
(Code 1963, § 2-23; Ord. No. 1425, § 1, 5-27-86) 
Sec. 28-24. - Authority to spend money or obligate city. 
    The city planning and zoning commission shall have no authority to make any expenditure on behalf of the city, or to obligate the city for the payment of any sums of money, except as herein provided, and then only after the council shall have first authorized such expenditure for such purpose from time to time by appropriate ordinance or resolution, which ordinance or resolution shall provide the administrative method by which fund shall be drawn and expended. 
(Code 1963, § 2-34; Ord. No. 1425, § 1, 5-27-86) 
Sec. 28-25. - Rules for procedures to be adopted by the planning and zoning commission. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall adopt rules of procedures for the commission. Such rules shall be adopted by a two-thirds vote, and may be suspended or amended by a two-thirds vote. 
(Ord. No. 1425, § 2, 5-27-86) 
Sec. 28-26. - Use permits. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall conduct a public hearing and approve or deny requests for use permits. 
(Ord. No. 1542, § 3, 5-24-88) 
Secs. 28-27-28-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Appointive boards and commissions, Art. V. 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions, etc., generally, § 2-266 et seq. 

Sec. 28-41. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a community development advisory committee of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 2-61; Ord. No. 1039, § 1, 9-12-78; Ord. No. 1057, § 1, 11-30-78; Ord. No. 1568, § 1, 11-8-88) 
Charter reference- Authority to create boards, commission, etc., Art. V, § 1. 
Sec. 28-42. - Members. 
(a)  The community development advisory committee shall consist of thirteen (13) members including one (1) representative from the Glendale Elementary School District, five (5) representatives of low-income residents/neighborhoods, and seven (7) members representing the City Council. Appointments to the committee shall be made by the City Council and shall be for two-year terms. 
(b)  The mayor and city manager shall be ex-officio members of the committee. 
(Code 1963, §§ 2-61-2-63; Ord. No. 1039, § 1, 9-12-78; Ord. No. 1057, § 1, 11-30-78; Ord. No. 1568, § 1, 11-8-88; Ord. No. 1849, § 7, 7-25-95; Ord. No. 2753, § 2, 11-23-10) 
Charter reference- Ex officio members, Art. V, § 2. 
Sec. 28-43. - Officers and meetings. 
(a)  The council shall appoint a chairman from the members of the community development advisory committee, which chairman shall serve at the pleasure of the council. At the organizational meeting of the committee, the members shall establish rules and regulations to govern its affairs and such rules and regulations shall designate: 
(1)  Other officials of the committee, the time and manner of the election, the terms of each office and the duties of each officer. 
(2)  The time, place and manner of notice of all regular and special meetings. 
(3)  The manner of adoption, amendment and repeal of the rules and regulations of the committee. 
(4)  Any and all other provisions necessary or desirable to aid the committee in conducting its affairs which are not contrary to the provisions of this article, any other ordinances, resolutions or the charter of the city or laws of the state or federal governments. 
(b)  The neighborhood resources director shall act as secretary for the committee and shall keep a record of all proceedings of the committee. 
(Code 1963, §§ 2-62, 2-65; Ord. No. 1039, § 1, 9-12-78; Ord. No. 1568, § 1, 11-8-88) 
Sec. 28-44. - Functions. 
    The community development advisory committee shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  to advise, counsel and aid the city in developing, implementing and evaluating the city's community development block program; and 
(b)  to advise, counsel and aid the city regarding rules, regulations and policies governing the maintenance and operation of housing programs and proposals for development of additional housing. 
(c)  to advise, counsel and aid the city in developing, implementing and evaluating the city's Community Action Program and community needs assessment. 
(Code 1963, § 2-64; Ord. No. 1039, § 1, 9-12-78; Ord. No. 1568, § 2, 11-8-88; Ord. No. 2753, § 2, 11-23-10) 
Secs. 28-45-28-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT TAX 

Sec. 28-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless from the content, a different meaning is clearly intended: 
    Dwelling unit: A room or group of rooms within a building containing cooking accommodations. An apartment and a mobile home shall be considered a dwelling unit, but a hotel room, motel room or a travel trailer is not considered a dwelling unit under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Mobile home space: Any lot or space contained in a mobile home park as defined by ordinance. 
    Person: An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, joint venture, association, estate, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular number. 
(Code 1963, § 25A-1; Ord. No. 1096, § 1, 10-30-79; Ord. No. 1334, § 2, 1-22-85; Ord. No. 1446, § 1, 8-26-88) 
Sec. 28-82. - Findings of fact. 
    The council finds as follows: 
(1)  That the provision of park land open space and recreational facilities is an essential service which the city must provide in an attempt to satisfy the environmental, psychological, health and aesthetic needs of its citizens; 
(2)  That the park land open space and recreation facilities now provided by the city are intended and adequate only for the needs of current residents; 
(3)  That the development of new neighborhoods will necessitate expenditures for park acquisition and the development of recreation facilities to meet the leisure needs of these new residents; 
(4)  That new developments, neighborhoods and residents will derive direct and specific benefits from the improvements that will be created with funds obtained from the fee or tax assessed herein; and 
(5)  That the fee or tax assessed herein is based on definite standards presented to, and approved by, the council and that it bears a reasonable relationship to the burden imposed on the city in providing park land open space and recreation facilities for new developments and residents. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 1, 1-22-85; Ord. No. 1446, § 1, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 28-82.1. - Park development districts. 
    There are hereby created three (3) park development districts for purposes of administration of this article: 
(1)  District One shall consist of that portion of the city south of Greenway Avenue and west of 75th Avenue. 
(2)  District Two shall consist of that portion of the city south of Greenway Avenue and east of 75th Avenue. 
(3)  District Three shall consist of that portion of the city north of Greenway Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 1446, § 1, 8-26-88) 
Sec. 28-83. - Levy. 
    There is hereby levied, and shall be collected by the community development group staff, for the purpose of defraying the cost of acquiring sites and providing public improvements required by the city as a result of residential development, an occupational fee or tax upon every person constructing any dwelling unit or units or establishing mobile home spaces within the city as provided in Article VI of this chapter for each dwelling unit or mobile home space hereinafter constructed upon any lot or area within the city. 
(Code 1963, § 25A-2; Ord. No. 1096, § 1, 10-30-79; Ord. No. 1334, § 2, 1-22-85; Ord. No. 1446, § 1, 8-26-86; Ord. No. 1903, § 2, 10-22-96) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy such a tax, A.R.S. § 9-463.05. 
Sec. 28-84. - Collection. 
    The tax or fee imposed by this chapter shall be collected by the community development group staff who shall be charged with the administration hereof. The tax for each dwelling unit shall be collected by the director prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of any dwelling unit, and the tax with respect to any mobile home space shall be collected prior to the issuance of a building permit for the development of a mobile home park. A permit shall not be issued until the tax or fee required by this chapter has been paid. 
(Code 1963, § 25A-3; Ord. No. 1096, § 1, 10-30-79; Ord. No. 1334, § 2, 1-22-85; Ord. No. 1446, § 1, 8-26-86; Ord. No. 1903, § 2, 10-22-96) 
Sec. 28-85. - Capital improvements funds. 
    All funds collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited into a non-lapsing capital improvement fund for the district from which the funds are collected and such funds are hereby created. All funds deposited in the non-lapsing capital improvement fund shall be used exclusively for the acquisition and development of park land and other recreational facilities and for the retirement of related debt service, as required as a result of residential development. Such fund shall be applied only for acquisition and development of park land and other recreational facilities and retirement of related debt service for land and facilities located in the district from which the funds were collected. 
(Code 1963, § 25A-4; Ord. No. 1096, § 1, 10-30-79; Ord. No. 1334, § 2, 1-22-85; Ord. No. 1446, § 1, 8-26-86; Ord. No. 1903, § 2, 10-22-96) 
Sec. 28-86. - Dedication of sites in lieu of tax. 
    In the event a person proposes a subdivision, which includes a plan and a program for a complete community or neighborhood, including the dedication of adequate public sites and improvements, the city council may accept the dedication of such sites and improvements in lieu of the tax levied by this article; provided, that the value of such space and improvements, as determined by the city council, apportioned over the number of dwelling units and mobile home spaces to be developed is substantially equal to the amount of tax levied by this section; and, in the event the dedications referred to above do not substantially equal in value the amount of taxes levied and measured as set forth in this section, as determined by the city council, the city council may accept such dedications in partial payment of such taxes and collect the remainder thereof in cash. 
(Code 1963, § 25A-5; Ord. No. 1096, § 1, 10-30-79; Ord. No. 1334, § 2, 1-22-85; Ord. No. 1446, § 1, 8-26-86) 
Secs. 28-87-28-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS OF REQUIREMENTS FOR DEDICATIONS AND EXACTIONS 

Sec. 28-100. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
    "Conditional approval" shall mean an approval by the city for the use, improvement or development of real property, which approval is conditioned upon a dedication or exaction as defined herein. It is intended that this definition of "conditional approval" shall apply only to those approvals which are subject to the administrative appeals process required by A.R.S. section 9-500.12 and any reported Arizona or federal court decisions interpreting those requirements. This definition does not include any conditional approvals made by a legislative act of the city council that does not give discretion to an administrative body or official to determine the nature or extent of the dedication or requirement, as provided by A.R.S. section 9-500.12(B). 
    "Dedication" shall mean the requirement of a dedication of Title to property to the city as part of a conditional approval for the use, improvement or development of real property which are subject to A.R.S. section 9-500.12 and any reported Arizona or federal court decisions interpreting that statute. 
    "Exaction" shall mean those requirements for conditional approval referred to as exactions in A.R.S. section 9-500.12 and any reported Arizona or federal court decisions interpreting that statute. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 1, 10-24-95) 
Sec. 28-101. - Right to administrative appeal. 
    A property owner, or the developer of the property in question if the developer is the applicant, may appeal the dedications or exactions required for a conditional approval to an administrative hearing officer to be designated pursuant to section 28-103. The property owner or developer shall not be requested to waive the right of administrative appeal or trial de novo in the Superior Court at any time during the consideration of the property owner's or developer's request. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 1, 10-24-95) 
Sec. 28-102. - Notice of appeal right. 
    The administrative official, whose decision to require a dedication or exaction is appealable under section 28-101, shall give written notice of the final decision and of the right of the property owner or applicant to an administrative appeal of the requirement. The notice of appeal right required by this section may be given generally as part of the information provided to development applicants by the community development group staff. In that event, the administrative official shall give notice to the property owner or other development applicant of the final decision of dedication or exaction required in connection with the development proposal. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 1, 10-24-95) 
Sec. 28-103. - Appointment of hearing officer. 
    The city manager, or his designee, shall designate hearing officers to hear administrative appeals required by A.R.S. section 9-500.12(B). The hearing officer shall not be employed in the same department or have direct supervisory responsibilities over the same department as the official whose decision is being appealed. The city manager also may designate the board of adjustment as the body to hear the administrative appeals under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 1, 10-24-95) 
Sec. 28-104. - Administrative appeal procedure. 
(a)  Filing of the appeal. The property owner or other development applicant, who intends to exercise the right to an administrative appeal of requirements for dedications or exactions, as provided in this article, shall file or mail a written request for administrative appeal to the designated hearing officer. The appeal request shall be mailed or filed within thirty (30) days after notice is given of the final determination of the development or exaction requirements under section 28-102. No fee shall be charged for filing the appeal. The request for appeal may be in the form of a letter or other written communication, but shall give fair notice that it requests an administrative appeal of a dedication or exaction requirement and of the particular dedication or exaction being appealed. 
(b)  Time for hearing; notice. After receipt of an appeal under this section, the hearing officer shall schedule a time for the appeal to be heard not later than thirty (30) days after receipt. The property owner or other development applicant shall be given at least ten (10) days' notice of the time when the appeal will be heard unless the property owner or development applicant agrees to a shorter time period. 
(c)  Conduct of hearing. In all appeals under this section, the administrative official, whose decision on a dedication or exaction is being appealed, has the burden to establish that there is an essential nexus between the dedication or exaction and a legitimate government interest and that the proposed dedication or exaction is roughly proportional to the impact of the proposed use, improvement or development. If more than a single parcel is involved, this requirement applies to the entire property that is subject to the approval. The hearing officer shall hear such testimony and consider such evidence as is relevant to the determination of such issues. The hearing officer shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence or procedure in conducting the hearing. 
(d)  Decision of appeal. The hearing officer shall decide the appeal within five (5) working days after the appeal is heard. If the city's administrative official does not meet its burden under subsection (c) above, the hearing officer shall modify or delete the requirement of the dedication or exaction. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 1, 10-24-95) 
Sec. 28-105. - Appeal to Superior Court. 
    If the hearing officer modifies or affirms the requirement of the dedication or exaction, a property owner or other development applicant aggrieved by the decision of the hearing officer may appeal the hearing officer's decision to the Superior Court within thirty (30) days after the decision was rendered, by following the procedures required in A.R.S. section 9-500.12(G) and (H). 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 1, 10-24-95) 
Secs. 28-106-28-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2891, §§ 1, 2, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 28-125-28-131, and enacted a new Art. VI, as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1903, § 1, adopted Oct. 22, 1996; Ord. No. 1991, § 1, adopted Feb. 10, 1998; Ord. No. 2147, § 1, adopted June 27, 2000; Ord No. 2220, § 1, adopted Oct. 9, 2001; Ord. No. 2333, § 1, adopted July 22, 2003; Ord. No. 2378, § 1, adopted May 25, 2004; Ord. No. 2514, § 1, adopted June 13, 2006; Ord. No. 2786, §§ 1(Attch), adopted Feb. 22, 2011. 

Sec. 28-125. - Legislative intent and purpose. 
    This article is adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city by: 
(a)  Requiring new development to pay its proportionate share of the costs incurred by the city that are associated with providing necessary public services to new development. 
(b)  Setting forth standards and procedures for creating and assessing development impact fees consistent with the requirements of Arizona Revised Statutes ("A.R.S.") § 9-463.05, including requirements under A.R.S. § 9-463.05(K) that, on or before August 1, 2014, the city replace its development impact fees adopted before January 1, 2012 with development impact fees adopted under A.R.S. § 9-463.05 as amended by the state legislature in SB 1525, Fiftieth Legislature, First Regular Session. 
(c)  Providing for the temporary continuation of certain development impact fees adopted before January 1, 2012 until otherwise replaced under this article, or longer where such development impact fees were pledged to support financing or debt for a grandfathered facility as permitted by A.R.S. § 9-463.05(K)(R)(S). 
(d)  Setting forth procedures for administering the development impact fee program, including mandatory offsets, credits, and refunds of development impact fees. All development impact fee assessments, offsets, credits, or refunds must be administered in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Having no impact upon the city's zoning authority or its authority to adopt or amend its general plan, provided that city planning and zoning activities may require amendments to development impact fees as provided in section 28-130 of this article. 
(f)  Not allowing the payment of development impact fees to entitle the applicant to a building permit unless all other applicable land use, zoning, planning, platting, subdivision or other related requirements, standards and conditions have been met. Such other requirements, standards and conditions are independent of the requirement for payment of a development impact fee. 
    Neither this article nor the specific development fee schedules for particular capital facilities shall affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density/intensity of development, design and improvement standards or other applicable standards or requirements of the city land development regulations, which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation. 
(Ord. No. 2891, § 2, 5-13-14) 
Sec. 28-126. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the terms listed below shall have the following meanings unless the context requires otherwise. Singular terms shall include their plural. 
    Applicant: A person who applies to the city for a building permit. 
    Appurtenance: Any fixed machinery or equipment, structure or other fixture, including integrated hardware, software or other components, associated with a capital facility that are necessary or convenient to the operation, use, or maintenance of a capital facility, but excluding replacement of the same after initial installation. 
    Aquatic center: A facility primarily designed to host non-recreational competitive functions generally occurring within water, including, but not limited to, water polo games, swimming meets, and diving events. Such facility may be indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof, and includes all necessary supporting amenities, including but not limited to, locker rooms, offices, snack bars, bleacher seating, and shade structures. 
    Building: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any residential or nonresidential land use or occupancy. 
    Building Area: The area included within surrounding exterior walls (or exterior walls and fire walls) exclusive of vent shafts and courts. Areas of the building not provided with surrounding walls shall be included in the building area if such areas are included within the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. 
    Building permit: Any permit issued by the city that authorizes vertical construction, increases square footage (building area), authorizes changes to land use, or provides for the addition of a residential or nonresidential point of demand to a water or wastewater system. 
    Capital facility: An asset having a useful life of three or more years that is a component of one or more categories of necessary public service provided by the city. A capital facility may include any associated purchase of real property, architectural and engineering services leading to the design and construction of buildings and facilities, improvements to existing facilities, improvements to or expansions of existing facilities, and associated financing and professional services. Wherever used herein, "infrastructure" shall have the same meaning as "capital facilities." 
    Category of necessary public service: A category of necessary public services for which the city is authorized to assess development impact fees, as further defined in section 28-131(a)(1) of this Article. 
    Category of development: A specific category of residential, industrial, commercial, institutional, or office and other services development against which a development impact fee is calculated and assessed. The city assesses development impact fees against the following categories of development: 
(1)  Residential development on a per dwelling unit basis (which includes, but is not limited to, single family, multi-family, mobile home/park model, and all other types of residential dwelling units), and 
(2)  Nonresidential development on a per thousand (1,000) square foot basis (which includes, but is not limited to, commercial/retail development, office, institutional, business park, light industrial, warehousing, manufacturing and hotel). 
    City: The city of Glendale, Arizona. 
    Commercial land use: Retail development, including the sale of goods to the public for use or consumption, rather than for resale, and eating/drinking places. A shopping center is an integrated group of commercial establishments. 
    Credit: A reduction in an assessed development impact fee resulting from developer contributions to, payments for, construction of, or dedications for capital facilities included in an infrastructure improvements plan under section 28-135 of this article (or as otherwise permitted by this article). 
    Credit agreement: A written agreement between the city and the developer(s) of subject development that allocates credits to the subject development under section 28-135 of this article. A credit agreement may be included as part of a development agreement under section 28-136 of this article. 
    Credit allocation: A term used to describe when credits are distributed to a particular development or parcel of land after execution of a credit agreement, but are not yet issued. 
    Credit issuance: A term used to describe when the amount of an assessed development impact fee attributable to a particular development or parcel of land is reduced by applying a credit allocation. 
    Developer: An individual, group of individuals, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, municipal corporation, state agency, or other person or entity undertaking land development activity, and their respective successors and assigns. 
    Development agreement: An agreement prepared in accordance with the requirements of section 28-136 of this article, A.R.S. § 9-500.05, and any applicable requirements of the city code. 
    Direct benefit: A benefit to a service unit resulting from a capital facility that: (a) addresses the need for a necessary public service created in whole or in part by the service unit; and that (b) meets either of the following criteria: (i) the capital facility is located in the immediate area of the service unit and is needed in the immediate area of the service unit to maintain the levels of service; or (ii) the capital facility substitutes for, or eliminates the need for a capital facility that would have otherwise have been needed in the immediate area of the service unit to maintain the city's levels of service. 
    Dwelling: A building that contains one or more dwelling units used, intended or designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied for living purposes. 
    Dwelling unit: A place of residence providing complete, living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. Examples include a house, apartment, townhome, condominium unit, or manufactured home. Dwelling unit does not include hotels designed primarily for transient occupant purposes, nor group quarters, nor rooms in hospitals or nursing homes. 
    Equipment: Machinery, tools, materials, and other supplies, not including vehicles, that are needed by a capital facility to provide the levels of service specified by the infrastructure improvement plan, but excluding replacement of the same after initial development of the capital facility. 
    Excluded library facility: Library facilities for which development impact fees may not be charged under A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including that portion of any library facility that exceeds 10,000 square feet, and equipment, vehicles or appurtenances associated with library operations. 
    Excluded park facility: Park and recreational facilities for which development impact fees may not be charged under A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including amusement parks, aquariums, aquatic centers, auditoriums, arenas, arts and cultural facilities, bandstand and orchestra facilities, bathhouses, boathouses, clubhouses, community centers greater than three thousand square feet in floor area, environmental education centers, equestrian facilities, golf course facilities, greenhouses, lakes, museums, theme parks, water reclamation or riparian areas, wetlands, or zoo facilities. 
    Fee report: A written report developed under section 28-132 of this article that identifies the methodology for calculating the amount of each development impact fee, identifies the service area to which each impact fee applies, explains or demonstrates the relationship between the development impact fee to be assessed and assumptions and calculations set forth in the infrastructure improvements plan, and which meets other requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05. 
    Financing or debt: Any debt, bond, note, loan, interfund loan, fund transfer, or other debt service obligation used to finance the development or expansion of a capital facility. 
    Fire protection: A category of necessary public services that includes fire stations, fire equipment, fire vehicles and all appurtenances for fire stations. Fire protection does not include vehicles or equipment used to provide administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes. Fire protection does not include any facility that is used for training firefighters from more than one station or substation. 
    Grandfathered facilities: Capital facilities provided through financing or debt incurred before June 1, 2011 for which a development impact fee has been pledged towards repayment as described in section 28-128(c) of this article. 
    General plan: Refers to the comprehensive plan, or part thereof, and all amendments, providing for the future growth and development of the city, the overall land-use plan for the city establishing areas of the city for different purposes, zones and activities adopted by the city council and any subsequent amendments to the general plan, including but not limited to the updated land use map. 
    Gross development impact fee: The total development impact fee to be assessed against a subject development on a per unit basis, before subtraction of any credits. 
    Industrial land use: Processing or production of goods, along with warehousing, transportation, communications, and utilities. 
    Infrastructure improvements plan: A document or series of documents that meet the requirements set forth in A.R.S. § 9-463.05, including those adopted under section 28-132 of this article to cover any category or combination of categories of necessary public services. 
    Institutional land use: Schools, universities, churches, and public buildings. 
    Interim fee schedule: Any development impact fee schedule established before January 1, 2012 in accordance with then-applicable law, and which shall expire not later than August 1, 2014 under section 28-134 of this article. 
    Land use assumptions: Projections of changes in land uses, densities, intensities and population for a service area over a period of at least ten years as specified in section 28-130 of this article. 
    Level of service: A quantitative and/or qualitative measure of a necessary public service that is to be provided by the city to development in a particular service area, defined in terms of the relationship between service capacity and service demand, accessibility, response times, comfort or convenience of use, or other similar measures or combinations of measures. Level of service may be measured differently for different categories of necessary public services, as identified in the applicable infrastructure improvements plan. 
    Library facilities: A category of necessary public services in which literary, musical, artistic, or reference materials are kept (materials may be kept in any form of media such as electronic, magnetic, or paper) for non-commercial use by the public in a facility providing a direct benefit to development. Libraries do not include excluded library facilities, although a library may contain, provide access to, or otherwise support an excluded library facility. 
    Mixed-use land use: A development or phase of development that may contain components of more than one use category (residential, industrial, commercial, institutional, or office and other services). 
    Necessary public services: "Necessary public services" shall have the meaning prescribed in A.R.S. § 9-463.05(T)(7). 
    Office and other services land use: Offices, health care, business services, and lodging. 
    Offset: An amount which is subtracted from the overall costs of providing necessary public services to account for those capital components of infrastructure or associated debt that have been or will be paid for by a development through taxes, fees (except for development impact fees), and other revenue sources, as determined by the city under section 28-131 of this article. 
    Parks and recreational facilities: A category of necessary public services including but not limited to parks, swimming pools and related facilities and equipment located on real property not larger than 30 acres in area, as well as park facilities larger than 30 acres where such facilities provide a direct benefit. Parks and recreational facilities do not include excluded park facilities, although parks and recreational facilities may contain, provide access to, or otherwise support an excluded park facility. 
    Pledged: Where used with reference to a development impact fee, a development impact fee shall be considered "pledged" where it was identified by the city as a source of payment or repayment for financing or debt that was identified as the source of financing for a necessary public service for which a development impact fee was assessed under the then-applicable provisions of A.R.S. § 9-463.05. 
    Police facilities: A category of necessary public services, including vehicles and equipment, that are used by law enforcement agencies to preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest criminal offenders, protect the rights of persons and property, regulate and control motorized and pedestrian traffic, train sworn personnel, and/or provide and maintain police records, vehicles, equipment, and communications systems. Police facilities do not include vehicles and equipment used to provide administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes. Police facilities do not include any facility that is used for training officers from more than one station or substation. 
    Qualified professional: Any one of the following: (a) a professional engineer, surveyor, financial analyst or planner, or other licensed professional providing services within the scope of that person's education or experience related to city planning, zoning, or impact development fees and holding a license issued by an agency or political subdivision of the State of Arizona; (b) a financial analyst, planner, or other non-licensed professional that is providing services within the scope of the person's education or experience related to City planning, zoning, or impact development fees; or (c) any other person operating under the supervision of one or more of the above. 
    Residential land use: Single-unit residential includes detached units (both site-built and manufactured) and townhouses that share a common sidewall, but are constructed on an individual parcel of land. The 2+ units per structure category includes all structures with two or more units on an individual parcel of land. 
    Right-of-way: Land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage, or process of law is reserved for or dedicated to the general public for street, highway, alley, public utility, or pedestrian walkway purposes. 
    Service area: Any specified area within the boundaries of the city within which: (a) the city will provide a category of necessary public services to development at a planned level of service; and (b) within which (i) a substantial nexus exists between the capital facilities to be provided and the development to be served, or (ii) in the case of library facilities or a park facility larger than 30 acres, a direct benefit exists between the library facilities or park facilities and the development to be served, each as prescribed in the infrastructure improvements plan. Some or all of the capital facilities providing service to a service area may be physically located outside of that service area provided that the required substantial nexus or direct benefit is demonstrated to exist. 
    Service unit: A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated under generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a particular category of necessary public services or facility expansions (A.R.S. § 9-463.05(T)(10)). 
    Street facilities: A category of necessary public services including arterial or collector streets or roads, traffic signals, rights-of-way, and improvements thereon, bridges, culverts, irrigation tiling, storm drains, and regional transportation facilities. 
    Subject development: A land area linked by a unified plan of development, which must be contiguous unless the land area is part of a development agreement executed in accordance with section 28-136 of this article. 
    Substantial nexus: A substantial nexus exists where the demand for necessary public services that will be generated by a service unit can be reasonably quantified in terms of the burden it will impose on the available capacity of existing capital facilities, the need it will create for new or expanded capital facilities, and/or the benefit to the development from those capital facilities. 
    Swimming pool: A public facility primarily designed and/or utilized for recreational non-competitive functions generally occurring within water, including, but not limited to, swimming classes, open public swimming sessions, and recreational league swimming/diving events. The facility may be indoors, outdoors, or any combination thereof, and includes all necessary supporting amenities. 
    Useful life: The period of time in which an asset can reasonably be expected to be used under normal conditions, whether or not the asset will continue to be owned and operated by the city over the entirety of such period. 
    Vehicle: Any device, structure, or conveyance utilized for transportation in the course of providing a particular category of necessary public services at a specified level of service, excluding helicopters and other aircraft. 
    Wastewater: A category of necessary public services including but not limited to sewers, lift stations, reclamation plants, wastewater treatment plants, and all other facilities for the collection, interception, transportation, treatment and disposal of wastewater, and any appurtenances for those facilities. 
    Water: A category of necessary public services including but not limited to those facilities necessary to provide for water services to development, including the acquisition, supply, transportation, treatment, purification and distribution of water, and any appurtenances to those facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2891, § 2, 5-13-14) 
Sec. 28-127. - Applicability. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, from and after July 31, 2014, this article shall apply to all new development within any service area. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all of the territory within the corporate limits of the city and/or within the city's water and wastewater service areas. 
(c)  The city manager or his/her designee is authorized to make determinations regarding the application, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2891, § 2, 5-13-14) 
TABLE 1: SCHEDULE OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 
Non-Utility Fees for Residential Development Residential - per Dwelling Unit in East Glendale Type Parks and Recreation Streets Police Fire Total Single Unit $909 $1,551 $339 $1,146 $3,945 2+ Units per Structure $517 $865 $193 $652 $2,227 Residential - per Dwelling Unit in West 101 Glendale Type Parks and Recreation Streets Police Fire Total Single Unit $909 $3,522 $339 $1,146 $5,916 2+ Units per Structure $517 $1,963 $193 $652 $3,325  
Non-Utility Fees for Nonresidential Development Nonresidential - per Thousand Square Feet of Floor Are in East Glendale Type Parks and Recreation Streets Police Fire Total Industrial $23 $308 $12 $129 $472 Commercial $43 $2,210 $99 $239 $2,591 Institutional $30 $883 $36 $166 $1,115 Office and Other Services $101 $957 $39 $563 $1,660 Nonresidential - per Thousand Square Feet of Floor Area in West 101 Glendale Type Parks and Recreation Streets Police Fire Total Industrial $23 $701 $12 $129 $865 Commercial $43 $5,017 $99 $239 $5,398 Institutional $30 $2,005 $36 $166 $2,237 Office and Other Services $101 $2,172 $39 $563 $2,875 Nonresidential - per Thousand Square Feet of Floor Area in West 303 Glendale Type Parks and Recreation Streets Police Fire Total Industrial $0 $1,154 $12 $129 $1,295 Commercial $0 $8,260 $99 $239 $8,598 Institutional $0 $3,301 $36 $166 $3,503 Office and Other Services $0 $3,575 $39 $563 $4,177  
Utility Fees for all Development Types (per meter) in East Glendale and West 101 Glendale Meter Size Water Wastewater Total 0.75 $2,761 $1,944 $4,705 1.00 $4,607 $3,243 $7,850 1.50 $9,183 $6,462 $15,645 2.00 $14,695 $10,341 $25,036 3.00 $29,413 $20,696 $50,109 4.00 $45,950 $32,331 $78,281 6.00 $91,867 $64,637 $156,504 8.00 $146,991 $103,420 $250,411  
Map of Service Zones 

Sec. 28-128. - Authority for development impact fees. 
(a)  Fee report and implementation . The city may assess and collect a development impact fee for costs of necessary public services, including all professional services required for the preparation or revision of an infrastructure improvements plan, fee report, development impact fee, and required reports or audits conducted under this article. Development impact fees shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The city shall develop and adopt a fee report that analyzes and defines the development impact fees to be charged in each service area for each capital facility category, based on the infrastructure improvements plan and the cost per service unit calculated under section 28-131(a)(12) of this article. 
(2)  Development impact fees shall be assessed against all new commercial, residential, and industrial developments, provided that the city may assess different amounts of development impact fees against specific categories of development based on the actual burdens and costs that are associated with providing necessary public services to that category of development. No development impact fee shall exceed the cost per service unit for any category of development. 
(3)  No development impact fees shall be charged, or credits issued, for any capital facility that does not fall within one of the categories of necessary public services for which development impact fees may be assessed as identified in section 28-131(a)(1) of this article. 
(4)  Costs for necessary public services made necessary by new development shall be based on the same level of service provided to existing development in the same service area. Development impact fees may not be used to provide a higher level of service to existing development or to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory standards to the extent that these are applied to existing capital facilities that are serving existing development. 
(5)  Development impact fees may not be used to pay the city's administrative, maintenance, or other operating costs. 
(6)  Projected interest charges and financing costs can only be included in development impact fees to the extent they represent principal and/or interest on the portion of any financing or debt used to finance the construction or expansion of a capital facility identified in the infrastructure improvements plan. 
(7)  Except for any fees included on interim fee schedules, all development impact fees charged by the city must be included in a "fee schedule" prepared under this article and included in the fee report. 
(8)  All development impact fees shall meet the requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05. 
(b)  Costs per service unit . The fee report shall summarize the costs of capital facilities necessary to serve new development on a per service unit basis as defined and calculated in the infrastructure improvements plan, including all required offsets, and shall recommend a development impact fee structure for adoption by the city. The actual development impact fees to be assessed shall be disclosed and adopted by council resolution in the form of development impact fee schedules noting the date the fee will become effective. 
(c)  Carry-over of previously-established development impact fees and grandfathered facilities . Notwithstanding the requirements of this article, certain development impact fees adopted by the city before the effective date of this article shall continue in effect as follows: 
(1)  Until August 1, 2014 or the date a new development impact fee is effective for the applicable category of necessary public services in a service area under this Article, whichever occurs first, development impact fees established before January 1, 2012 shall continue in full force and effect to the extent that the development impact fee is used to provide a category of necessary public services that is authorized by section 28-131 of this article. Development impact fees collected before January 1, 2012, shall be expended on capital facilities within the same category of necessary public services for which they were collected. 
(2)  The city may continue to collect and use any development impact fee established before January 1, 2012, even if the development impact fee would not otherwise be permitted to be collected and spent under A.R.S. § 9-463.05, as amended by the state legislature in SB 1525, Fiftieth Legislature, First Regular Session, if either of the following apply: 
a.  Both of the following conditions are met: 
i.  Before June 1, 2011, the development impact fee was pledged towards the repayment of financing or debt incurred by the city to provide a capital facility. 
ii.  The applicable capital facility was included in the city's infrastructure improvements plan, or other city planning document prepared under applicable law, before June 1, 2011. 
b.  Before August 1, 2014, the city uses the development impact fee to finance a capital facility in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-463.05(S). 
(3)  Defined terms in any previously established fee schedule shall be interpreted according to the ordinance in effect at the time of their adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2891, § 2, 5-13-14) 
Sec. 28-129. - Administration of development impact fees. 
(a)  Separate funds . Development impact fees collected pursuant to this article shall be placed in separate funds for each capital facility category within each service area. Impact fee funds must be held by the city in an interest bearing account or accounts. 
(b)  Limitations on use of fees . Development impact fees and any interest thereon collected under this article shall be spent to provide capital facilities associated with the same category of necessary public services in the same service area for which they were collected, including costs of financing or debt used by the city to finance such capital facilities and other costs authorized by this article that are included in the infrastructure improvements plan. 
(c)  Time limit . Development impact fees collected after July 31, 2014 shall be used within ten years of the date upon which they were collected for all categories of necessary public services except for water and wastewater facilities. For water facilities or wastewater facilities collected after July 31, 2014, development impact fees must be used within 15 years of the date upon which they were collected. 
(Ord. No. 2891, § 2, 5-13-14) 
Sec. 28-130. - Land use assumptions. 
    The infrastructure improvements plan shall be consistent with the city's current land use assumptions for each service area and each category of necessary public services as adopted by the city under A.R.S. § 9-463.05. 
(1)  Reviewing the land use assumptions . Before the adoption or amendment of an infrastructure improvements plan, the city shall review and evaluate the land use assumptions on which the infrastructure improvements plan is to be based to ensure that the land use assumptions within each service area conform to the general plan. 
(2)  Evaluating necessary changes . If the land use assumptions upon which an infrastructure improvements plan is based have not been updated within the last five years, the city shall evaluate the land use assumptions to determine whether changes are necessary. If, after general evaluation, the city determines that the land use assumptions are still valid, the city shall issue the report required in section 28-133 of this article. 
(3)  Required modifications to land use assumptions . If the city determines that changes to the land use assumptions are necessary in order to adopt or amend an infrastructure improvements plan, it shall make such changes as necessary to the land use assumptions before or in conjunction with the review and approval of the infrastructure improvements plan under section 28-133 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2891, § 2, 5-13-14) 
Sec. 28-131. - Infrastructure improvements plan. 
(a)  Infrastructure improvements plan contents . The infrastructure improvements plan shall be developed by qualified professionals and may be based upon or incorporated within the city's capital improvements plan. The infrastructure improvements plan shall: 
(1)  Specify the categories of necessary public services for which the city will impose a development impact fee, which may include any or all of the following: 
a.  Water 
b.  Wastewater 
c.  Stormwater, drainage, and flood control 
d.  Libraries 
e.  Street facilities 
f.  Fire protection 
g.  Police 
h.  Parks 
(2)  Define and provide a map of one or more service areas within which the city will provide each category of necessary public services for which development impact fees will be charged. Each service area must be defined in a manner that demonstrates a substantial nexus between the capital facilities to be provided in the service area and the service unit to be served by those capital facilities. For libraries and for parks larger than 30 acres, each service area must be defined in a manner that demonstrates a direct benefit between the capital facilities and the service units to be served by those capital facilities. The city may cover more than one category of capital facilities in the same service area provided that there is an independent substantial nexus or direct benefit, as applicable, between each category of necessary public services and the service units to be served. 
(3)  Identify and describe the land use assumptions upon which the infrastructure improvements plan is based in each service area. 
(4)  Analyze and identify the existing level of service provided by the city to existing service units for each category of necessary public services in each service area. 
(5)  Identify the level of service to be provided by the city for each category of necessary public services in each service area based on the relevant land use assumptions and any established city standards or policies related to required levels of service. If the city provides the same category of necessary public services in more than one service area, the infrastructure improvements plan shall include a comparison of the levels of service to be provided in each service area. 
(6)  For each category of necessary public services, analyze and identify the existing capacity of the capital facilities in each service area, the utilization of those capital facilities by existing service units, and the available excess capacity of those capital facilities to serve new service units including any existing or planned commitments or agreements for the usage of such capacity. The infrastructure improvements plan shall additionally identify any changes or upgrades to existing capital facilities that will be needed to achieve or maintain the planned level of service to existing service units, or to meet new safety, efficiency, environmental, or other regulatory requirements for services provided to existing service units. 
(7)  Identify any grandfathered facilities and the impact thereof on the need for necessary public services in each affected service area. 
(8)  Estimate the total number of existing and future service units within each service area based on the city's land use assumptions and projected new service units in each service area. 
(9)  Based on the analysis in paragraphs (3) through (6) above, provide a summary table or tables describing the level of service for each category of necessary public services by relating the required capital facilities to service units in each service area, and identifying the applicable service unit factor associated with each category of development. 
(10)  For each category of necessary public services, analyze and identify the projected utilization of any available excess capacity in existing capital facilities, and all new or expanded capital facilities that will be required to provide and maintain the planned level of service in each service area as a result of the new projected service units in that service area, for a period not to exceed ten years. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the city from additionally including in its infrastructure improvements plan projected utilization of, or needs for, capital facilities for a period longer than ten years, provided that the costs of such capital facilities are excluded from the calculation of the cost per service unit. 
(11)  For each category of necessary public services, estimate the total cost of any available excess capacity and/or new or expanded capital facilities that will be required to serve new service units, including costs of land acquisition, improvements, engineering and architectural services, studies leading to design, design, construction, financing, and administrative costs, as well as projected costs of inflation. Such total costs shall not include costs for ongoing operation and maintenance of capital facilities, nor for replacement of capital facilities to the extent that such replacement is necessary to serve existing service units. If the infrastructure improvements plan includes changes or upgrades to existing capital facilities that will be needed to achieve or maintain the planned level of service to existing service units, or to meet new regulatory requirements for services provided to existing service units, such costs shall be identified and distinguished in the infrastructure improvements plan. 
(12)  Forecast the revenues from taxes, fees, assessments or other sources that will be available to fund the new or expanded capital facilities identified in the infrastructure improvements plan, which shall include estimated state-shared revenue, highway users revenue, federal revenue, ad valorem property taxes, construction contracting or similar excise taxes and the capital recovery portion of utility fees attributable to development based on the approved land use assumptions. The infrastructure improvements plan shall additionally estimate the time required to finance, construct and implement the new or expanded capital facilities. 
(13)  Calculate required offsets as follows: 
a.  From the forecasted revenues in subsection (12) of this section, identify those sources of revenue that: (i) are attributable to new development, and (ii) will contribute to paying for the capital costs of necessary public services. 
b.  For each source and amount of revenue identified under paragraph "a" of this subsection, calculate the relative contribution of each category of development to paying for the capital costs of necessary public services in each service area. 
c.  Based on the relative contributions identified under paragraph "b" of this subsection, for each category of necessary public services, calculate the total offset to be provided to each category of development in each service area. 
d.  For each category of necessary public services, convert the total offset to be provided to each category of development in each service area into an offset amount per service unit by dividing the total offset for each category of development by the number of service units associated with that category of development. 
e.  Beginning August 1, 2014, for purposes of calculating the required offset, if the city imposes a construction, contracting, or similar excise tax rate in excess of the percentage amount of the transaction privilege tax rate that is imposed on the majority of other transaction privilege tax classifications in the city, the entire excess portion of the construction, contracting, or similar excise tax shall be treated as a contribution to the capital costs of necessary public services provided to new development unless the excess portion is already utilized for such purpose under this section. 
f.  In determining the amount of required offset for land included in a community facilities district established under A.R.S. Title 48, chapter 4, article 6, the city shall take into account any capital facilities provided by the district that are included in the infrastructure improvements plan and the capital costs paid by the district for such capital facilities, and shall offset impact fees assessed within the community facilities district proportionally. 
(14)  Calculate the plan-based cost per service unit by: 
a.  Dividing the total projected costs to provide capital facilities to new service units for each category of necessary public services in each service area as determined under subsection (9) of this section into the number of new service units projected for that service area over a period not to exceed ten years, considering the specific service units factor(s) associated with such service units for each category of necessary public services. 
b.  Subtracting the required offset per service unit calculated under subsection (11) of this section. 
(b)  Multiple plans . An infrastructure improvements plan adopted under this subsection may address one or more of the city's categories of necessary public services in any or all of the city's service areas. Each capital facility shall be subject to no more than one infrastructure improvements plan at any given time. 
(c)  Reserved capacity . The city may reserve capacity in an infrastructure improvements plan to serve one or more planned future developments, including capacity reserved through a development agreement under section 28-136 of this article. All reservations of existing capacity must be disclosed in the infrastructure improvements plan at the time it is adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2891, § 2, 5-13-14) 
Sec. 28-132. - Adoption and modification procedures. 
(a)  Adopting or amending the infrastructure improvements plan . The infrastructure improvements plan shall be adopted or amended subject to the following procedures: 
(1)  Major amendments to the infrastructure improvements plan . Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the adoption or amendment of an infrastructure improvement plan shall occur at one or more public hearings according to the following schedule, and may occur concurrently with the adoption of an update of the city's land use assumptions as provided in section 28-130 of this article: 
a.  At least sixty days before the first public hearing regarding a new or updated infrastructure improvements plan, the city shall provide public notice of the hearing and post the infrastructure improvements plan and the underlying land use assumptions on its website; the city shall additionally make available to the public the documents used to prepare the infrastructure improvements plan and underlying land use assumptions and the amount of any proposed changes to the plan-based cost per service unit. 
b.  The city shall conduct a public hearing on the infrastructure improvements plan and underlying land use assumptions at least thirty (30) days, but no more than sixty (60) days, before approving or disapproving the infrastructure improvements plan. 
(2)  Minor amendments to the infrastructure improvements plan . Notwithstanding the other requirements of this section, the city may update the infrastructure improvements plan and/or its underlying land use assumptions without a public hearing if all of the following apply: 
a.  The changes in the infrastructure improvements plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions will not add any new category of necessary public services to any service area. 
b.  The changes in the infrastructure improvements plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions will not increase the level of service to be provided in any service area. 
c.  Based on an analysis of the fee report and the city's adopted development impact fee schedules, the changes in the infrastructure improvements plan and/or the underlying land use assumptions would not, individually or cumulatively with other amendments undertaken under this subsection, have caused a development impact fee in any service area to have been increased by more than five per cent above the development impact fee that is provided in the current development impact fee schedule. 
d.  At least thirty (30) days before the date that the any amendment under this section is adopted, the city shall post the proposed amendments on the city website. 
(b)  Amendments to the fee report . Any adoption or amendment of a fee report and fee schedule shall occur at one or more public hearings according to the following schedule: 
(1)  The first public hearing on the fee report must be held at least thirty (30) days after the adoption or approval of and infrastructure improvements plan as provided in subsection A of this section. The city must give at least thirty (30) days' notice before the hearing, provided that this notice may be given on the same day as the approval or disapproval of the infrastructure improvements plan. 
(2)  The city shall make the infrastructure improvements plan and underlying land use assumptions available to the public on the city's website thirty (30) days before the public hearing described in paragraph (1) of this subsection. 
(3)  The fee report may be adopted by the city no sooner than thirty (30) days, and no later than 60 days, after the hearing described in paragraph (1) of this subsection. 
(4)  The development fee schedules in the fee report adopted under this subsection shall become effective seventy-five (75) days after adoption of the fee report by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2891, § 2, 5-13-14) 
Sec. 28-133. - Timing for the renewal and updating of the infrastructure improvements plan and the land use assumptions. 
(a)  Renewing the infrastructure improvements plan . Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, not later than every five (5) years the city shall update the applicable infrastructure improvements plan and fee report related to each category of necessary public services under section 28-132 of this article. Such five-year period shall be calculated from the date of the adoption of the infrastructure improvements plan or the date of the adoption of the fee report, whichever occurs later. 
(b)  Determination of no changes . Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, if the city determines that no changes to an infrastructure improvements plan, underlying land use assumptions, or fee report are needed, the city may elect to continue the existing land use assumptions, infrastructure improvements plan, and fee report without amendment by providing notice as follows: 
(1)  Notice of the determination shall be published at least one hundred eighty (180) days before the end of the five-year period described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  The notice shall identify the infrastructure improvements plan and fee report that shall continue in force without amendment. 
(3)  The notice shall provide a map and description of the service area(s) covered by such infrastructure improvements plan and fee report. 
(4)  The notice shall identify an address to which any resident of the city may submit, within sixty (60) days, a written request that the city update the infrastructure improvements plan, underlying land use assumptions, and/or fee report and the reasons and basis for the request. 
(c)  Response to comments . The city shall consider and respond within thirty (30) days to any timely requests submitted under subsection 4(b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2891, § 2, 5-13-14) 
Sec. 28-134. - Collection of development impact fees. 
(a)  Collection . Development impact fees, together with administrative charges assessed under subsections (a)(5) and (d) of this section, shall be calculated and collected before issuance of permission to commence development; specifically: 
(1)  Unless otherwise specified under a development agreement adopted under section 28-136 of this article, development impact fees shall be paid before issuance of a building permit according to the current development impact fee schedule for the applicable service area(s) as adopted under this article, or according to any other development impact fee schedule as authorized in this article. 
(2)  If a building permit is not required for the development, but water or wastewater connections are required, any and all development impact fees due shall be paid at the time the water service connection is purchased. If only a wastewater connection is required, the development impact fees shall be paid before approval of a connection to the sewer system. Wastewater development impact fees shall be assessed if a development connects to the public sewer, or as determined by the utilities director or his/her designee, is capable of discharging sewage to a city public sewer. 
(3)  No building permit, water or sewer connection, or certificate of occupancy shall be issued if a development impact fee is not paid as directed in subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section. 
(4)  If the building permit is for a change in the type of building use, an increase in square footage, a change to land use, or an addition to a residential or nonresidential point of demand to the water or wastewater system, the development impact fee shall be assessed on the additional service units resulting from the expansion or change, and following the development impact fee schedule applicable to any new use type. 
(5)  For issued permits that expire or are voided, development impact fees and administrative charges shall be as follows: 
a.  If the original permittee is seeking to renew an expired or voided permit, and the development impact fees paid for such development have not been refunded, then the permittee shall pay the difference between any development impact fees paid at the time the permit was issued and those in the fee schedule at the time the permit is reissued or renewed. 
b.  If a new or renewed permit for the same development is being sought by someone other than the original permittee, the new permit applicant shall pay the full development impact fees specified in the fee schedule in effect at the time that the permits are reissued or renewed. If the original permittee has assigned its rights under the permits in writing to the new permit applicant, the new permit applicant shall pay development impact fees as if it were the original permittee. 
(b)  Exceptions . Development impact fees shall not be owed under the following conditions: 
(1)  Development impact fees have been paid for the development and the permit(s) which triggered the collection of the development impact fees have not expired or been voided. 
(2)  The approval(s) that trigger the collection of development impact fees involve modifications to existing residential or nonresidential development that do not: (a) add new service units, (b) increase the impact of existing service units on existing or future capital facilities, or (c) change the land-use type of the existing development to a different category of development for which a higher development impact fee would have been due. To the extent that any modification does not meet the requirements of this paragraph, the development impact fee due shall be the difference between the development impact fee that was or would have been due on the existing development and the development impact fee that is due on the development as modified. 
(3)  Parking garages are ancillary uses that do not directly create a demand for infrastructure and the primary land uses (commercial, office, etc.) generate the service units and pay development fees. If a dedicated water meter is used for landscaping, fire suppression, restroom or other water system at the parking garage then the water meter size is used to determine the utility development impact fees assessed on the development. 
(c)  Temporary exemptions from development impact fee schedules . New developments in the city shall be temporarily exempt from increases in development impact fees that result from the adoption of new or modified development impact fee schedules as follows: 
(1)  Residential uses . On or after the day that the first building permit is issued for a single-family residential development, the city shall, at the permittee's request, provide the permittee with an applicable development impact fee schedule that shall be in force for a period of 24 months beginning on the day that the first building permit is issued, and which shall expire at the end of the first business day of the 25 th month thereafter. During the effective period of the applicable development impact fee schedule, any building permit issued for the same single-family residential development shall not be subject to any new or modified development impact fee schedule. 
(2)  Commercial, industrial and multifamily uses . On or after the day that the final approval, as defined in A.R.S. § 9-463.05(T)(4), is issued for a commercial, industrial or multifamily development, the city shall provide an applicable development impact fee schedule that shall be in force for a period of 24 months beginning on the day that final development approval of a site plan or final subdivision plat is given, and which shall expire at the end of the first business day of the 25 th month thereafter. During the effective period of the applicable development impact fee schedule, any building permit issued for the same development shall not be subject to any new or modified development impact fee schedule. 
(3)  Other development . Any category of development not covered under subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this subsection shall pay development impact fees according to the fee schedule that is current at the time of collection as specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(4)  Changes to site plans and subdivision plats . Notwithstanding the other requirements of this subsection, if changes are made to a development's final site plan or subdivision plat that will increase the number of service units after the issuance of a grandfathered development impact fee schedule, the city may assess any new or modified development impact fees against the additional service units. If the city reduces the amount of an applicable development impact fee during the period that a grandfathered development impact fee schedule is in force, the city shall assess the lower development impact fee. 
(d)  Option to pursue mixed-use development fee determination . The development fees with categories industrial, commercial, institutional, office and other services take into account that a development or phase of development may contain components of more than one use category but the primary use category for which the development or phase of development is being constructed shall be the basis for which fees are assessed. For uses that cannot readily be designated under a particular category and are not part of a larger development, the city's development services director, planning director or city manager designee shall determine the category the particular use will be assigned based on which category has a p.m. peak hour trip generation rate equal to or less than the rate for the land use under consideration. 
(e)  Option to pursue special fee determination . Where a development is of a type that does not closely fit within a particular category of development appearing on an adopted development impact fee schedule, or where a development has unique characteristics such that the actual burdens and costs associated with providing necessary public services to that development will differ substantially from that associated with other developments in a specified category of development, the city may require the applicant to provide the city's development services director or city manager authorized designee with an alternative development impact fee analysis. Based on a projection of the actual burdens and costs that will be associated with the development, the alternative development impact fee analysis may propose a unique fee for the development based on the application of an appropriate service unit factor to the applicable cost per service unit, or may propose that the development be covered under the development impact fee schedule governing a different and more analogous category of development. The city development services director or authorized designee shall review the alternative impact fee analysis and shall make a determination as to the development impact fee to be charged. Such decision shall be appealable under section 28-137 of this article. The city development services director or authorized designee may require the applicant to pay an administrative fee to cover the actual costs of reviewing the special fee determination application. 
(Ord. No. 2891, § 2, 5-13-14) 
Sec. 28-135. - Development impact fee credits and credit agreements. 
(a)  Eligibility of capital facility . All development impact fee credits must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  One of the following is true: 
a.  The capital facility, or the financial contribution toward a capital facility that will be provided by the developer and for which a credit will be issued, must be identified in an adopted infrastructure improvements plan and fee report as a capital facility for which a development impact fee was assessed; or 
b.  The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that, given the class and type of improvement, the subject capital facility should have been included in the infrastructure improvements plan in lieu of a different capital facility that was included in the infrastructure improvements plan and for which a development impact fee was assessed. If the subject capital facility is determined to be eligible for a credit in this manner, the city shall amend the infrastructure improvements plan to (i) include the subject replacement facility and (ii) delete the capital facility that will be replaced. 
(2)  Credits shall not be available for any infrastructure provided by a developer if the cost of such infrastructure will be repaid to the developer by the city through another agreement or mechanism. To the extent that the developer will be paid or reimbursed by the city for any contribution, payment, construction, or dedication from any city funding source including an agreement to reimburse the developer with future collected development impact fees under section 28-136 of this article, any credits claimed by the developer shall be: (a) deducted from any amounts to be paid or reimbursed by the city; or (b) reduced by the amount of such payment or reimbursement. 
(b)  Eligibility of subject development . To be eligible for a credit, the subject development must be located within the service area of the eligible capital facility. 
(c)  Calculation of credits . Credits will be based on that portion of the costs for an eligible capital facility identified in the adopted infrastructure improvements plan for which a development fee was assessed under the fee report. If the gross impact fee for a particular category of necessary public services is adopted at an amount lower than the cost per service unit, the amount of any credit shall be reduced in proportion to the difference between the cost per service unit and the gross impact fee adopted. A credit shall not exceed the actual costs the applicant incurred in providing the eligible capital facility nor shall it exceed the gross impact fees payable for the subject development for that particular category of necessary public services. 
(d)  Allocation of credits . Before any credit can be issued to a subject development (or portion thereof), the credit must be allocated to that development as follows: 
(1)  The developer and the city must execute a credit agreement stating all of the following: 
a.  The total amount of the credits resulting from provision of an eligible capital facility. 
b.  The estimated number of service units to be served within the subject development. 
c.  The method by which the credit values will be distributed within the subject development. 
(2)  It is the responsibility of the developer to request allocation of development impact fee credits through an application for a credit agreement (which may be part of a development agreement entered into under section 28-136 of this article). 
(3)  If a building permit is issued or a water/sewer connection is purchased, and a development impact fee is paid before execution of a credit agreement for the subject development, no credits may be allocated retroactively to that permit or connection. Credits may be allocated to any remaining permits for the subject development in accordance with this article. 
(4)  If the entity that provides an eligible capital facility sells or relinquishes a development (or portion thereof) that it owns or controls before execution of a credit agreement or development agreement, credits resulting from the eligible capital facility will only be allocated to the development if the entity legally assigns such rights and responsibilities to its successor(s) in interest for the subject development. 
(5)  If multiple entities jointly provide an eligible capital facility, both entities must enter into a single credit agreement with the city, and any request for the allocation of credit within the subject development(s) must be made jointly by the entities that provided the eligible capital facility. 
(6)  Credits may only be reallocated from or within a subject development with the city's approval of an amendment to an executed credit agreement, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The entity that executed the original agreement with the city, or its legal successor in interest and the entity that currently controls the subject development are parties to the request for reallocation. 
b.  The reallocation proposal does not change the value of any credits already issued for the subject development. 
(7)  A credit agreement may authorize the allocation of credits to a non-contiguous parcel only if all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The entity that executed the original agreement with the city or its legal successor in interest, the entity that currently controls the subject development, and the entity that controls the non-contiguous parcel are parties to the request for reallocation. 
b.  The reallocation proposal does not change the value of any credits already issued for the subject development. 
c.  The non-contiguous parcel is in the same service area as that served by the eligible capital facility. 
d.  The non-contiguous parcel receives a necessary public service from the eligible capital facility. 
e.  The credit agreement specifically states the value of the credits to be allocated to each parcel and/or service unit, or establishes a mechanism for future determination of the credit values. 
f.  The credit agreement does not involve the transfer of credits to or from any property subject to a development agreement. 
(e)  Credit agreement . Credits shall only be issued under a credit agreement executed in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. The city manager or his/her authorized designee is authorized by this article to enter into a credit agreement with the controlling entity of a subject development, subject to the following: 
(1)  The developer requesting the credit agreement shall provide all information requested by the city to allow it to determine the value of the credit to be applied. 
(2)  An application for a credit agreement shall be submitted to the city by the developer within one year of the date on which ownership or control of the capital facility passes to the city. 
(3)  The developer shall submit a draft credit agreement to the city manager or authorized designee(s) for review in the form provided to the applicant by the city. The draft credit agreement shall include, at a minimum, all of the following information and supporting documentation: 
a.  A legal description and map depicting the location of the subject development for which credit is being applied. The map shall depict the location of the capital facilities that have been or will be provided. 
b.  An estimate of the total service units that will be developed within the subject development depicted on the map and described in the legal description. 
c.  A list of the capital facilities, associated physical attributes, and the related costs as stated in the infrastructure improvements plan. 
d.  Documentation showing the date(s) of the city's acceptance, if the capital facilities have already been provided. 
e.  The total amount of credit to be applied within the subject development and the calculations leading to the total amount of credit. 
f.  The credit amount to be applied to each service unit within the subject development for each category of necessary public services. 
(4)  The city council must approve the credit agreement before it is executed. The city's determination of the credit to be allocated is final. 
(5)  Upon city's and applicant's execution of the credit agreement, credits shall be deemed allocated to the subject development. 
(6)  Any amendment to a previously approved credit agreement must be initiated within two years of the city's final acceptance of the eligible capital facility for which the amendment is requested. 
(7)  Any credit agreement approved as part of a development agreement shall be amended under the terms of the development agreement and section 28-136 of this article. 
(f)  Issuance of credits . Credits allocated under subsection (d) of this section may be issued and applied toward the gross impact fees due from a development, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Credits issued for an eligible capital facility may only be applied to the development impact fee due for the applicable category of necessary public services, and may not be applied to any fee due for another category of necessary public services. 
(2)  Credits shall only be issued when the eligible capital facility from which the credits were derived has been accepted by the city or when adequate security for the completion of the eligible capital facility has been provided in accordance with all terms of an executed development agreement. 
(3)  Where credits have been issued under paragraph (2) of this subsection, an impact fee due at the time a building permit is issued shall be reduced by the credit amount stated in or calculated from the executed credit agreement. Where credits have not yet been issued, the gross impact fee shall be paid in full, and a refund of the credit amount shall be due when the developer demonstrates compliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection in a written request to the city. 
(4)  Credits, once issued, may not be rescinded or reallocated to another permit or parcel, except that credits may be released for reuse on the same subject development if a building permit for which the credits were issued has expired or been voided and is otherwise eligible for a refund under section 28-138(a)(2)(a) of this article. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section 28-135, credits issued before January 1, 2012 may only be used for the subject development for which they were issued. Such credits may be transferred to a new owner of all or part of the subject development in proportion to the percentage of ownership in the subject development to be held by the new owner. 
(Ord. No. 2891, § 2, 5-13-14) 
Sec. 28-136. - Development agreements. 
    Development agreements containing provisions regarding development impact fees, development impact fee credits, and/or disbursement of revenues from development impact fee accounts shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Development agreement required . A development agreement is required to authorize any of the following: 
(1)  To issue credits before the city's acceptance of an eligible capital facility; 
(2)  To allocate credits to a parcel that is not contiguous with the subject development and that does not meet the requirements of section 28-135(d)(7) of this article; 
(3)  To reimburse the developer of an eligible capital facility using funds from development impact fee accounts; 
(4)  To allocate different credit amounts per service units to different parcels within a subject development; and 
(5)  For a single family residential dwelling unit, to allow development impact fees to be paid at a later time than the issuance of a building permit as provided in this section. 
(b)  General requirements . All development agreements shall be prepared and executed in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-500.05 and any applicable requirements of the city code. Except where specifically modified by this section, all provisions of section 28-135 of this article shall apply to any credit agreement that is authorized as part of a development agreement. 
(c)  Early credit issuance . A development agreement may authorize the issuance of credits before city's acceptance of an eligible capital facility when the development agreement specifically states the form and value of the security (i.e. bond, letter of credit, etc.) to be provided to the city before issuance of any credits. The city shall determine the acceptable form and value of the security to be provided. 
(d)  Non-contiguous credit allocation . A development agreement may authorize the allocation of credits to a non-contiguous parcel only if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The non-contiguous parcel is in the same service area as that served by the eligible capital facility. 
(2)  The non-contiguous parcel receives a necessary public service from the eligible capital facility. 
(3)  The development agreement specifically states the value of the credits to be allocated to each parcel and/or service units, or establishes a mechanism for future determination of the credit values. 
(e)  Uneven credit allocation . The development agreement must specify how credits will be allocated amongst different parcels on a per-service unit basis, if the credits are not to be allocated equally. If the development agreement is silent on this topic, all credits will be allocated equally amongst all parcels on a per-service unit basis. 
(f)  Use of reimbursements . Funds reimbursed to developers from impact fee accounts for construction of an eligible capital facility must be utilized in compliance with A.R.S. § 34-201, et seq., and all other applicable law governing the use of city funds in construction or acquisition of capital facilities. 
(g)  Deferral of fees . A development agreement may provide for the deferral of payment of development impact fees for a residential development beyond the issuance of a building permit; provided that a development impact fee may not be paid later than the fifteen (15) days after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for that dwelling unit. The development agreement shall provide for the value of any deferred development impact fees to be supported by appropriate security, including a surety bond, letter of credit, or cash bond. 
(h)  Waiver of fees . If the city agrees to waive any development impact fees assessed under a development agreement, the city shall reimburse the appropriate development impact fee account for the amount waived. 
(i)  No obligation . Nothing in this section obligates the city to enter into any development agreement or to authorize any type of credit agreement permitted by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2891, § 2, 5-13-14) 
Sec. 28-137. - Appeals. 
    City staff assessment of a development impact fee may be appealed under the following procedures: 
(a)  Limited scope . An appeal shall be limited to disputes regarding the calculation of the development impact fees for a specific development and/or permit and calculation of service units for the development. 
(b)  Form of appeal . An appeal shall be initiated on such written form as the city may prescribe, and submitted to the director of the development services department or city manager-authorized designee. Any hearing on the appeal to the director, authorized designee, or city manager will be informal; and strict adherence to the rules of evidence is not required. Testimony will not be taken under oath and subpoenas for the production of evidence or witnesses may not be issued. 
(c)  Department action . The development services director or city manager-authorized designee shall act upon the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days of the filing of the appeal with the city, and the applicant shall be notified of the director's or authorized designee's decision in writing within fourteen (14) calendar days after the date of the hearing. 
(d)  Appeal to city manager . The applicant may further appeal the decision of the development services director or authorized designee to the city manager or his/her authorized designee, who shall be in a more senior position than the initial appeals decision-maker, within fourteen (14) calendar days of the decision. 
(e)  Action by city manager . The city manager or his/her authorized designee shall act upon the appeal within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of the appeal, and the applicant shall be notified of the city manager or authorized designee's decision in writing. 
(f)  Final decision . The city manager or his/her authorized designee's decision regarding the appeal is final and no further administrative appeals shall be permitted. 
(g)  Fees during pendency . Building permits may be issued during the pendency of an appeal if the applicant: (1) pays the full impact fee calculated by the city at the time the appeal is filed; or (2) provides the city with financial assurances in the form acceptable to the city manager or authorized designee equal to the full amount of the impact fee calculated by the city. Upon final disposition of an appeal, the fee shall be adjusted in accordance with the decision rendered, and a refund paid if warranted. If the appeal is denied by the city manager or authorized designee and there is no appeal to the Superior Court, and the applicant has provided the city with financial assurances as set forth in this subsection (g), the applicant shall deliver the full amount of the impact fee to the city within ten days of the city manager or designee's final decision on the appeal. If the applicant fails to deliver the full amount of the impact fees when required by this subsection, the city may draw upon such financial assurance instrument(s) as necessary to recover the full amount of the impact fees due from the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2891, § 2, 5-13-14) 
Sec. 28-138. - Refunds of development impact fees. 
(a)  Refunds . A refund (or partial refund) will be paid to any current owner of property within the city who submits a written request to the city and demonstrates that: 
(1)  The permit(s) that triggered the collection of the development impact fee have expired or been voided before the commencement of the development for which the permits were issued and the development impact fees collected have not been expended, encumbered, or pledged for the repayment of financing or debt; or 
(2)  The owner of the subject real property or its predecessor-in-interest paid a development impact fee for the applicable capital facility on or after August 1, 2014, and one of the following conditions exists: 
a.  The capital facility designed to serve the subject real property has been constructed, has the capacity to serve that real property and any development for which there is reserved capacity, and the service which was to be provided by that capital facility has not been provided to the real property from that capital facility or from any other infrastructure. 
b.  After collecting the fee to construct a capital facility, the city fails to complete construction of the capital facility within the time period identified in the infrastructure improvements plan, as it may be amended, and the corresponding service is otherwise unavailable to the subject real property from that capital facility or any other infrastructure. 
c.  Regarding categories of necessary public services other than water or wastewater facilities, any part of a development impact fee is not spent within ten (10) years of the city's receipt of the development impact fee. 
d.  Any part of a development impact fee for water or wastewater facilities that is not spent within fifteen (15) years of the city's receipt of the development impact fee. 
e.  The development impact fee was calculated and collected for the construction cost to provide all or a portion of a specific capital facility serving the subject real property and the actual construction costs for the capital facility are less than the construction costs projected in the infrastructure improvements plan by a factor of ten (10) percent or more. In such event, the current owner of the subject real property shall, upon request as set forth in this subsection A, be entitled to a refund for the difference between the amounts of the development impact fee charged for and attributable to such construction cost and the amount the development impact fee would have been calculated to be if the actual construction cost had been included in the fee report. The refund contemplated by this subsection shall relate only to the costs specific to the construction of the applicable capital facility and shall not include any related design, administrative, or other costs not directly incurred for construction of the capital facility that are included in the development impact fee as permitted by A.R.S. § 9-463.05, as amended. 
(b)  Earned interest . A refund of a development impact fee shall include any interest actually earned on the refunded portion of the development impact fee by the city from the date of collection to the date of refund. All refunds shall be made to the record owner of the property at the time the refund is paid. 
(c)  Refund to government . If a development impact fee was paid by a governmental entity, any refund shall be paid to that governmental entity. 
(Ord. No. 2891, § 2, 5-13-14) 
Sec. 28-139. - Oversight of development impact fee program. 
(a)  Annual report . Within ninety (90) days of the end of each fiscal year, the city shall file with the city clerk an unaudited annual report accounting for the collection and use of the fees for each service area and shall post the report on its website in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-463.05(N)(O), as amended. 
(b)  Biennial audit . In addition to the annual report described in subsection (a) of this section, the city shall provide for a biennial, certified audit of the city's land use assumptions, infrastructure improvements plan and development impact fees. 
(1)  An audit under this subsection shall be conducted by one or more qualified professionals who are not employees or officials of the city and who did not prepare the infrastructure improvements plan. 
(2)  The audit shall review the collection and expenditures of development fees for each project in the plan and provide written comments describing the amount of development impact fees assessed, collected, and spent on capital facilities. 
(3)  The audit shall describe the level of service in each service area, and evaluate any inequities in implementing the infrastructure improvements plan or imposing the development impact fee. 
(4)  The city shall post the findings of the audit on the city's website and shall conduct a public hearing on the audit within sixty (60) days of the release of the audit to the public. 
(5)  For purposes of this section a certified audit shall mean any audit authenticated by one or more of the qualified professionals conducting the audit under paragraph (b)(1) of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2891, § 2, 5-13-14) 
Secs. 28-140-28-149. - Reserved. 
Chapter 29 - POLICE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Auxiliary police, § 2-52; unclaimed personal property, § 2-246 et seq.; alarm systems, Ch. 3; traffic accident investigations, § 24-14; impoundment of vehicles, § 24-120 et seq.; vehicle immobilization devices, § 24-123; offenses against administration of justice, § 26-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Police departments generally, A.R.S. § 9-901 et seq. 

Sec. 29-1. - Defined. 
    For the purpose of this Code the term "police officer" shall mean any person commissioned as a police who has taken an oath as such. No person shall be allowed to take such an oath until he has been certified by the state as having completed the required courses of instruction and training. 
Sec. 29-2. - Duty to preserve public peace. 
    Police officers are hereby authorized to preserve the public peace. 
Sec. 29-3. - Calls outside city. 
    The members of the police department are hereby duly authorized to answer calls for aid and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the city whenever the chief of police of the department, in his discretion, shall deem it necessary to protect lives and property. 
(Code 1963, § 2-38) 
Sec. 29-4. - Unarmed police aides. 
    Unarmed police aids may be employed by the police department and shall be empowered to commence an action or proceeding before a court or judge for any violation of city ordinances regulating the standing or parking of vehicles. The authority of the unarmed police aide shall be strictly limited to the enforcement of the ordinances regulating the standing or parking of vehicles, and such aides are not granted any other powers or benefits to which peace officers of the city are entitled. 
(Code 1963, § 24-1) 
Sec. 29-5. - Appointment of traffic investigators. 
    The city may appoint traffic investigators who may investigate traffic accidents within the corporate limits and commence an action or proceeding before a court or judge for any violation of a state statute or city ordinance relating to traffic laws; provided, that such violation is related to a traffic accident within the jurisdiction of the city. A city appointed traffic investigator shall be unarmed at all times during the course of his duties, shall be an employee of the city, shall file written reports as required pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes, section 28-667, but not is not granted other powers or benefits to which peace officers of this state are entitled. 
(Code 1963, § 24-2) 
Sec. 29-6. - Criminal history record information. 
    Upon request of the community housing services director or his or her designees, the police department shall release criminal history record information to the community housing services department for the purpose of determining whether to deny or terminate assistance to an applicant or participant in public or assisted housing. 
(Ord. No. 1704, § 1, 11-26-91) 
Chapter 29.1 - RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 29.1-1. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. This chapter establishes minimum standards for residential rental properties that preserve and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of residents of the city and enhance the appearance and quality of neighborhoods. 
(b)  Application. The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards that apply to all residential rental properties located within the city including single family homes, multifamily units, mobile homes, boardinghouses and hotels/motels. 
(c)  Limitations. This chapter shall not require changes in existing buildings and utilities if the building or utility was constructed, altered or repaired in accordance with the city codes in effect at the time of construction, alteration or repair, unless one (1) of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  The building or utility has not been maintained in accordance with the city codes in effect at the time of construction, alteration or repair. 
(2)  The building or utility has been determined to be a potential or imminent hazard. 
(3)  The building was constructed prior to city building code regulations and does not meet the minimum standards of this chapter. 
(4)  The building lacks smoke detectors as required under section 29.1-16, subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-2. - Conflict of chapters. 
    This chapter is intended to supplement, not replace, existing city codes. Except for section 29.1-1(c), Limitations, in any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with the city codes in effect at the time a building was constructed or altered, the provisions of the city codes in effect at the time the building was constructed or altered shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-3. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect; and to this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned or inoperable vehicle: Any vehicle which is partially or wholly dismantled, discarded, wrecked; or on blocks, stands or similar devices; or stripped or scrapped; or inoperable due to mechanical disassembly; or with a deflated tire or tires; or physically incapable of operation; or other reasons that may include an expired license plate or the absence of a license affixed or assigned thereto. This term shall apply to any vehicle being repaired or restored when such repairs or restoration take fifteen (15) days or more. 
    Agent: Any person residing within Maricopa County authorized, in writing by the owner of a property, to receive notices relative to the property. 
    Blight or blighted: A condition of a building or premises characterized by neglect or lack of maintenance or damage or graffiti or other similar conditions of disrepair, dilapidation or deterioration which may endanger life or property by fire or other causes or is conducive to ill health, transmission of diseases, rodent or insect infestation or is otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
    Building: That which is designed, built or constructed, and is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants. 
    Boardinghouse: A building in which sleeping rooms are provided which serve as the principal residence of the occupants. A common dining room and sanitary facilities may be provided for the residents. 
    Code official: The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative. 
    Debris: Substance or material of little or no apparent value, including but not limited to deteriorated lumber, old newspapers, cardboard material, scrap metal, vehicle parts, discarded furniture parts, stoves, sinks, cabinets, household fixtures, refrigerators, abandoned, broken or neglected equipment, or the scattered remains of items. 
    Deteriorated: A lowering in quality of the condition of a building, or parts thereof including but not limited to holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting, or any other evidence of physical decay or neglect or lack of maintenance that may endanger life or property. 
    Habitable space/room: A space in a building for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space, and similar areas, are not considered habitable space. 
    Hotel/motel: A building which provides guest rooms for the lodging of travelers and other temporary residents, and may include customarily incidental uses such as meeting rooms, restaurants and cocktail lounges. 
    Imminent hazard: A condition which places a person's life, health, safety or property in high risk of immediate, instant or impending peril, injury or harm. 
    Occupant: Any person residing at a residential rental property. 
    Owner: A person, persons or legal entity listed as current Title holder as recorded in the official records of Maricopa County Recorder's Office. 
    Plumbing system: Includes all potable water supply and distribution pipes, plumbing fixtures and traps, drainage and vent pipe, all building drains including their joints and connections, fuel gas piping, water heaters and vents for same within the property lines of the premises. 
    Potential hazard: A condition which can cause an unreasonable risk of death or serious personal injury or serious damage to property and can become an imminent hazard if further deterioration occurs. 
    Premises: A lot, plot, or parcel of land including any buildings thereon. 
    Residential rental property: Includes any buildings, boardinghouses, hotels/motels, rented or leased for any valuable consideration. This chapter excludes facilities owned, operated or licensed by the federal, state or county government or any of their agencies and dormitories operated by educational institutions. 
    Repeat offender: Any person who has been issued two (2) notices of violation and orders of compliance and commits the same violation a third time within a twelve (12) month period. 
    Sound condition: Capable of performing the task for which it was designed and in the manner intended. 
    Violator: The person(s) responsible for creating or causing a violation of the Code of the City of Glendale to exist. 
    Weed: Vegetation which bears seeds of a downy or wingy nature; sagebrush, chaparral and any other brush or vegetation of uncontrolled growth which may provide harborage for insects or other infestations or which is likely to become a fire hazard when dry; and vegetation that is otherwise noxious or dangerous; or dry grass, stubble or brush or other flammable material which endangers the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2186, § 13, 2-27-01) 
Secs. 29.1-5-29.1-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 29.1-10. - General. 
(a)  When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the city manager or designee may grant modifications for individual cases. The city manager or designee shall first find that a special individual reason makes the strict letter of this chapter impractical and the modification is in conformance with the intent and purpose of this chapter and that such modification does not lesson any health or safety standards or any degree of structural integrity. The details of any action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the code enforcement office. 
(b)  All buildings both existing and new, and all parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All equipment, devices or safeguards which are required by this chapter or any other city code shall be maintained in a safe and operable condition. 
(c)  Every plumbing and electrical system, heating and cooling system, ventilating system, fixture and appliance shall be properly installed, maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function(s). 
(d)  All exterior property, premises and common areas shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition free from deterioration and blighting conditions. 
(e)  The exterior and interior of a building shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-11. - Plumbing systems and fixtures. 
(a)  General. Every residential rental property shall have a plumbing system maintained in good working condition, free from defects, leaks and obstructions. All plumbing fixtures, drains, waste and vent piping shall be maintained in proper working order, connected to an approved disposal system and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks, and defects. 
(b)  Water system. The water system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to each fixture in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate such that the fixtures will function safely and properly, free from defects and leaks and will perform their intended function(s). 
(c)  Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed and maintained and capable of providing a supply of water in sufficient volume at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower and laundry facility, if provided, at a temperature of not less than one hundred ten (110) degrees. 
(1)  A gas burning water heater shall not be located in any room used or designed to be used for sleeping purposes, bathrooms, clothes closets or in a closet or other confined space opening into a bath or bedroom. 
(2)  An approved combination temperature and pressure relief valve and relief valve discharge line shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-12. - Sanitary facilities. 
(a)  Every residential rental property shall be provided with a bathroom equipped with plumbing fixtures consisting of a water closet, lavatory basin, and either a bathtub or shower. 
(b)  A lavatory basin is required in, or immediately adjacent to, any room containing a water closet. A kitchen sink may not be substituted for the lavatory basin. 
(c)  Each water closet, lavatory basin, bathtub and shower shall be properly installed and maintained free from defects and leaks. Each lavatory basin, bathtub and shower shall be supplied with hot and cold running water in sufficient volume necessary for its normal operation. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-13. - Kitchen facilities. 
(a)  Every residential rental property shall have a kitchen or kitchen area with space to store, prepare, and serve food in a sanitary manner. 
(b)  Every residential rental property shall be equipped with an oven and range, or stove, and a refrigerator. Each appliance shall be properly installed and operating in a manner for which the appliance was designed. The oven and range or stove and refrigerator may be provided by the owner or tenant as part of the rental agreement. 
(c)  Every residential rental property shall be provided with a kitchen sink properly installed, maintained free from defects and leaks, and supplied with hot and cold running water in sufficient volume necessary for its normal operation. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-14. - Electrical and lighting. 
(a)  Every residential rental property shall have electrical service and lighting that is maintained in a hazard free condition and in a state of good repair. The capacity of all electrical systems shall be able to safely supply power to the existing appliances, fixtures, and facilities in the building. 
(b)  The electrical system shall be free from such hazards as broken wiring, non-insulated wiring, improper types of wiring, connections or insulation, exposed wiring on or within fixtures, overloaded circuits, missing receptacle or switch covers, or badly cracked receptacles or switches. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-15. - Heating and cooling. 
(a)  All duct systems, ventilating systems, fuel gas systems, vents and connectors shall be properly installed, free from defects and maintained hazard free. 
(b)  Heating equipment shall be capable of maintaining a room temperature of seventy (70) degrees F. at a point three (3) feet above the floor in all habitable rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the minimum requirements of this section. 
(c)  Heating and cooling equipment shall not be removed from any building intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants except for immediate repair or replacement. 
(1)  If heating or cooling equipment previously existed and has been removed, no building shall be occupied unless heating or cooling equipment is re-installed. 
(2)  The heating or cooling equipment shall be designed and installed in conformance with the city codes in effect at the time of installation. 
(d)  Evaporative cooling equipment shall be maintained in a condition free from excessive accumulation of rust, corrosion or mineral deposits that will limit proper operation and all mounting apparatus shall be structurally sound. Condensate from air cooling coils and the overflow from evaporative coolers shall be piped from the roof. 
(e)  Unused and deteriorated evaporative coolers shall be removed from the building. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-16. - Emergency escapes and smoke detectors. 
(a)  Any room used for sleeping must have at least one (1) openable window or door unit for emergency escape or rescue. The units shall be operable from the inside and provide a clear, unobstructed opening without the use of separate tools. 
(b)  Smoke detectors. 
(1)  Smoke detectors shall be installed and maintained in good operating condition in accordance with the code edition in effect when the residential rental property was constructed or altered. 
(2)  If a smoke detector(s) was not required when the residential rental property was constructed or altered, or a smoke detector(s) is not centrally located in each corridor or area giving access to a sleeping area, a smoke detector(s) shall be installed not later than six (6) months after the effective date of this chapter. Smoke detectors required under this section may be battery operated or may receive their power from the building wiring and shall be mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to each sleeping area. Detectors shall sound an alarm audible in all sleeping areas of the residential rental property in which they are located. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-17. - Light and ventilation. 
(a)  Habitable rooms within a residential rental property shall be provided with natural light by means of an exterior glazed opening facing to the outside and natural ventilation by means of an exterior opening vented directly to the outside. If natural ventilation by means of an exterior opening vented to the outside is not provided a mechanical ventilating system shall be provided. 
(b)  Bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms and similar rooms shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of operable exterior openings. If natural ventilation by means of an exterior opening is not provided a mechanical ventilating system connected directly to the outside shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-18. - Interior sanitation. 
    The interior of every residential rental property shall be kept free from the presence or apparent evidence of insect, rodent or vermin infestation, and shall be maintained free from any unsafe or unsanitary condition such as but not limited to excessive moisture, accumulation of garbage, food waste, trash, rubbish, refuse or litter or any condition which would promote or could harbor infestation by insects, rodents, vermin or other noxious pests. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-19. - Interior of buildings. 
(a)  Structural members. All structural members, walls, floors, partitions or ceilings shall be structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(b)  Interior surfaces. All interior wall and ceiling surfaces shall be maintained in good repair and free from loose plaster or sagging drywall or other defective surface conditions that may cause injury. 
(c)  Handrails and guardrails. Every handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in sound condition. 
(d)  Stairways. Every interior stairway shall be maintained in sound condition and free from any broken, rotted or missing steps or tripping hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-20. - Exterior of buildings. 
(a)  Foundations, walls, and roofs. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof and all exterior surfaces shall be structurally sound, and maintained in a weathertight, watertight condition and vermin proof. 
(b)  Exterior surfaces. Exterior surfaces of buildings not naturally resistant to decay shall be treated with a protective coating of paint or other suitable preservative which will provide resistance to weathering and deterioration. 
(c)  Roof coverings. Roof coverings and flashings shall be free from any defects that admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building. 
(d)  Handrails and guardrails. Every handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in sound condition. 
(e)  Stairways and balconies. Every outside stairway and balcony shall be maintained in sound condition and free from any broken, rotted or missing steps or tripping hazards. 
(f)  Doors and windows. Every door, door frame, window, window frame, locking device and related hardware shall be properly installed and maintained in sound condition. Exterior doors and windows that provide access to a residential rental property shall be equipped with locking devices and shall be maintained in a substantially weathertight condition. Window screening, if present, shall be maintained in good condition free from tears or holes or imperfections of the frame that could admit insects or other vermin. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-21. - Exterior premises. 
(a)  Sidewalks and parking lots. All sidewalks, walkways, parking lots and similar areas shall be maintained free from potentially dangerous holes, depressions or projections that are likely to cause tripping or injury to a person or otherwise present a hazardous condition. 
(b)  Parking areas. Within any residential zoned district no person shall park or store any vehicle such as but not limited to watercraft, camper shell, truck camper, or utility trailer in any portion of the side yard unless screened from the street or the surface area is improved with gravel, concrete, asphalt or paving bricks. 
(c)  Drainage. All premises shall be maintained to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water when such water may cause an unhealthy or hazardous condition, become a breeding area for insects or cause damage to foundation walls. 
(d)  Grass and weeds. All premises shall be maintained so that grass or weeds shall not attain a height of over six (6) inches. 
(e)  Bushes, trees and other vegetation. All premises shall be kept free from dry bushes, trees, tumbleweeds or other vegetation which create a blighting condition, which may harbor insect or rodent infestations, or which is likely to become a fire hazard or result in a condition which may threaten the health and safety or welfare of occupants or adjacent property owners. 
(f)  Abandoned or inoperable vehicles and graffiti. All premises shall be maintained free of abandoned or inoperable vehicles and graffiti visible from any public right-of-way or visible from any common area of residential rental property. 
(g)  Rubbish and debris. All premises shall be maintained free from an accumulation of rubbish or debris which constitutes a hazard to the health and safety of occupants or the public. 
(h)  Garbage, trash or refuse. All premises shall be maintained free from an accumulation of garbage, trash or refuse, or other wastes except that which is deposited in proper containers for sanitation collection. 
(i)  Items stored in public view. No person shall place and/or store furniture, except furniture designed and placed for outdoor use, household equipment, appliances, construction or landscape material, cardboard material, plastic material, debris or similar materials in a location that is visible to a person standing upon any public street or sidewalk or any common area of residential rental property. 
(j)  Exterior insect control. All premises shall be kept free from the presence or apparent evidence of insects and rodent infestation, other noxious pests, nesting places, and any other unsightly or unsanitary accumulation which could harbor insects, rodents or other vermin. 
(k)  Swimming pools. All swimming pools, architectural pools and spas shall be properly maintained so as not to create a health or safety hazard, harbor insect infestation, be polluted, become stagnant or create a blighting condition. All enclosures, gates and doors shall be installed and properly maintained in accordance with the Code of the City of Glendale. 
(l)  Fences, screen walls and retaining walls. All fences, screen walls and retaining walls on the premises shall be safe and structurally sound. 
(m)  Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting shall be properly maintained and capable of performing the intended function. Exterior lighting shall include parking, common area and security lighting. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2186, § 13, 2-27-01) 
Secs. 29.1-22-29.1-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 29.1-30. - General. 
(a)  Authority to enforce. The city manager shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. The city manager shall assign responsibility for administration and enforcement of this chapter to such department(s) of the city as may be appropriate. 
(b)  Enforcement independent of other officials. The authority of the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter is independent of and in addition to the authority of other city officials to enforce the provisions of any other law, rule, regulation or chapter of the Code of the City of Glendale. 
(c)  Cooperation of other city departments. The police department, fire department and any other department of the city has authority to assist and cooperate with the city manager or designee in the performance of duties under this chapter. This cooperation may include assistance in enforcement or abatement actions. 
(d)  Informational material. The city will make available a copy of this chapter or other appropriate code information to any local owner, agent, or occupant. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-31. - Inspections. 
(a)  The city is authorized to make inspections of all residential rental properties to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  An inspector may expand the scope of any inspection to include other City Code violations noted during inspection. 
(c)  Except in cases of alleged imminent hazards, the city manager or designee shall provide at least seventy-two (72) hours notice to the owner, managing agent and tenant prior to any interior inspections concerning violations. 
(d)  Interior inspections may be initiated by a tenant directly affected by a violation, social service agencies, city officials or by other city departments. Interior inspections requested by a tenant, social service agencies, city officials or other city departments will be referred to a housing counselor trained in state and city regulations as they pertain to residential rental properties. If it is determined that a violation(s) exist and the violator has been nonresponsive a rental housing inspector will inspect the property. The scope of the inspection will be expanded to include all other City Code violations. 
(e)  Exterior inspections may be initiated by a tenant, neighbor, neighborhood group or association, homeowner's association, or city officials or employees. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-32. - Notice of violations. 
(a)  Contents of notification. If the city finds a violation(s) of this chapter, a notice of violation and order of compliance shall be served on the violator(s). Such notice shall be in writing and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The date of the inspection, the name of the inspector, identification of the property in violation, and name of the violator(s); 
(2)  A statement of the violation(s) in sufficient detail to allow the violator(s) to identify and correct the violation(s); 
(3)  The date the property will be reinspected for compliance; 
(4)  Address and phone number of a city representative to contact; 
(5)  Appeal procedures. 
(b)  Service of notification. A notice of violation and order of compliance shall be deemed served on the violator at the time the notice is personally delivered to the violator. If personal delivery is not feasible, the notice of violation and order of compliance shall be mailed and deemed received five (5) calendar days after the notice is mailed, by certified mail, to the violator. If the violator is an occupant of the residential rental property, the notice of violation and order of compliance shall be mailed to the address of the residential rental property. If the violator is the owner, the notice of violation and order of compliance shall be mailed to either the owner at the owner's address as listed on the most recent county tax records or to the owner's agent at the most recent address provided by the owner for the agent. The owner shall be responsible for notifying the city of any change of agent or a change of the agent's address after a notice of violation and order of compliance has been issued. 
(c)  Transfer of property after notice. 
(1)  The transfer, in any manner including, but not limited to the sale, trade, lease, gift or assignment of any real property against which a notice of violation has been issued shall not relieve the owner at the time the notice was served of responsibility and liability for the violation(s) unless the person(s) acquiring the ownership interest in such property, assumes, in writing, the responsibility for remediating the violations and a copy of such writing is presented to the city. 
(2)  Any person who transfers or attempts to transfer their property interest in any real property against which a notice of violation and order of compliance has been issued and does not obtain a written acceptance of liability for the violation(s) from the person(s) acquiring the ownership interest in the property, shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-33. - Owner of record. 
    The owner(s) of record, as recorded in the Maricopa County Recorder's Office, may be presumed to have lawful control over any building or parcel of land. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2432, § 2, 3-22-05) 
Sec. 29.1-34. - Owner's responsibility for violations by occupants. 
    Owners of residential rental property shall not permit the occupant(s) of the residential rental property to commit a violation of this chapter. An owner shall be deemed to have permitted the occupant(s) to commit a violation if the owner fails, after notice required herein, to take substantial action to prevent the occupant(s) from committing future violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-35. - Notification of violations by occupants. 
(a)  The owner shall be provided a notice of occupant violations. The notice shall be mailed, by certified mail, to the owner or owner's agent and shall include a copy of all notices of violation and orders of compliance issued to the occupant(s) of a residential rental property. Such notice shall be in writing and contain the following: 
(1)  The name of the occupant(s), if available, the property address and a description of the violation(s); 
(2)  A statement that outlines the owner's responsibility and requirement to take all legal remedies available to cause the occupant(s) to abate the violation and prevent any further occupant violations of the Code of the City of Glendale; 
(3)  A statement that outlines sanctions that may be imposed on the owner if more than three (3) notices of violation and orders of compliance have been issued to the occupant(s). 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-36. - Owner's responsibility for repeat violations by occupants. 
    If an owner has been sent, pursuant to section 29.1-35 above, three (3) notices of occupant violations and any subsequent violations occur by the occupant(s), the owner shall be deemed to have violated this chapter and shall be issued a notice of violation or criminal complaint. The notice of violation shall be served on the owner or owner's agent in the same manner as described in section 29.1-32(b). 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-37. - Appeals. 
(a)  Request for appeal. 
(1)  Any person who has been issued a notice of violation and order of compliance may appeal the notice or the interpretation of this chapter as applied to the property by filing a written request for an administrative conference at the office of the code official. A request for an administrative conference shall be made within five (5) working days from the date of the notice of violation. 
(2)  In the event an appellant is not satisfied with the decision reached at the administrative conference, an appeal to the building safety advisory and appeals board may be made by filing a written request at the office of the code official within five (5) working days after the decision. 
(b)  Appeals to the building safety advisory and appeals board. 
(1)  Appeal application form. Appeals to the building safety advisory and appeals board shall be made on an application form supplied by the city. The application for appeal shall contain the grounds for appeal, the relief sought and the appellant's mailing address to which the decision of the board may be mailed. 
(2)  Appeal fees. The request for appeal must be accompanied by an appeal fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). The appeal fees shall be reimbursed if the appeal is decided in favor of the appellant. In cases of financial hardship, a fee waiver may be requested by submitting an application for appeal fees waiver available through the city. 
(3)  Hearing. The board shall hold a public hearing on the application for an appeal and hear such evidence as the city, appellant and other interested parties wish to present relevant to the listed violation(s) and the stated ground for the appeal. The board shall not be limited by the rules of evidence or rules of procedure as to what evidence or testimony the board may receive. Failure of the appellant to appear shall result in a default judgment. 
(4)  Written decision of the board. The board shall issue a written decision to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the code official. The written decision shall be issued within ten (10) working days from the date of the appeal hearing. The written decision shall include the board's findings of facts based on the testimony and evidence presented at the hearing. If the decision of the board is in favor of the city, the written decision shall also include the time frame for abatement of the violation(s). The decision of the board shall be binding on the city. In the event the appellant is not satisfied with the decision, they may continue with proceedings in the Municipal Court of the City of Glendale. 
(c)  Stay of enforcement. A request for an appeal shall act as an automatic stay of enforcement unless the city manager or designee certifies that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. 
(d)  Repeat offender exclusion. The right of appeal shall not apply to any person who has been issued two (2) notices of violation and orders of compliance and commits the same violation a third time within a twelve (12) month period. This exclusion applies to any subsequent violations for the same offense on the same property. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-38. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. All proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall be in the Municipal Court of the City of Glendale. 
(b)  Separate offense. Each day a violation of any provision of this chapter or the failure to perform any act or duty required by this chapter continues shall constitute a separate violation or offense. 
(c)  Failure to abate violation. It shall be a violation of the Code of the City of Glendale if a violator who has been issued a notice of violation and order of compliance fails, neglects or refuses to remedy and/or abate all violations identified in the notice within the time set for compliance in the notice of violation and order of compliance. 
(d)  Penalties. For a violation of this chapter, the city may elect to proceed either civilly or criminally against any person who is found responsible for causing, permitting, facilitating, or aiding or abetting any violation of any provision of this chapter or for failing to perform any act or duty required by this chapter. A criminal violation of this chapter shall be designated a class one misdemeanor. 
(1)  Civil citation sanctions. The code compliance manager and the person(s) designated by the code compliance manager as the rental housing inspector(s) are hereby authorized to issue citations for violations of this chapter which are designated as civil violations. 
a.  Any person who is found guilty of committing a civil code infraction under this chapter is subject to a civil sanction of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
b.  In addition to any monetary civil sanction, the defendant shall abate the violation(s). 
(2)  Criminal citation sanctions. 
a.  Any person who is found guilty of committing a class one criminal misdemeanor offense under this chapter is subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), exclusive of penalty assessments prescribed by law, a sentence of incarceration not to exceed six (6) months in jail and probation not to exceed three (3) years. 
b.  In addition to any other sanctions, the court shall order the defendant to abate the violation, unless it has been abated by the date of the trial. 
(e)  Repeat offenses. Any person who has been issued two (2) notices of violation and orders of compliance and commits the same violation a third time within a twelve (12) month period will be designated a repeat offender and a criminal complaint will be commenced for the third and all subsequent violations by the issuance of a criminal citation or summons. 
(f)  Re-occupancy prohibited. If violations of interior standards are found to exist, the owner will be required to correct all violations within a reasonable amount of time. In the event that the building becomes unoccupied, future occupancy will be prohibited until the violations have been corrected and approved by the city. The city shall reinspect for the purpose of re-occupancy within two (2) business days of the receipt of written request by the owner or agent. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-39. - Out-of-county owners. 
(a)  Owners of residential rental property located within the city, who reside outside Maricopa County, shall designate a person residing within Maricopa County as the local agent for the owner to receive notices relative to the property. The name, address, and telephone number of this designated agent shall be provided to the city upon request or upon service of a notice. 
(b)  If an out-of-county owner of a property on which a violation occurs fails to provide the city with the name of a designated agent residing within Maricopa County, the owner shall be served by complying with the "service by publication" requirements set forth in the Arizona Rules of Civil Procedure. Further, the owner shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and subject to a civil sanction of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 29.1-40. - Emergency abatement. 
(a)  Order of abatement. If, in the opinion of the city manager or designee, the conditions at a property constitute an imminent hazard, the city manager or designee may order immediate abatement of the hazard. The notice of immediate abatement shall specify the time limit for abating the hazard. 
(b)  Failure to abate. If the owner fails to abate the imminent hazard within the time period stated in the notice, or the city is unable to contact the owner or owner's agent, the city may, at the expense of the owner, abate or cause the abatement of the imminent hazard. 
(c)  Cost of abatement. When the city has effected the abatement of a violation of this chapter as provided for herein, the costs of such abatement, including a surcharge equal to five percent (5%) of the costs of such abatement to cover inspection and administrative costs in connection therewith, shall become an assessment upon the property and the owner(s) of the property shall be liable, jointly and severally, for the payment of such costs and surcharge. Such assessments shall be recorded in the Maricopa County Recorder's Office and shall be a lien on such property until paid. 
(d)  Order to vacate. Whenever the city finds that any building contains an imminent hazard, the city manager or his designee, may declare such building unfit for human occupancy and order it to be vacated or to remain vacant. Future occupancy will be prohibited until the violations have been corrected and approved by the city. 
(e)  Re-occupancy prohibited. A building declared unfit for occupancy and ordered vacated or to remain vacant under the provisions of this section shall not be leased, rented or occupied until it has been inspected and deemed fit for occupancy by the city. The city shall reinspect for the purpose of re-occupancy within two (2) business days of the receipt of written request by the owner or owner's agent. 
(f)  Subsequent assessments. A prior assessment against property shall not be a bar to the subsequent assessment or assessments for such purposes, and any number of liens on the same property may be enforced in the same action. 
(Ord. No. 2036, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Chapter 29.2 - SPECIAL EVENTS 
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 29.2-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Event: Shall mean either a Large Special Event or Special Event as defined herein. 
    Large Special Event: A preplanned, single gathering event or series of related consecutive daily gatherings or events of an entertainment, cultural, recreational, educational, political, religious or sporting nature, or of any other nature, sponsored by an individual or entity that is expected to draw five hundred (500) or more attendees and proposed to be held at a public facility. 
    Public facility: Land, outdoor park and recreational facilities, streets, sidewalks, parking lots and rights-of-way that are owned, leased, operated, maintained or controlled by the city. 
    Special Event: A preplanned, single gathering event or series of related consecutive daily gatherings or events of an entertainment, cultural, recreational, educational, political, religious or sporting nature, or of any other nature, sponsored by an individual or entity that is expected to draw less than five hundred (500) attendees and proposed to be held at a public facility and which could either: result in activity impeding or impairing the normal flow of vehicles and pedestrians on streets, sidewalks or other public facilities used primarily for travel or require the partial closing or obstruction of such; or requires the necessity of public safety or traffic control measures not already provided at the proposed site of the event. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Secs. 29.2-2, 29.2-3. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 29.2-4. - Regulation of events. 
    This chapter shall govern all special or large special events as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-5. - Regulation of city parks. 
    Events at public facilities commonly known as city parks or recreational facilities and expected to draw less than five hundred (500) attendees, and not otherwise an event under this chapter, are governed by Glendale City Code, Chapter 27, Article III, Division IV (Parks and Recreation). 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Secs. 29.2-6, 29.2-7. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 29.2-8. - Permit requirement. 
    Any event on a public facility shall require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-9. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Any person seeking the issuance of a permit for an event shall make application with the city in a form prescribed by the city manager. 
(b)  The application shall be filed at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the first day of the event. Applications involving a political march or rally, or other exercise of rights guaranteed by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article II, Section 6, of the Arizona Constitution, shall be filed at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the first day of the event. 
(c)  There shall be a non-refundable application fee for each application. All application fees shall be assessed under a schedule of fees as determined by city manager regulations. 
(d)  Permits are specific to the time, place and manner authorized by the city. A permit is only applicable to that event set forth in the application and is subject to the conditions on which the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-10. - Application processing. 
(a)  Applications for permits shall be processed in order of receipt and the use of a particular public facility or part thereof shall be allocated in order of receipt of a permit application accompanied by the application fee. After submission of the application, the city may request supplemental information which may include but not be limited to: a schedule of planned activities or performances; a parking map/plan; a traffic operations plan; a detailed parade or road race route; a map of the event layout; and the location and size of tentage, generators fencing and designated entries and exits. 
(b)  An application will not considered to be completed until all requirements listed in paragraph (a) above have been fulfilled. 
(c)  Applicants shall obtain any required permits or licenses from state or county agencies. Applicants shall also obtain other permits or licenses as required by the city such as transportation, building safety or fire permits or business licenses. No event permit shall be issued unless all applicable city fees, permits, licenses and agreements have been obtained and executed and all timelines met as prescribed under this chapter or by administrative regulation. 
(d)  The city shall issue either a permit or denial of application within ten (10) calendar days of a completed application. Provided, however, the city may extend the period of review for an additional five (5) calendar days by issuance of a written notice of extension. 
(e)  The city shall issue a permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, upon a finding that: 
(1)  The conduct of the event is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property or create a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public; 
(2)  The conduct of the event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its location or route; 
(3)  The conduct of the event will not require the diversion of an amount of public safety personnel and resources that would impede normal and routine operations for public safety; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals or vehicles at the event will not unduly interfere with public safety in the areas or the event or contiguous to the location or route of the event; or 
(5)  The conduct of such event will not interfere with the movement of public safety personnel responding to calls for service. 
(f)  Any denial of an application for permit shall clearly set forth the grounds upon which the permit was denied. To the extent permitted by law, the city may deny an application for a permit if the applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for permit was made, has on prior occasions made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of an event or activity previously permitted or has violated the terms of prior permits issued to or on behalf of the applicant. The city may also deny an application for an event permit on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The application for permit, including any required attachments and submissions, is not fully completed and executed; 
(2)  The applicant has not tendered the required application fee with the application or any required deposit, indemnification or user agreement, insurance certificate or surety within the prescribed time; 
(3)  The application for permit contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation; 
(4)  The applicant is legally incompetent to contract or to sue and be sued; 
(5)  The applicant or the person on whose behalf the application for permit was made has on prior occasions damaged city property, or has other outstanding and unpaid debts to the city; 
(6)  A prior application for permit for the same time and place has been received, and a permit has been or will be granted to a prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not reasonably permit multiple occupancy of the public facility or part thereof; 
(7)  The use or activity intended by the applicant would conflict with previously-planned programs organized and conducted by the city and previously scheduled for the same time and place; 
(8)  The proposed use or activity is inconsistent with the type of public facility; 
(9)  The use or activity intended by the applicant would present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the applicant, of other users of the public facility, of city employees, or of the public; 
(10)  The applicant has not complied or cannot comply with applicable licensure requirements, codes or regulations of the city concerning the sale or offering for sale of any goods or services; 
(11)  The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by law, by Glendale City Code or by the regulations of the city manager; 
(12)  The event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of aerial navigation, or of public transportation or other vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the area of the event, will cause conflicts with construction or development in public rights-of-way or at the public facility where the event is held; or will close streets or significantly restrict the number of traffic lanes during peak commuter hours on weekdays between 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. or between 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.; or 
(13)  The expected attendance at the event will exceed the lawful capacity of the public facility under the city's fire code or the parking available at the public facility will be inadequate to accommodate the expected attendance at the event. 
(g)  Written notice of denial or notice of extension of time for the city to review an application shall be served on the applicant by personal delivery or by deposit in United States mail, with proper postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the name and address set forth on the application for permit. Appeal of a denial under this section shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Section 29.2-41 herein. 
(h)  Any substantive amendment or revision of an application or permit for purposes of determining the priority of the application for permit or for determining the time in which the city shall grant or deny the application for permit and serve notice of such grant or denial, shall be computed from the date of the amendment or revision. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-11. - Attendance estimates. 
    For purposes of this chapter, attendance estimates by the permit applicant shall be accompanied by an affidavit for the basis of the estimate. Each estimate shall be based upon all the relevant factors known at the time, including, without limitation, past attendance at similar functions having the same and similar performers, both in the city and comparable communities, the price of admission, and the extent of advertising and promotion planned. The city may accept the applicant's affidavit if it appears to be based on realistic and appropriate information. If the city rejects the attendance estimates, the city shall substitute a reasonably determined estimate for the applicant and the applicant shall be responsible for all attendant costs and requirements associated with the revised estimate. If, for unforeseen reasons, an estimate did not in fact reflect the actual and necessary resources for the event, the city may seek cost recovery from the applicant in such amounts as determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-12. - Application deadline. 
    The city manager, upon good cause and in the best interests of the city, has the authority to consider any application not filed within the timeframes as required by Section 29.2-9(b) herein. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-13. - Rules and regulations. 
    The city manager may, from time to time, establish reasonable rules and regulations which may include, but not be limited to: application fees, processes, cost recovery for public safety, sanitation and transportation personnel, resources, surety and insurance requirements. Such rules and regulations shall be based on due regard for public health, safety, and welfare of citizens and event attendees. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Secs. 29.2-14-29.2-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 29.2-20. - User agreement. 
(a)  The applicant shall enter into a user agreement with the city prior to the special event, in which the applicant agrees to bear all costs of clean up and restoration of the public facility upon conclusion of the special event and to reimburse the city for costs related to any damage or use beyond normal wear and tear on the public facility. The user agreement shall require the applicant to provide full reimbursement to the city within thirty (30) calendar days of the conclusion of the permitted event. The assessed reimbursement amount shall be subject to the procedures for appeal contained in Section 29.2-41. 
(b)  For special events clearly involving a political march or rally, or other non-commercial exercise of rights guaranteed by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article II, Section 6, of the Arizona Constitution, the provisions of Section 29.2-34 shall be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Secs. 29.2-21-29.2-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LARGE SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 29.2-25. - Findings and intent. 
(a)  The city council finds that large special events offered to the general public or a substantial segment of the public often attract a large gathering of people which may cause adverse public health and safety conditions requiring municipal regulation in addition to that required for other events in order to assure adequate public safety personnel and resources, sanitation and sewage disposal facilities, parking, traffic control and crowd control, and other regulations in the interest of public safety and public health. 
(b)  It is the intent of the city council that this article be enacted to protect and promote the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of and visitors to the city. It is the further intent of the council that this article be construed liberally in favor of protecting and promoting the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of and visitors to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-26. - Code compliance; additional application requirements. 
    To ensure that the public health, welfare and safety are protected, applicants shall comply with all city plumbing and electrical code requirements; provide for public safety personnel and resources (police, fire and emergency medical), sanitation and sewage disposal facilities, and indemnification and insurance. If the event will be held during hours of darkness, the applicant shall comply with lighting standards prescribed in this city code for streets and public property. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-27. - Indemnification agreement. 
(a)  At the time of application, the applicant shall enter into an indemnification agreement with the city under which the applicant assumes full responsibility and liability for and indemnifies, defends and holds the city harmless against: 
(1)  All liability, claims for damages, and suits for or by reason of any injury to any person, including death, and damage to any property for every cause in any way connected with the holding of the large special event, including the preparation, set-up, holding and closeout; and 
(2)  All expenses incurred by the city for public safety, sanitation and transportation personnel and resources required to preserve public order and protect public health, safety and welfare, together with any other expenses or costs that may be incurred by the city as a result of the large special event. The applicant shall indemnify the city against all charges, expenses and costs, including the city's legal department services incurred on account of or by reason of any such injuries, damages, liability, claims, suits or losses and all damages growing out of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-28. - Insurance. 
(a)  The applicant shall deliver to the city manager, within fifteen (15) calendar days of the submission of a completed application or within two (2) calendar days of the event, whichever occurs first, proof of insurance in the amounts and types of coverage as determined by city manager regulation. All issuers of insurance shall be authorized to do business within the State of Arizona and carry an A.M. Best Company, Inc., FSR rating of at least B++. Minimum coverage shall include, but not be limited to: commercial general liability; automobile liability; and liquor and aircraft coverage as the type of event may necessitate. The city may also require special coverage that would protect against liabilities in case of the provision of activities involving child care. All such insurance shall be endorsed to provide for a waiver of underwriter's rights of subrogation in favor of the city. Prior to commencing any work on the event, certificates of insurance approved by the city's division of risk management demonstrating the maintenance of the required insurance shall be furnished to the city. The certificates shall provide that no material alteration or cancellation, including expiration and non-renewal, shall be effective until fifteen (15) business days after receipt of written notice by the city. If one or more cranes or similar heavy equipment pieces are used for any activity associated with the large special event, the proof of insurance will clearly demonstrate that the general liability coverage includes coverage for such equipment and has no limitation specific to use of the equipment. If fireworks displays or pyrotechnic displays are included in the large special event, the proof of insurance will clearly demonstrate that general liability coverage is provided to include coverage for such display(s) with no limitation specific to the display(s). Such evidence must be provided by the organization(s) responsible for such display(s). The failure by the applicant to provide or the failure of the city to demand an insurance certificate as required in this section shall not relieve the applicant's obligation to provide the required insurance. 
(b)  All coverages are to be provided on a "per occurrence" form. If coverage is only available on a "claims made" form, the insured shall agree to maintain extended reporting coverage for a minimum of two (2) years past the expiration of the annual policy term. 
(c)  The coverage(s) required under this section shall survive and not be terminated, reduced or otherwise limited by any expiration or termination of particular policies for insurance coverages. 
(d)  All coverages shall be primary and non-contributory with respect to all other available sources. Where the city is named as an additional insured, it shall be by endorsement and not solely as a listed party on the certificate of insurance. The city shall be an additional insured to the full limits of coverage purchased by the applicant even if those limits are in excess of the minimums required by this section. 
(e)  Federal, state and local government agencies may submit a statement of self-insurance or proof of eligibility for sovereign immunity allowed by the applicable state or federal statute. Such statement will be acceptable in place of insurance requirements defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-29. - Surety bonds and payment for city resources. 
(a)  The applicant shall deliver to the city within fifteen (15) calendar days after the submission of a completed application or within two (2) calendar days of the event, whichever occurs first, surety by a cash bond, payment and performance bond, or a continuing letter of credit in an amount equal to the costs of providing public safety, sanitation and transportation personnel and resources at the event. The surety shall be released if no claims are made against it no later than fifteen (15) business days from the last date of the large special event. Such surety shall be conditioned upon the applicant faithfully observing, fulfilling and performing all obligations under the application, contract and provisions of this chapter, and shall be in a form approved by the city's legal department according to the standards set forth in this section. The purpose of such surety is to insulate the city from financial loss due to the large special event. Cash bonds shall be deposited into a non-interest bearing account designated for such deposits by the city. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements above, the applicant shall pay the city by cash, cashier's check, certified check, wire transfer or money order within fifteen (15) calendar days after the submission of a completed application or within two (2) calendar days prior to the event, whichever occurs first, fifty percent (50%) of the total costs for city resources as listed in paragraph (a) above. The balance due shall be paid to the city in the same manner by no later than thirty (30) calendar days following the conclusion of the event. If the applicant is unable to obtain surety as required above, then the applicant must pay in advance by cash, cashier's check, wire transfer, certified check or money order within ten (10) calendar days of submission of a completed application, the total costs for city resources as listed in paragraph (a) above. 
(c)  The city may seek recovery of the costs listed in paragraph (a) above for large special events conducted without a permit. 
(d)  If the event a large special event is cancelled due to a state of emergency declared by the Governor or the Mayor of the city, the city, at the applicant's request, shall refund to the applicant all deposits paid hereunder to the extent the costs have not already been incurred by the city, and shall release the net remaining surety posted as soon as practicable. 
(e)  Costs for city resources shall be determined by the city pursuant to city manager regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-30. - Restrictions; safety precautions. 
(a)  In addition to any city manager regulations relating to the use of public facilities, the following conditions shall apply to large special events: 
(1)  No person shall possess: 
a.  Any beverage containing alcohol, unless the promoter of the large special event provides all necessary insurance required by this chapter, and meets all requirements of Glendale City Code, Chapter 4 (Alcoholic Beverages). If alcohol is to be served, that fact must be disclosed to the city manager at the time of filing an application for a permit, and all applicable requirements of Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 4 (Alcoholic Beverages) must be met. 
b.  Any container made of glass unless specifically authorized in writing by the city manager. 
(2)  The large special event promoter shall be responsible for the orderly and safe conduct of the event and for the avoidance of adverse public health and public safety conditions or incidents, and, upon failure to comply, shall be liable to the city for all damages resulting therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-31. - Public safety. 
    For public safety, the following will be observed at all large special events: 
(a)  The Glendale Police Department shall be the primary provider of law enforcement and security at large special events. If the promoter of a large special event wishes to use private security providers for personal safety or property security at large special events, such entities must be approved by the city and serve as only supplemental support to the services provided by the Glendale Police Department. 
(b)  Fire protection services (including fire prevention, inspection, suppression and special operations) and emergency medical services, including transportation, for large special events shall be provided by the Glendale Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-32. - Sanitary facilities; solid waste; transportation. 
(a)  Sanitary facilities and solid waste collection services shall be provided by applicants, promoters or sponsors of large special events to supplement the available facilities. 
(b)  The applicant, promoter or sponsor shall be responsible for adequate solid waste collection areas and transportation of such for appropriate disposal. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-33. - Restricted commercial activities. 
    The city manager may define a specified area surrounding a large special event within which commercial activity on a public facility shall be restricted in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of event attendees and to preclude deceptive business practices. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-34. - Cost waivers authorized for First Amendment expression; alternative venues for events. 
(a)  The city manager upon the advice of the city attorney, is authorized to waive the application fee, surety, indemnification, insurance, or cost recovery for public safety, sanitation or transportation personnel and resources for large special events when the city manager determines that the event is exclusively or primarily for speech or other expressive activity that is not commercial in nature and which is protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or Article II, Sections 5 and 6 of the Arizona Constitution. 
(b)  An applicant, promoter or sponsor seeking a waiver for the exercise of non-commercial free speech as provided in this section shall file an affidavit stating that it is made under oath and under penalty of perjury and that the large special event's purpose is exclusively or primarily for such First Amendment speech or expression purposes, and that they have determined that the financial considerations listed in section (a) above would be so financially burdensome that it would constitute an unreasonable restriction on the right of First Amendment expression, or that it has been or would be impossible due to the indigence of the applicants, promoters or sponsors to obtain the required coverage or guarantee or to stage the large special event. 
(c)  Upon a claim of indigence of an applicant, promoter or sponsor seeking a waiver for the exercise of non-commercial free speech, the applicants, promoters or sponsors shall complete as part of the affidavit, a listing on a monthly basis of information about income, assets, expenses and liabilities of the applicant or of any organization promoting or sponsoring the event on a form prescribed by the city manager. Such affidavit shall also include the name and address of at least two (2) State of Arizona licensed insurance agents, sureties, or other sources of insurance contacted to determine premium rates for coverage or guarantee. Notwithstanding any waiver authorized by this section, the applicant, promoter or sponsor of the large special event shall be required by agreement to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city from any claim or liability occasioned by the large special event. Upon receipt of the affidavit, the city manager shall conduct an investigation as expeditiously as possible, but within no later than ten (10) calendar days, as to the income, assets, expenses, and liabilities listed to determine if any discrepancies exist. If any discrepancies are found, the applicants, promoters or sponsors shall be so notified at the conclusion of the investigation and shall be given an additional five (5) calendar days to explain or correct any incorrect information discovered. If the discrepancies are due to inaccurate or incomplete information provided to the city manager in the affidavit, the request for a waiver of fees, costs and/or bond requirements due to indigence shall be denied, in which event all fees and costs required by this article shall be paid and posted, or a permit shall not be issued. 
(d)  Approvals of waivers shall be granted by the city manager, upon the advice of the city attorney, after completion of the financial investigation, unless a discrepancy has been discovered. A waiver may be denied if the city manager determines that: (1) inaccurate or incomplete information was provided; (2) there is no undue burden on First Amendment rights; or (3) there is no demonstrated indigence. The city manager shall provide the applicant with written reasons for any denial. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, an applicant, promoter or sponsor of an event involving the exercise of non-commercial free speech shall be considered indigent if the monthly expenses and liabilities disclosed by the affidavit exceed the monthly income and the equity available in any owned assets. For purposes of this section, compliance with the fees, costs and bond requirements of this chapter shall be deemed unduly burdensome and unreasonably restrictive of First Amendment rights of expression if such compliance would impose a severe hardship financially which could foreseeably cause indigence to occur within ninety (90) calendar days after compliance. 
(f)  In any case where an applicant, promoter, or sponsor fee, cost or bond waiver is granted for an event involving the exercise of non-commercial free speech, the costs and expenses waived shall be paid and absorbed by the city, and the large special event shall be allowed to proceed as requested if the other requirements of this chapter are timely met. 
(g)  With respect to events that are exclusively or primarily for protected non-commercial First Amendment expressive activity, a particular venue need not be made available if there are scheduling conflicts or if the city's unreimbursed costs to make the venue available will make the use of budgeted funds impractical in light of other budgetary requirements. In such situation, the city will seek to make available an alternate venue at which the expressive activity can be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Secs. 29.2-35-29.2-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EXEMPTIONS; APPEALS; WAIVERS 

Sec. 29.2-40. - Exemptions. 
    The following activities shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  Activities at any college, junior college, high school, middle school or elementary school stadium or gymnasium; 
(2)  Activities conducted by any person or organization pursuant to a license, lease or use agreement for use of public facilities entered into with the city; 
(3)  Any activity sponsored in whole or in part by the City of Glendale; or 
(4)  Any activity on private property unless the activity's impact on any adjacent public facilities would otherwise qualify as an event as defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-41. - Procedures for appeal. 
(a)  Review by city manager. 
(1)  Any city action for which a right of appeal is available under this chapter may, within five (5) calendar days of the service of notice of such determination, file a written appeal for reconsideration by the city manager; 
(2)  The city manager shall have ten (10) calendar days from the date on which the appeal was received in which to serve upon the appellant a notice that the decision has been affirmed, modified or reversed; 
(3)  Such notice shall be deemed served upon the appellant when it is personally delivered or when it is sent by United States mail, with proper postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the name and address set forth on the application for permit. 
(b)  Form of appeals. Any appeals filed pursuant to this chapter shall specifically state the grounds upon which it is asserted and why the determination should be modified or reversed. The appeal shall be accompanied by copies of the application for permit, the written notice of the determination of the city, and any other information material to the determination. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Secs. 29.2-42-29.2-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 29.2-45. - Enforcement; revocation or suspension of permit. 
(a)  The city may take any appropriate civil action to preclude an event that is conducted or which may be conducted without a permit. 
(b)  The city manager may suspend or revoke a permit issued under this chapter for violation of this chapter; for violating any federal, state or local laws during an event; or for making any material false representation in an application for a permit or for an exemption certificate. Upon suspension or revocation, the appeal provisions of this chapter shall apply commencing with the date the suspension or revocation notice is provided to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 29.2-46. - Penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor to: 
(1)  Conduct or stage an event without a permit. 
(2)  Knowingly make a false statement in connection with an application. 
(3)  Violate any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  Each day a violation of any provision of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2591, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Chapter 30 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 24; sale of goods on streets, § 26-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Parking lot construction. 
    In all cases of parking lot construction, physical barriers may be required to maintain proper angle of parking. The angle of parking is measured from a line parallel to the roadway. 
(Code 1963, § 26-13) 
Cross reference- Off-street parking, App. A, § 81 et seq. 
Sec. 30-2. - Adoption of standard specifications. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except contractors performing projects contracted by the City of Glendale, to erect, construct, enlarge alter or repair any public works construction in the city contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, sponsored and distributed by the Maricopa Association of Governments, 1979, Arizona, and all supplements and appendixes thereto issued by the Maricopa Association of Governments and/or the city manager or designee, which standard specifications are hereby adopted by reference. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city manager or designee from amending or deleting the details for public works constructed or contracted by the city. 
(b)  The Uniform Standard Specifications may be amended or deleted by the city manager or the city manager's designee for public works constructed or contracted by the City of Glendale. 
(Code 1963, § 26-26; Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 2-13-80; Ord. No. 1838, § 1, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 30-3. - Adoption of standard details. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except contractors performing projects contracted by the City of Glendale, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter or repair any public works construction in the city contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the Uniform Standard Details for Public Works Construction, sponsored and distributed by the Maricopa Association of Governments, 1979, Arizona, and all supplements and appendixes thereto issued by the Maricopa Association of Governments and/or the city manager or designee, which details are hereby adopted by reference. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city manager or designee from amending or deleting the details for public works constructed or contracted by the city. 
(b)  The Uniform Standard Details may be amended or deleted by the city manager or the city manager's designee for public works constructed or contracted by the City of Glendale. 
(Code 1963, § 26-27; Ord. No. 1110, § 1, 2-13-80; Ord. No. 1838, § 1, 4-11-95) 
Sec. 30-4. - Discharge of water into streets prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause the escape or flow of domestic water or flood irrigation water from private property, public places and flood irrigation systems in or upon any street, sidewalk or alley in such quantity as to create flooding, to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous condition to such traffic, to create a condition which constitutes a threat to the public health or safety, or to cause damage to the public streets, sidewalks or alleys of the City of Glendale. 
(Code 1963, § 15-1; Ord. No. 1659, § 1, 12-11-90) 
Cross reference- Design standards for drainage, § 18.5-7. 
Sec. 30-5. - Publications adopted by reference. 
    The following publications are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length in this Code: 
Glendale Standard Drawing of Conditions; and 
Traffic Barricade Manual of the City of Phoenix, most recent edition. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 1, 4-8-86) 
Secs. 30-6-30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION, EXCAVATION, ETC.[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Grading and drainage regulation, Ch. 18.5; utility undergrounding regulations, Ch. 32.5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-21. - Driveways generally. 
    Provisions may be made by the city for vehicular access to private property from streets and alleys, but in so doing, due consideration must be given to pedestrian and vehicular safety, the resulting interference with the movement of vehicular traffic and the interference with public improvements. In establishing permissible curb cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings for access to private property, authorization shall not be granted where they are unnecessary or where they would unreasonably interfere with the rights of the public in the adjacent street or alley, and in no event shall any such cut or crossing be of greater width than necessary for reasonable access to the private property to be served thereby. 
(Code 1963, § 26-11) 
Sec. 30-22. - Time and manner of work. 
    All work done under permits granted by authority of this article shall be completed within the time set by the community development department and shall be done in accordance with the official grades and standard details and specifications of the city. All sidewalks shall be constructed under standard specifications of the city. 
(Code 1963, § 26-14) 
Sec. 30-23. - Elimination of driveway cuts. 
(a)  When the improvements on, or the use of property which is being served by a driveway, is so changed that the driveway, in the opinion of the community development department, is not needed, the owner of the property shall be notified to restore the street pavement, curb, gutter and sidewalk to the same condition as the adjoining street pavement, curb, gutter and sidewalk. Whenever any owner shall have been notified to restore the street pavement, curb, gutter and sidewalk as provided in this subsection and shall fail to comply within ninety (90) days after receipt of such notice, the city shall proceed to repair such pavement, curb, gutter and sidewalk, and when so restored by the city, the cost of such repair shall be paid by the owner of such abutting property. 
(b)  The city shall refuse to issue a building permit for any construction, remodeling or repair on the property unless the owner of the property complies with the provisions of subsection (a). Any improvement district organized shall provide for the replacement or installation of curbs across any abandoned driveway as provided in subsection (a). The city may refuse to issue any and all other permits or perform any and all other services to the property owner unless the owner complies with the provisions of subsection (a). 
(Code 1963, §§ 26-15, 26-16) 
Sec. 30-24. - Engineering and inspection services of the city. 
    The community development department shall furnish to the applicant such engineering and inspection services as will assure that the improvements constructed are in accordance with the permit granted and the specifications and details mentioned in this article. Any person doing work under any permit shall notify the department twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the time and place where work will begin. 
(Code 1963, §§ 26-3, 26-9) 
Secs. 30-25-30-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 30-36. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, build, construct or remove any pavement or pavement widening, driveway, sidewalk, curb, gutter, pipeline, or grade, oil or gravel any public street of the city, without first having received a written permit from the community development department. 
(b)  The city shall refuse to issue a permit for street cutting unless the owner of the property complies with the provisions of section 30-23. 
(Code 1963, §§ 26-3, 26-16) 
Sec. 30-37. - Application. 
    All applications for a permit to construct driveways, streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, pipelines, to widen the paved roadway, to cut pavement, sidewalks, curbs, gutters or to repave pavement cuts, shall be in writing on forms provided by the city, and shall be accompanied by at least three (3) copies of a plot plan showing the size of the property, the location with reference to lot and street lines of existing proposed buildings, driveways, curbs, sidewalks, trees, poles or other objects that might affect the work. 
(Code 1963, § 26-4; Ord. No. 1053, § 1, 10-24-78) 
Sec. 30-38. - Persons eligible. 
    Applicants for permits required by the provisions of this division shall be either an owner or a contractor. However, the work may be performed only by a properly licensed state contractor, a utility company, a governmental agency or the owner of residential property where the property owner proposes to do such work between his property line and the back curb line. 
(Code 1963, § 26-7) 
Sec. 30-39. - Other grounds for denial. 
(a)  The community development department shall withhold issuance of a permit under the following conditions: 
(1)  Until the required plan of such construction shall have been approved in writing by the department. 
(2)  If the construction is for a driveway in any commercial (business) or industrial district, as delineated in the zoning ordinance, of less than sixteen (16) feet in width or more than forty (40) feet in width, exclusive of wings. 
(3)  If the construction is for a driveway in any residential area, as delineated in the zoning ordinance, of less than twelve (12) feet in width or more than thirty (30) feet in width exclusive of wings. 
(4)  In the case of construction of two (2) or more driveways on any one (1) lot less than twenty-five (25) feet of full straight curb exists between driveways. 
(5)  If the construction is a driveway in a commercial, industrial and residential area which encroaches closer than five (5) feet to the side property line. 
(6)  If the curb returns are for a driveway of less than two (2) foot radius or four (4) foot curb ramps or any radius or any radius or curb ramp, the length and location of which is not fixed or approved in each instance by the department. 
(7)  At intersection corners where the intersection curb radius is less than twenty-five (25) feet, if the drive, curb return or curb ramp is located on any part of an intersection curb radius. On curb returns at street intersections where the radius is thirty (30) feet or more, driveway approaches, including curb returns and curb ramps, may encroach upon each end of the curb radius for a distance of five (5) feet. 
(8)  In any commercial (business) or industrial zoned district, if the applicant does not provide for the construction of a safety curb constructed of cement concrete between the driveways along and inside the property line or between the sidewalk and the property line subject to approval of the department when the property located between the two (2) driveways is used for the purpose of movement, storage or parking of vehicles. Such safety curb shall be not less than six (6) inches wide by eighteen (18) inches deep with six (6) inches of the curb extending above the official property line grade. 
(9)  In the case of construction of driveways in a commercial (business) or industrial zoned area, if sufficient space is provided on the private property to provide egress from the property without backing the vehicle across the sidewalk, except where a building exists which is used for the storage or repair of motor vehicles. When parking is provided in front of a building, sufficient space on private property to provide egress without backing the vehicle across the sidewalk shall mean the following: 
a.  In the case of existing buildings: 
1.  Forty-foot minimum setback for ninety degree parking. 
2.  Thirty-six-foot minimum setback for sixty-degree parking. 
3.  Thirty-foot minimum setback for forty-five-degree parking. Private sidewalks abutting the face of the building are not included in this set back but are desirable and would require additional setback. 
b.  In the case of new construction of buildings: 
1.  Forty-two-foot minimum setback for ninety-degree parking, plus an additional minimum seven-foot setback for a sidewalk abutting the face of the building. 
2.  Thirty-six-foot minimum set back for sixty-degree parking, plus an additional minimum seven-foot setback for a sidewalk abutting the face of the building. 
3.  Thirty-foot minimum setback for forty-five-degree parking, plus an additional minimum seven-foot setback for a sidewalk abutting the face of a building. 
(10)  If more than one (1) driveway will be constructed to each fifty (50) feet of frontage upon any street, except within the commercial (business) or industrial districts and as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  Any request for an exception to the foregoing shall be submitted in writing to the department. The community development administrator may grant requests for exceptions not to exceed maximum widths of driveways of sixty (60) feet. 
Sec. 30-40. - Fee. 
    The applicant for a permit required by the provisions of this division shall deposit with the city before any permit is issued, a permit fee in the amount established by resolution or pursuant to Glendale City Code Section 2-3. No part of the fee is refundable. 
(Code 1963, § 26-6; Ord. No. 1186, § 1, 11-24-81; Ord. No. 1243, § 1, 7-21-83; Ord. No. 2260, § 5, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 30-41. - Bond. 
(a)  On all work for which a permit is required by the provisions of this division which is estimated to cost less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), each applicant shall deposit an amount in cash or a surety bond equal to fifteen (15) percent of the total cost of construction with the community development department prior to issuance of the permit. 
(b)  On all such work estimated to cost over five hundred dollars ($500.00), each applicant shall deposit an amount in cash or a surety bond equal to the total coast of construction with the community development department prior to issuance of the permit. The estimated total cost of construction and the sufficiency of the bond shall be determined by the department. 
(c)  Surety bonds shall be executed by the applicant as principal with a corporation duly authorized to transact surety business in this state. Surety bonds shall be payable to the city, shall be continuous in form, and shall be conditioned that the total aggregate liability of the surety for all claims shall be limited to the face amount of the bond irrespective of the number of years the bond is in force. Upon satisfactory performance and acceptance of the work, the surety bond shall be released by the city, or such bond may be cancelled upon deposit of other security by the applicant which is satisfactory to the city which will cover any obligations that remain. 
(d)  Upon the determination by the community development department that the construction has been properly completed and accepted by and for the city, the cash or surety bond deposited with the city shall be returned to the permittee. 
(e)  In the event an applicant is issued a number of small permits throughout the year, he may, at the discretion of the department, post a continuing bond to cover work on more than one (1) permit. The continuing bond shall be of a value sufficient to cover any and all work under construction by the permittee at any one time. A continuing bond, however, is not acceptable for new subdivision work. 
(f)  The bond is subject to cancellation or may be terminated after all obligations are fulfilled which were under permit prior to receipt of cancellation notice from surety by the city. 
(g)  This section shall not be construed to include work by the owner of any residential property where the work to be performed shall be accomplished by such owner, or work within a subdivision where in the subdivider has furnished other satisfactory assurances. 
(Code 1963, § 26-5, 26-10) 
Sec. 30-42. - Indemnification of city and insurance requirements. 
(a)  In addition to any liability imposed upon the permittee by law, a permittee under the provisions of this division shall indemnify and agree to save harmless the city and its elected or appointed officers, agents, boards, commissions, employees and representatives against and from any cost, expense, claim, demand or liability arising out of or in connection with any act or commission or the permittee, his agents and employees, and of any subcontractor, his agents and employees, in the course of the performance of the work under permit which results directly or indirectly in the injury or death of any person or the damage of any property of any person. 
(b)  The permittee shall take out and maintain during the life of the permit workmen's compensation insurance for all of his employees employed at the site of the project, and, in case any work is sublet, the permittee shall require the subcontractor similarly to provide workmen's compensation insurance for all of the latter's employees, unless such employees are covered by the protection afforded by the permittee. In case any class of employees engaged in hazardous work under this contract at the site of the project is not protected under the workmen's compensation statute, the permittee shall provide, and shall cause each sub contractor to provide protection equal to that required by law for the protection of his employees not otherwise protected. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, any applicant for a permit shall, prior to the issuance of such permit, procure and deliver to the engineering and development department a certificate of insurance covering public liability and property damage issued by an insurance company authorized by the insurance department of the state to transact business in this state, as shall protect the applicant or contractor and any subcontractor performing any work covered by the permit from claims for damages for personal injury, including death, as well as from claims for property damages which may arise from operations under the permit, or by anyone directly or indirectly employed by any of the foregoing. Such certificate shall contain coverage for explosions, collapse and underground operations. 
(d)  The certificate may be placed on file for each individual permit or a blanket certificate may be filed for an extended period of time. The policy limits of such liability insurance shall contain not less than the following limits of coverage: 
(1)  Three hundred thousand dollars($300,000.00) for death or bodily injury or loss sustained by any one person per occurrence. 
(2)  Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for death or bodily injury or loss sustained by more than one (1) person per occurrence. 
(3)  One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for loss sustained by damage or loss to property occasioned per occurrence. 
(e)  This insurance policy shall not be cancelled or changed until ten (10) days written notice of cancellation or change has been served on the department of engineering and development. The permittee shall maintain such insurance in full force and effect until all work is complete and the permit has been released. 
(f)  No insurance policy shall be required as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit to: 
(1)  The owner of residential property where he proposes to perform construction in front of his own property; 
(2)  A county; 
(3)  A state; 
(4)  The federal government; 
(5)  A qualified self-insurer. 
(Code 1963, § 26-8) 
Secs. 30-43-30-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ASSESSMENT FOR REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1378, 9 1, adopted July 30, 1985, amended the 1963 Code by adding 99 26-28-26-32. The editor has included this material as Div. 3, 99 30-51-30-55. 

Sec. 30-51. - Resolution of the city council to construct. 
(a)  In accordance with section 9-243, Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended, the city council may pass an ordinance providing for the construction of streets and sidewalks, in which the streets and sidewalks to be constructed shall be briefly described. The ordinance shall state the width and location of the streets and sidewalks to be constructed. The ordinance shall order and direct that the construction of the streets and sidewalks shall be made by the owners of the abutting property and also that, in the event of the failure of the abutting property owners to construct such streets and sidewalks, the city shall do the work and the expense shall be charged to the abutting property owners. 
(b)  The city shall make a reasonable effort to provide abutting property owners with written copies of the ordinance fourteen (14) days prior to the city council adoption of the ordinance. In addition, the ordinance shall be published in five (5) successive issues of a daily newspaper or two (2) successive issues of a weekly newspaper prior to ordinance adoption. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 1(26-28), 7-30-85) 
Sec. 30-52. - Notice to abutting property owners. 
    The city engineer shall notify the owners of each lot or parcel abutting upon any streets or sidewalks to be constructed, pursuant to an ordinance adopted under section 30-51, that they shall commence work within sixty (60) days from the date of the notice and that, should the property owners fail to commence said work and complete the same within sixty (60) days from the date of the notice, the city will proceed to make the improvements and the cost of construction of the improvements shall become a lien upon the abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 1(26-29), 7-30-85) 
Sec. 30-53. - Assessment of property; limitations. 
    The city may assess the abutting property for the full cost of the improvements subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  The assessment of property, if adjacent arterial streets are involved, shall not exceed the cost of improving more than one-half of the width or more than one thousand (1,000) lineal feet of such adjacent arterial street, except that if any parcel of land is presently being used for single-family residential use and the width of such does not exceed two hundred (200) lineal feet, such property shall not be assessed greater than one-half the cost of the average residential street within the city. 
(2)  The assessment of property shall not exceed the actual expenses incurred by the city at the time of construction. 
(3)  Any assessment under this section shall abate if the property has not been developed within ten (10) years of the assessment. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 1(26-30), 7-30-85) 
Sec. 30-54. - Duty of abutting property owner; construction by city. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of any lot or parcel abutting upon any proposed street and sidewalk to proceed to construct such streets and sidewalks as provided by the terms of the ordinance of the city council. If the owner fails to comply with the ordinance and the notice provided in the preceding section, the city shall have the right to construct the streets and sidewalks and assess the costs and expenses thereof to the abutting property owner. 
(b)  At the time of development of the property adjacent and abutting such improvements, the city council shall fix, levy and assess the amount to be repaid upon such property and collect the amounts of such improvements as county taxes are collected. All statutes providing for the levy and collection of state and county taxes, including collection of delinquent taxes and sale of property for nonpayment of taxes, are applicable to the assessments provided for in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 1(26-31), 7-30-85) 
Sec. 30-55. - Construction contracts awarded by the city. 
    The city may contract for the construction of any street and sidewalk. Such contracts shall specify a reasonable time for the completion of the improvements. All work must be done under the direction of the city engineer subject to such rules and regulations relating to the supervision of the work as the city council may order and direct. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 1(26-32), 7-30-85) 
Secs. 30-56-30-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FENCES, TREES AND HEDGES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Landscaping, Ch. 19. 

Sec. 30-61. - Responsibility for violations. 
    Either or both the owners and occupiers of corner lots in the city shall be guilty of a violation of this article if a condition prohibited by this article is created or allowed to exist. 
(Code 1963, § 26-23) 
Sec. 30-62. - Encroachment of vegetation within city right-of-way prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any owner or occupier of property to permit any tree, shrub, hedge or other plant located on the property, or installed on the property, to interfere with the function of any traffic sign, signal or lighting, or the flow of drainage water on any street, roadway, easement or other public right-of-way, or the passage of traffic, pedestrian or vehicular, on any street, sidewalk, roadway or other public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1559, § 1, 8-23-88; Ord. No. 1654, § 3, 10-30-90) 
Sec. 30-63. - Size offenses. 
(a)  No fence shall be built, repaired, remodeled or replaced within thirty (30) feet of the corner of any lot, which corner is at the point of intersection of two (2) or more streets and which prevents a clear view by the operators of vehicles on the streets of traffic proceeding on the crossing street or streets. Within the area above defined, no fence which obstructs more than ten (10) percent of the view shall be built, repaired, remodeled or replaced to a height of more than thirty (30) inches from the level of the adjacent street. 
(b)  No fence shall be built, repaired, remodeled or replaced within ten (10) feet of any driveway within the city which obstructs the clear view of the operators of vehicles proceeding out of the driveway of pedestrians and vehicles on the adjacent sidewalk or street or roadway right-of-way. Within the area above defined, no fence which obstructs more than twenty-five (25) percent of the view shall be built, repaired, remodeled or replaced to a height of more than thirty (30) inches from the level of the adjacent street. (Code 1963, §§ 26-17, 26-18) 
Cross reference- Fences, App. A, § 72. 
Sec. 30-64. - Barbed-wire and electrical fences. 
    No fence with strands of barbed-wire below the height of six (6) feet shall be constructed, or allowed to remain if heretofore constructed, within ten (10) feet of a street, sidewalk or roadway right,f-way in the city, and no electrically charged fence, other than one which is approved by the underwriter's laboratory and unmodified, or other fence which is, or may be, dangerous to persons, children or animals shall be constructed, or allowed to remain if heretofore constructed, in the city. 
(Code 1963, § 26-19) 
Sec. 30-65. - Height of hedges, shrubs, etc., at intersections. 
    Within thirty (30) feet of the corner of any lot, which corner is at the point of intersection of two (2) or more streets, all hedges, shrubs or other plants, except trees, shall be cut and trimmed to no more than thirty (30) inches in height from the level of the adjacent street and thereafter shall not be allowed to grow above such height. (Code 1963, § 26-20) 
Cross reference- Screening walls, § 19-49 
Sec. 30-66. - Trees at intersections to be trimmed. 
    Within thirty (30) feet of the corner of any lot, which corner is at the point of intersection two (2) or more streets, all trees shall be trimmed and kept trimmed so that there shall be no limbs, leaves, needles or other foliage above thirty (30) inches or below eighty-four (84) inches from the level of the nearest adjacent street. 
(Code 1963, § 26-21) 
Sec. 30-67. - Certain trees prohibited at inter. sections. 
    Within thirty (30) feet of the corner of any lot, which corner is at the point of intersection of two (2) or more streets, trees shall not be planted, or trees heretofore planted shall, not be allowed to remain, which are so numerous or so close together that the trunks thereof obstruct more than twenty (20) percent of the view of operators of vehicles on an adjacent street over the area to the crossing street. 
(Code 1963, § 26-22) 
Sec. 30-68. - Limitation on location of plants. 
    It is unlawful for the owner or occupier of property to permit any tree, shrub, hedge, or other plant to grow within two (2) feet of the face of any curb or within one (1) foot of any sidewalk located on public right-of-way, except that tree canopies over eighty-four (84) inches in height and plants under one (1) foot in height are exempted from this provision. 
(Code 1963, § 26-25; Ord. No. 1654, § 4, 10-30-90) 
Sec. 30-69. - Removal of violations. 
(a)  If the city discovers any violation of section 30-62, the city may immediately remove such interference or encroachment, or notify the owner of the property, by certified mail, that he/she has seven (7) days from receipt of said notice to remove the interference or encroachment. 
(b)  (1)  If the city discovers any violation of sections 30-63, 30-64, 30-65, 30-66, 30-67 or 30-68, the City shall notify the owner of the property, by certified mail or personal notice, that he/she has seven (7) days from receipt of said notice to remove the violation or take reasonable action to bring the violation into full compliance. 
(2)  If the violation described in (b)(1) creates an unreasonably hazardous condition for the operation of motor vehicles or the passage of pedestrians on any right-of-way, the city shall notify the property owner, by posting such notice on the front door of the residence or by personal delivery to the owner, that he/she has twenty-four (24) hours to remove or remedy such violation. 
(c)  In the event a property owner fails to remove or remedy a violation of this article within the time provided in the notice to the property owner, the city is authorized to take any action necessary, including going upon the property, to effect full compliance with the provisions of the article. The property owner shall be liable to the city for the actual cost, plus city overhead, to remove or abate a violation of this article. If the amount is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of billing, the amount shall become a lien against the property. 
(Ord. No. 1559, § 2, 8-23-88) 
Sec. 30-70. - Sight distance requirements. 
    In addition to the requirements set forth in Sections 30-65, 30-66 and 30-67, it is unlawful for any person to install or maintain any fence, sign, wall, utility box, tree, shrub, hedge or other plant or vegetation adjacent to any public street or public roadway contrary to the standards set forth in standard details G-147 and G-148 of the City of Glendale Design Guidelines for Site Development and Infrastructure Construction, which are incorporated herein by this reference as if set forth at length. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 5, 10-30-90) 
Secs. 30-71-30-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2591, § 2, adopted Oct. 9, 2007, repealed Art. IV, §§ 30-81-30-93, which pertained to special events and derived from Ord. No. 1621, § 1, adopted Sept. 12, 1989; Ord. No. 2260, § 5, adopted June 11, 2002; Ord. No. 2273, § 8, adopted July 23, 2002. The user's attention is directed to § 29.2-1 et seq. 

Secs. 30-81-30-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION SITE TEMPORARY ENCROACHMENT 

Sec. 30-101. - Purpose and definition. 
(a)  The following sections apply to anyone who wishes to construct, excavate, demolish, place materials or otherwise plan some action which will result in creating a temporary encroachment within the City of Glendale. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term "material" shall mean building blocks, lumber, stone, building or landscape material of any kind, protective fence, protective canopy, debris from any building or building excavation, any material or equipment used or intended for use in connection with any construction or other work upon adjacent private or public property; however, such term shall not include any garbage, trash or other refuse in proper containers for collection or placed under express approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-102. - Permit-Required. 
(a)  No person shall deposit or maintain in or upon any public street, court, alley, sidewalk, thoroughfare or right-of-way, any materials without first making and filing a written application with the city and receiving a permit therefrom to do so. 
(b)  Exceptions: City employees engaged in official city business and contractors in connection with work performed under contract to the city shall be exempt from the permit procedures set forth in this article. 
(c)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, in addition to any fine and/or imprisonment which may be imposed for a violation of this section, shall be liable for all costs for the removal of such materials. 
(d)  Each permit issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of either: 
(1)  Seven (7) days from the date of issuance; or 
(2)  From the date of issuance to a date specified in the permit by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-103. - Same-Application. 
    Application for said permit shall contain: 
(a)  The address for which a permit is desired. 
(b)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(c)  A non-business hour telephone number of the party responsible for use of public property. 
(d)  A detailed diagram accompanied by a written statement declaring the location and dimension of each excavation, demolition, or construction intended to be made, and the proposed purpose thereof, and the exact location where it is desired to place materials in a public street, court, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way, the kind and nature of the materials to be thus placed, the amount of room required therefor, and the time during which the materials will be there. 
(e)  A statement revealing any use of heavy or oversized construction equipment, including the purpose of their use and the parking location thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-104. - Same-Fees. 
    Accompanying the permit application to the city shall be: 
(a)  A fee for the handling and filing of such permit. 
(b)  A fee for inspection by the city. 
(c)  A deposit to be used if the city finds it necessary to install any type of structure or device to prevent or correct any adverse condition resulting from the building or completion of any construction, excavation or demolition, or to pay for any violations cited against said permittee by qualified city officers. If the cost against the sum of this deposit depletes said deposit or exceeds it, then the permittee shall provide any additional funds required by the city. Any part of the deposit made by the permittee which is not used shall be returned to the depositor upon written request within ninety (90) days after the completion of work under the permit. 
(d)  A late filing fee if the city discovers any activity requiring a permit pursuant to section 30-102(a) and for which a permit had not been obtained at the time of discovery. 
    The fees and deposit specified above may be in the amount established by council resolution or pursuant to Glendale City Code Section 2-3 and changed in the same way. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86; Ord. No. 2260, § 5, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 30-105. - Same-Revocation or suspension. 
    Suspension or revocation of permit shall result when an officer of the city finds that public property or the public's safety is endangered in any way by any hazardous element produced by the excavation, demolition or construction conducted by the permittee; or when federal, state, county or city law has been violated; or when any condition or fact exists which would, if known at the time of issuance of the permit, have been grounds for denying the permit; or when any failure to comply with the Traffic Barricade Manual of the City of Phoenix, 1980 Edition, or the Glendale Standard Drawing of Conditions exists. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-106. - Same-Posting. 
    The permittee shall post the permit at the site of the work in an obvious and accessible place, and retain a copy himself during building, and have any manager or assigns under him be able to quickly produce a copy to any officer or inspector of the city at the work site. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-107. - Same-Reapplication. 
    Application for renewal must be made prior to the expiration date of the permit, and must be accompanied by a renewal fee of five dollars ($5.00); otherwise a new permit must be filed in accordance with sections 30-103 and 30-104 and a new inspection fee, which shall be added to the preliminary deposit, must be paid. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-108. - Location of materials. 
    Materials, for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this article, shall not occupy any sidewalk or street, or part thereof, other than immediately in front of the premises of the project for which the permit is issued. 
    The permittee shall comply with the following restrictions regarding the placement of any materials. Unless otherwise permitted, no materials whatsoever shall be deposited or maintained: 
(a)  Within twenty-five (25) feet of any fire hydrant; 
(b)  Within ten (10) feet of any railroad track; (c) Directly in front of any U.S. mail box; 
(d)  Within ten (10) feet of any pole, facility, or structure belonging to a public utility lawfully using the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or parkways of the city; 
(e)  Directly in front of any business so as to obstruct or discourage the entering or approaching to such a place by any citizen; 
(f)  Within ten (10) feet of any crosswalk; 
(g)  Within seventy-five (75) feet of any gate or passageway which lends access to public school grounds; 
(h)  Where or in such manner that gutters or waterways are obstructed and the passage of water is inhibited; or 
(i)  Directly in front of marked public transit stops. 
    Only with the consent of an officer or inspector of the city may the permittee place or extend any materials, produced by or necessary for the construction, excavation or demolition of any structure, into any road, street, or alley, and the permittee shall abide by any suggestions made by said officer or inspector as to the potential development of traffic congestion or other problems. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-109. - Location of materials on sidewalk. 
    During the progress of building operations, at least four (4) feet of the sidewalk pavement shall be at all times kept clear for the free and unobstructed use of pedestrians. If the sidewalk is to be occupied, a temporary plankwalk not less than four (4) feet in width surrounded by sturdy railings or guards shall be constructed pursuant to the Uniform Building Code around the outside of said construction. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-110. - location of equipment. 
    Materials consisting of equipment, whether parked or in operation on a public street, shall not extend more than ten (10) feet into the roadway from the curb and shall not occupy more than one-half the width of any alley in which it is working except: 
(a)  When it is found absolutely necessary that these boundaries must be extended for more efficient parking or operation of such equipment; and 
(b)  When previous arrangements have been made with the city to (1) establish any device to guide traffic and pedestrians around the periphery of the equipment occupation, or (2) to close any street or portion thereof to vehicle or pedestrian traffic when public peace, health or safety requires such temporary closing. 
    The permittee will be responsible for any damage from any oil droppings from the equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-111. - Safety factors. 
    Flagman, barricades, signs, canopies, temporary sidewalks, railings, approaches, and warning devices are to be provided and maintained whenever necessary to protect the public, and such will be constructed and positioned to the satisfaction of the city and be in conformance with the Traffic Barricade Manual of the City of Phoenix, 1980 Edition, and/or the Glendale Standard Drawing of Conditions. 
    All approaches to excavations and depressions must be barricaded. Railings are to be established as a safety barrier between the pedestrian right-of-way and the construction material or excavation, and these railings must not be less than three and one-half (3%) feet from the floor of the walkway. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-112. - Illumination. 
    No person shall maintain materials on any street or alley without placing and maintaining a warning light at each end of such materials throughout the night. Such warning lights shall be so located that they are clearly visible to approaching traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, and shall be placed in accordance with the Traffic Barricade Manual of the City of Phoenix, 1980 Edition, or the Glendale Standard Drawings. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-113. - Reparation of uninvolved structures. 
    Upon completion of any project, any structure not involved or mentioned in the contract and permit must be in the same or better condition as before the commencement of such work. 
    If such uninvolved structure is damaged, repair costs incurred by the city shall be deducted from the deposit or shall be paid in full by the permittee. However, if said permittee is capable of conducting such repair himself, he shall repair, with the approval of the city, all such damaged structures and be subject to all costs involved. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-114. - Inspection, complying with orders, and recourse against such violations. 
    Each construction site will be subject to inspection at any time by officers of the city. The city may at any time impose such additional conditions or requirements as may reasonably be deemed necessary in order to protect the public. 
    Every permittee shall comply with each and every written or oral request by the city within four (4) hours, or sooner if an emergency situation exists, after submittal to him to remove or modify any aspect of the construction, excavation, or demolition as may be necessary to protect the public. Any material extending outside the boundaries of the' diagram proposed in the permit, and not removed by the permittee, may be removed and sold at a price which will reimburse the cost incurred by the removal of such. In the event the sale of the material does not cover the cost of its removal, then the permittee will be liable for the excess cost, which cost can be deducted from the deposit or collected from the permittee, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-115. - Removal of materials. 
    If the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, or parkways are not cleaned to prior condition or if any materials are not removed after two (2) days following the completion of the project, city crews may remove the materials or clean up the traffic or pedestrian routes and the cost for this service will be deducted from the deposit. In the event the deposit is insufficient, the permittee will be liable for the cost exceeding the deposit. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-116. - Removal of debris. 
    Materials consisting of earth, rubbish or debris produced by excavations, constructions or other projects shall not be stored either upon sidewalks, roadways or streets and shall be removed as quickly as produced. The permittee shall be responsible at all times for ensuring that the dust at the construction site or on haul routes to and from the construction site is kept inside or on the vehicles transporting it and that it is not blown into the air and deposited onto the ground or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-117. - Chemical substances stored on streets. 
    No person shall mix, make, place, pile or store any mortar, concrete plaster, lime, or any similar substance or mixture upon any surface of any paved street in such a manner that the same will be deposited upon the surface of any street, alley, sidewalk or parkway. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-118. - Stability of structures. 
    Any structure or storage of materials related to the encroachment shall be maintained in a safe and stable condition regardless of weather conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-119. - Overhead construction equipment. 
    Any person operating overhead construction equipment in or upon a public roadway or right-of-way must comply with the following regulations: 
(a)  No unauthorized person or vehicle is to be permitted to pass or stand under a boom or load. All unauthorized persons and vehicles must be kept at a safe distance from such operations. 
(b)  Flagmen, barricades, signs and warning devices are to be provided and maintained whenever necessary to protect the public. 
(c)  The contractor shall be liable for all damage that occurs to public streets or improvements or property therein which is caused by or results from the operation. 
(d)  Any other condition specified by the city in granting the permit including, but not limited to, the hours and days that such equipment is to be parked or operated in a public street, and any safety measures to be taken shall be observed by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 30-120. - Civil and criminal liability. 
(a)  Any contractor, materials supplier or other persons responsible for depositing materials in or upon any public street, court, alley, sidewalk, thoroughfare or right-of-way must post and maintain with the city a surety bond or policy of public liability insurance in a form and with limits of coverage approved by the city. In no event shall the bond or coverage be less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
(b)  No permit shall be issued pursuant to this article unless the applicant shows compliance with the provisions in subsection (a) above. Further, the person applying for the permit must assume responsibility, and agree to indemnify the city, for all injuries and damages to persons or property arising from, or in connection with, exercise of the permitted encroachment. 
(c)  A violation of the provisions of this article shall be unlawful and constitute a misdemeanor. In addition, each and every day that the violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 4-8-86) 
Chapter 31 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1561, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 1988, repealed and reenacted Chapter 31, to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 31 was derived from Ord. No. 1193, adopted March 9, 1982, as amended by Ord. No. 1281, § 1, 5-22-84; Ord. No. 1283, § 1, 6-12-84; Ord. No. 1336, §§ 1-4, 1-22-85; and Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-25-86. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9; floodplain management, Ch. 17; grading and drainage regulations, Ch. 18.5; mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, Ch. 23; outdoor light controls, Ch. 26.5; planning and development, Ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 30; subdivisions in flood hazard areas, § 17-52; zoning, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 31-1. - Short Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Subdivision and Minor Land Division Ordinance of the City of Glendale." 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Sec. 31-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the city in accordance with the General Plan and other adopted plans and ordinances; to create high quality neighborhoods and ensure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions and public facilities; to achieve individual property lots of reasonable utility and livability; to secure adequate provisions for water supply, drainage, sanitary sewerage and other health requirements; to ensure consideration for adequate sites for schools, recreation areas and other public facilities; to promote the conveyance of land by accurate legal description; and, to provide logical procedures for the achievement of this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Sec. 31-3. - Rules of construction. 
    For the purposes of carrying out the intent of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows: 
(a)  All words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; all words used in the singular shall include the plural; and all words used in the plural shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory; and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The word "person" shall include an individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, the federal and state government, city, county, district, or any other group or combination acting as an entity. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Sec. 31-4. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, and any word, term or phrase not specifically defined in this section, shall be as defined by reference to state law, city ordinance, or other persuasive authority: 
    Alley: A passage or way open to public travel, affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting lots or upon which service entrances of buildings abut, and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Block: A single piece of land or parcel of land, or group of lots, entirely surrounded by public streets, streams, railroads, parks or a combination thereof. 
    Building line or building setback line: A line between which line and the street right-of-way line no building or structure, or portion thereof, shall be erected, constructed or otherwise established. 
    Chairman: The chairman of the City of Glendale Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    City: The City of Glendale. 
    Commissioner: The City of Glendale Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    Conditional approval: An affirmative action by the commission or the council indicating that approval will.be forthcoming upon satisfaction of certain specified stipulations. 
    Council: The City of Glendale City Council. 
    Cul-de-sac: A short minor street having but one end open for motor traffic, the other being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Department: The City of Glendale Planning Department. 
    Development master plan. A comprehensive preliminary master plan for the development of a large or complicated land area, the platting of which may be expected in progressive steps. The area encompassed by a development master plan may include properties not owned by the applicant subdivider. 
    Easement: A grant by the owner of the use of a portion of land by the public, the city, a corporation, or persons, for specific uses and purposes, and so designated. 
    Engineering plans: The plans, profiles, cross-sections, and other required details for the construction of public improvements and private lots, prepared by a civil engineer registered in the State of Arizona, in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and in compliance with standards of design and construction published by the Maricopa Association of Governments (MAG) as amended by the city. 
    Exception: Any parcel of land which is within the boundaries of the subdivision but which is not being subdivided or divided, and which is noted as such. An exception is not a part of a subdivision. 
    Final approval: Unconditional approval of the final plat by the council, as evidenced by certification on the original plat by the mayor of the City of Glendale, and attested to by the city clerk; and constitutes authorization to record a plat. 
    General plan: A comprehensive plan providing for the future growth and improvement of the city, and for the general location and coordination of streets and highways, schools and recreation areas, public building sites, land use, and other physical development, which shall have been duly adopted by the council to serve as a policy guide. 
    Improvements: Required installations, pursuant to Article IV of this chapter, including grading, drainage, sewer and water utilities, streets, easements, street lighting, and traffic control devices, the final approved design of which is a prerequisite to the approval and acceptance of the final plat thereof. 
    Irrigation facilities: Canals, laterals, ditches, conduits, gates, pumps and allied equipment necessary for the supply, delivery, and drainage of irrigation water and the construction, operation and maintenance of such. 
    Land split: The division of improved or unimproved land whose area is two and one-half (2%) acres or less into two (2) or three (3) tracts or parcels of land for the purpose of sale or lease. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 9-463(3). 
    Lot: A piece or parcel of land, separated from other pieces or parcels by description, as in a subdivision or on a record survey map, or by metes and bounds, for present or future purposes of sale, lease, or mortgage, and having frontage on at least one street. 
    Corner lot: A lot abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
    Interior lot: A lot other than a corner lot. 
    Through lot or double frontage lot: A lot which abuts upon two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets or which abuts upon two (2) streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
    Lot width: The width of the lot shall be determined as follows: 
(a)  If the side property lines are parallel, the shortest distance between these side lines. 
(b)  If the side property lines are not parallel, the width of the lot shall be the length of a line at right angles to the axis of the lot at a distance equal to the required front or rear building setback line, whichever is the lesser. The axis of a lot shall be a line: (1) joining the midpoints of the front and rear property lines; or (2) generally perpendicular to the fronting street, which divides the lot area into two (2) equal parts. 
    Minor land division: The division of improved or unimproved land or lands for the purpose of financing, sale, or lease, whether immediate or future, pursuant to Article V, section 31-111, of this chapter. 
    Neighborhood plan: A plan designed by the department to guide the platting of remaining vacant parcels in a partially built-up neighborhood, so as to make reasonable use of all land, correlate street patterns, and to achieve the best possible land-use relationships in accordance with the General Plan. 
    Nonvehicular access easement (NVAE): An easement prohibiting the passage of vehicles, normally to prohibit vehicle movement between private properties and public rights-of-way or other areas where vehicular traffic is not desired. 
    Owner: The person or persons holding title by deed to land, or holding title as vendees under land contract or holding any other title of record. 
    Pedestrian way: A public walk entirely through a block from street-to-street and/or providing access to a school, park, recreation area, or shopping center. 
    Plat: A map of a subdivision. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 9-463(b). 
    Pre-application plat or sketch plan: A sketch of a proposed subdivision, drawn to scale with sufficient information to allow the project team and other interested city staff agencies to review the plat, and to make determinations and recommendations as provided for herein. 
    Preliminary plat: A preliminary map, including supporting data, indicating a proposed subdivision design prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Ordinance, and the General Plan of the city. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 9463(6Xa). 
    Final plat: A map of all or part of a subdivision in substantial conformance to an approved preliminary plat, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Ordinance, and the General Plan of the city by a land surveyor registered in the State of Arizona. State law reference-Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 9-463(6)(b). 
    Recorded plat: A final plat bearing all the certificates of approval required by law and duly recorded in the Maricopa County Recorder's Office. State law reference-Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 9-463(6)(c). 
    Preliminary approval: Approval of the preliminary plat by the commission or council as evidenced in its meeting minutes; approval constitutes authorization to proceed with final engineering plans and final plat preparation. 
    Project manager: A designated member of the City of Glendale community development group staff who serves as primary contact person and is charged with single point responsibility for the successful performance of the subdivision process as provided in this chapter. 
    Project team: A group of selected city staff personnel responsible to the project manager for the design and technical review of proposed subdivision plats to ensure compliance with city codes, ordinances, development standards, objectives and the General Plan. 
    Public improvement standards: A set of regulations setting forth the details, specifications, and instructions to be followed in the planning, design and construction of certain public and private improvements in the city; formulated by the city engineer, the county health department, the Maricopa Association of Governments (MAG) and other city departments. 
    Reverse frontage lot: A through lot which is not accessible from one of the parallel or nonintersecting streets upon which it abuts. 
    Specific area plan: A plan prepared by the department and approved by the council which designates necessary regulations, programs and legislation for the systematic execution of the General Plan in designated geographical areas pursuant to A.R.S. 9-461.08. 
    Street: Any existing or proposed street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, place, bridge, viaduct or easement for public vehicular access, or a street shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law, or a street in a plat duly filed and recorded in the county recorder's office. A street includes all land within the street right-of-way whether improved or unimproved, and includes such improvements as pavement, shoulders, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, landscaping, parking space, bridges and viaducts. Street classifications shall be in accordance with the General Plan: 
    Freeway: A freeway is designed to carry large volumes of traffic and serve long metropolitan-wide trips. Access is at interchanges only. 
    Major arterial: Major arterials move moderate speed traffic to and from freeways and serve some metropolitan-wide trips. They connect areas that are major traffic generators. There is con-trolled access for commercial uses along major arterials, and residential areas are served from side streets. 
    Arterial: Arterial streets move large volumes of traffic from one part of Glendale to another. Spacing of arterials is a function of land use density, not distance. Direct property access is a secondary concern to the movement of through traffic. Arterials are used primarily to connect neighborhoods to local commercial uses. 
    Collector: A collector street allows neighborhood traffic to travel from local to arterial streets. Direct property access is a secondary concern to the movement of neighborhood traffic. Collectors serve internal neighborhood traffic movements, but not as connections for non-neighborhood through traffic movements. 
    Local: Local streets provide direct property access. They bring local neighborhood traffic to collectors which then feed into arterials. Local streets are designed to preserve privacy and encourage liveable residential neighborhoods. 
    Subdivider: An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, syndicate, trust or other legal entity that files an application and initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land or minor land division in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and A.R.S. Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 6.2, except that an individual serving as agent for such legal entity is not a subdivider. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 9-463(9). 
    Subdivision: Improved or unimproved land or lands divided for the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into four (4) or more lots, tracts or parcels of land, or, if a new street is involved, any such property which is divided into two (2) or more lots, tracts or parcels of land; or, any such property, the boundaries of which have been fixed by a recorded plat, which is divided into more than two (2) parts. "Subdivision" also includes any condominium, cooperative, community apartment, townhouse or similar project containing four (4) or more parcels, in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon. Plats of such condominium projects will show the location and dimensions of both vertical and horizontal boundaries of each unit and each unit's identifying number, said boundaries to be referenced to established benchmarks and datum. "Subdivision" does not include the following: 
(a)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land to or between adjoining property owners if such sale or exchange does not create additional lots. 
(b)  The partitioning of land in accordance with other statutes regulating the partitioning of land held in common ownership. 
(c)  The leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within a building or trailer park, nor to mineral, oil or gas leases. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 9-463.02. 
    Subdivision design: Street alignment, grades and widths, alignment and widths of easements and rights-of-way for drainage and sanitary sewers, and the dimensions, arrangement and orientation of lots and streets 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. § 9-463(1). 
    Subdivision design expectations: A resolution adopted by the council outlining minimum design standards to be applied in all residential areas within the city and attached as Appendix F to this chapter for information and reference. [2] 
    Usable lot area: That portion of a lot usable for or adaptable to the normal permitted uses made of property, excluding any areas which may be periodically covered by water, having excessively steep grades, or included in certain types of easements which effectively preclude customary land uses for the zoning district within which such lot is located. 
    Utilities: Facilities or means (and the owners of such facilities or means) for the furnishing to the public of the following types of services or commodities, irrespective of whether such facilities or means are underground or above ground: electrical, gas, steam, communications, telephone service, cable television, water, drainage, sewage disposal, flood control, and trash or rubbish disposal. 
    Watercourse: Any lake, river, creek, manmade channel, stream, wash or other body of water having banks and beds through which water flows at least periodically. The term may include specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix F to Ordinance No. 1561, from which this chapter derives, is not set out herein but is kept on file and available for inspection at the office of the city clerk. 

Secs. 31-5-31-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 31-21. - In general. 
(a)  The preparation, submittal, review and approval of all subdivisions located within the city limits proceed through the following progressive stages, except when otherwise provided herein: 
(1)  Pre-application conferences with the project team. 
(2)  Possible submittal, review, and approval of a development master plan. 
(3)  Preliminary plat submittal, review, and approval. 
(4)  The submittal and approval of engineering plans for the required subdivision improvements. 
(5)  Final plat submittal, review, and approval. 
(6)  Recordation of approved final plat with the Maricopa County Recorder. 
(b)  The following subdivision acts shall not be deemed a subdivision within the context of this article and Articles III through IV, inclusive, and shall, therefore, be processed in accordance with Article V and are exempt from the provisions of the aforementioned articles: 
(1)  Land Splits. 
(2)  Minor Land Divisions. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88; Ord. No. 1597, § 1, 4-11-89) 
Sec. 31-22. - Pre-application conferences. 
    The pre-application conference stage of subdivision review is an investigatory and informational exchange period preceding the preparation and submittal of a preliminary plat application by the subdivider. Pre-application review shall proceed in the following manner: 
(a)  The subdivider and his engineer shall initially present their proposal and meet with the project manager and project team on an informal basis. The subdivider shall present a general outline of his proposal which shall include sketch plans and ideas regarding land use, street and lot arrangement, lot sizes, and tentative proposals regarding water supply, sewage disposal, grading and drainage, stormwater, retention, and street improvements. The project team shall advise the subdivider of specific city objectives, standards, and regulations related to the subject property; the subdivision design expectations; details and suggestions regarding subdivision platting procedures and requirements; the requirements for citizen participation; and related issues. If appropriate the project team may require a subdivider to revise his initial proposal and present the revised proposal to the project team for additional review. 
(b)  Following the pre-application conference with the project team, the subdivider shall have a preliminary plat prepared which contains that information and data required for preliminary plats as specified in subsection 31-24(a) and (b) hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88; Ord. No. 1952, § 8, 7-22-97) 
Sec. 31-23. - Development master plans. 
(a)  A development master plan may be required as a condition precedent to the review and approval of a preliminary plat when: 
(1)  The tract proposed for development comprises an entire neighborhood; or 
(2)  The tract proposed for development is only a portion of a larger contiguous landholding of the subdivider, or when a tract proposed for development creates undesirable land splits or exceptions; or 
(3)  The proposed subdivision lies wholly or partially within an area covered by an approved specific area plan; or 
(4)  The tract proposed for development is part of a larger land area which is complicated by unusual topographic features, land use, land ownership or other conditions. The entire land area may or may not be under the subdivider's control. 
(b)  The development master plan shall be prepared to scale and accuracy commensurate with its purpose, and shall include: 
(1)  General street pattern with particular attention to collector streets and future circulation throughout the neighborhood. 
(2)  General location and size of school sites, parks or other public areas. 
(3)  Location and approximate parcel sizes of shopping centers, multifamily residential, single-family residential, or other proposed land uses. 
(4)  Proposed unit sizes, unit counts and densities for each residential parcel. 
(5)  Methods proposed for sewage disposal, water supply and storm drainage. 
(6)  Identification of the proposed phases of development, and the anticipated time frame for such development. 
(c)  If the project team determines that a development master plan shall be required, then the development master plan shall be submitted to the project team and the planning and zoning commission for their review and recommendations, and then to the city council for its approval or disapproval. A review fee for development master plans shall be in the amount established by resolution of the city council or pursuant to Glendale City Code Section 2-3. 
(d)  The procedure for review and approval shall be as follows: 
(1)  The commission shall review the development master plan application at a public hearing. 
(2)  A notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be posted on the property affected at least fifteen (15) days prior to the commission meeting. A notice of the public hearing shall be published in an official newspaper of the city or a newspaper of general circulation in the city not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled hearing date. Property owners of properties within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed development master plan boundary shall be notified by first class mail of the proposed hearing postmarked at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date. It shall be the project manager's responsibility to insure that all notification procedures are complied with. 
(3)  The commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of the development master plan. 
(4)  The commission recommendation will be forwarded to the city council for public hearing and final action unless withdrawn by the applicant. The council hearing shall require notice as provided in subsection (d)(2) above. 
(e)  If the development master plan is approved by the city council, the subdivider may continue preliminary plat approval procedures. If the development master plan is not approved by the city council, the subdivider shall not continue preliminary plat processing until a development master plan is prepared which is satisfactory to and approved by council. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88; Ord. No. 1952, § 8, 7-22-97; Ord. No. 2260, § 6, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 31-24. - Preliminary plats. 
(a)  Preliminary plat submittal: 
(1)  The subdivider or his authorized representative shall submit the following materials to the project manager: 
(i)  Twenty (20) copies of the preliminary plat reproduced in the form of blue or black line prints on a white background. Plan sheets shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches in overall size. 
(ii)  A completed preliminary plat application form. If the subdivider is not the current land owner of all of the subject real property, a signed and notarized statement shall also be filed attesting that the owner grants to the subdivider authority to represent the owner in this matter. 
(iii)  A nonrefundable preliminary plat filing fee to compensate the city for the costs of examining and processing the subdivision plat and subsequent field investigations. The required fee for subdivision plats shall be in the amount established by resolution of the city council or pursuant to Glendale City Code Section 2-3. The filing fee shall cover the cost of the filing of one amended or revised preliminary plat handled as the same case. If preliminary plat approval expires prior to application for final plat approval, the plat shall be resubmitted for preliminary approval as a new case, and the subdivider shall pay the required fee. 
(iv)  One eight and one-half (8 1/2) inch by eleven (11) inch clear film positive (transparency) of the preliminary plat. 
(v)  One copy, preliminary draft, of the proposed deed restrictions (covenants, conditions, and restrictions) for the proposed subdivision.The subdivider shall meet and confer with the project team as to those certain minimum deed restrictions to be placed upon the property in order to maintain the character and value of the proposed subdivision and adjoining properties. 
(vi)  A current list of property owners of all properties within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed subdivision boundary with current mailing addresses. 
(2)  All submittals shall be reviewed by the project manager for completeness and as signed a project number. If incomplete as to the requirements set forth in this chapter, the submittal will be rejected and returned to the subdivider for revision and resubmittal. 
(3)  The project manager will send copies of the preliminary plat to applicable city staff members for review and comment. As a prerequisite of preliminary plat review by the planning and zoning commission, the project manager shall inform the appropriate public utility and cable television companies, school districts, Maricopa County Department of Health Services, Maricopa County Planning Department, and adjacent municipalities, if the proposed subdivision abuts city limits, of the tentative plans and learn the general requirements for sewage disposal, water supply, and public dedications applicable to their needs. Written recommendations from the review agencies shall be transmitted to the project manager. 
(b)  Preliminary plat requirements: 
(1)  Every subdivision shall conform to the objectives of the city General Plan or applicable specific area plan approved by the city council. 
(2)  All subdivisions shall be designed to comply with the requirements of the specific zoning districts within which located. Should a change in zoning be necessary due to the proposed use(s), a rezoning application must be initiated by the property owner or his authorized representative, and then reviewed and acted upon by the planning and zoning commission and city council pursuant to appendix A (Zoning) of the City Code prior to action on a plat by the same. Concurrent applications may be considered, with the requested zoning change being resolved first. 
(3)  An application for preliminary plat approval shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 17 of the Glendale City Code (Floodplain Management). 
(4)  Any information required as part of the preliminary plat submittal shall be shown graphically, or by note on plans, or by letter, or by combination thereof, and may comprise several sheets showing various elements of the required data. All mapped data for the same plat shall be drawn at the same engineering scale. Said scale shall not be greater than one hundred (100) feet to the inch. All plats requiring more than one (1) sheet shall have a cover sheet indicating the entire subdivision and the proposed sections to be found on the corresponding individual pages. 
(5)  All preliminary plats shall contain the following information: 
(i)  Notation of plat as a preliminary plat. 
(ii)  Proposed subdivision name and location by section, township and range. 
(iii)  Legal description of property involved. 
(iv)  Name, address, and phone number of subdivider(s). 
(v)  Name, address, and phone number of person or firm preparing the plat. 
(vi)  Name, address, and phone number of land owner(s). 
(vii)  Scale, north point, and dates of preparation and any revisions. 
(viii)  Topography by contours sufficient to reflect the character and drainage of land. Topography to be based on an established city benchmark with a note identifying the location and height of the benchmark. Direction of proposed drainage flows shall be indicated. 
(ix)  Existing street dedications and lot lines of all adjacent properties. Subdivided properties must be indicated by subdivision name and Maricopa County Recorder's Office Book and Page number;if unsubdivided land, property owner(s) shall be noted. 
(x)  Location, size and names of all existing rights-of-way and easements within and adjacent to subject property shall be shown on the plat, as well as any special features such as driveway entrances to major facilities or parking bays. Existing rights-of-way and easements proposed to be abandoned will be so noted. 
(xi)  Location and size of existing structures identifying those which are to be removed and those to remain; and the date when any removals shall be completed. 
(xii)  Existing zoning classification of the property and adjacent property by note. 
(xiii)  Acreage of the tract being platted by note: 
a.  Gross acreage; 
b.  Net acreage. 
(xiv)  Boundaries of the platted property to be fully dimensioned. 
(xv)  Proposed street layout shall include proposed street names, right-of-way widths, alleys and connections to adjoining properties. 
(xvi)  Parcels to be reserved for school sites are to be indicated as such. Parcels to be dedicated or reserved to the City of Glendale for public recreation, storm water retention or other public use must directly indicate the City of Glendale as the entity to whom the tracts or parcels of land are being dedicated. All parcels to be reserved or dedicated will show the size of said parcels. 
(xvii)  Existing natural features (trees greater in diameter than four (4) inches), and any significant manmade features within and adjoining the subdivision boundaries for a distance of one hundred (100) feet from such boundaries. 
(xviii)  Gross and net density, minimum lot size, average lot size. 
(xix)  Location map with north point, scale, site location, and existing points of reference. 
(xx)  Location and description of existing utilities on or within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed development. Reference by note the location and description of such utilities if not located within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed development. 
(xxi)  The location of all proposed fire hydrants within the subdivision and any existing fire hydrants within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed subdivision. 
(xxii)  Typical scaled lot dimensions; approximate dimensions of all corner lots and lots on curvilinear sections of streets; and each lot numbered individually and the total number of lots. 
(xxiii)  The location of vehicular nonaccess easements and typical building setback lines. 
(xxiv)  For subdivision with amended development standards approved as a planned residential development, a typical maximum building envelope containing minimum building setbacks and maximum lot coverage permitted shall be noted on the plat. 
(xxv)  Locations and sizes of designated private common areas, landscaped areas and entry features. 
(6)  The preliminary plat shall contain the following information with respect to proposed utilities: 
(i)  It is the responsibility of the subdivider to furnish the Maricopa County Department of Health Services and the city engineer such evidence that may be required to satisfy the design and operation of sanitary sewage treatment facilities if proposed. A statement as to the types of facilities proposed shall appear on the preliminary plat and the plat application. The proposed sanitary sewage treatment facilities, if any, shall be consistent with the Maricopa Association of Governments 208 Wastewater Management Plan. 
(ii)  As to water supply, the subdivider shall show evidence of adequate volume and quality satisfactory to the Maricopa County Department of Health Services and the city engineer. 
(7)  The preliminary plat shall contain preliminary calculations and a description of the proposed stormwater disposal system and the locations of the stormwater retention areas and disposal outlets. A master drainage study showing offsite drainage impacts may be required. 
(8)  Conceptual streetscape and landscape plans for open spaces, entryways and major streets. 
(c)  Preliminary plat approval: 
(1)  An applicant shall submit all of the documents, information, data, and other requirements for preliminary plat approval to the project manager, and shall furnish all information and materials required by the project team to satisfy the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  An applicant shall also submit a plan showing proposed conceptual landscape and streetscape proposals. 
(3)  In addition to the requirements of the preceding subsections, the applicant shall provide to the project manager any additional information, documents, or other material relevant to the application that the project team reasonably believes is necessary in order for the planning and zoning commission to evaluate, analyze, and understand the subject matter of the application. 
(4)  An application for preliminary plat approval shall not be deemed to have been filed or properly submitted until all fees have been paid and all of the above listed requirements have been complied with. Compliance shall be determined by the project manager. 
(5)  An application for preliminary plat approval may be denied if it is determined that all or part of the subject property has adverse topography, periodic inundation, adverse soils, subsidence of the earth's surface, high water table, lack of water, or other natural or manmade hazard to life or property as provided by A.R.S. section 9-463(c)4. 
(6)  The commission shall approve an application for preliminary plat approval if all requirements set forth in this chapter are complied with. 
(7)  The procedure for approval, amendment, or disapproval of preliminary plat applications shall be as follows: 
(i)  The commission shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove applications for preliminary plat approval after reviewing the application and conducting a public hearing. In cases of conditional approval or disapproval, the specific conditions or reasons for disapproval will be stated in the minutes of the commission meeting and hearing. 
(ii)  Each council member shall be notified by the project manager of commission action within three (3) working days of the commission meeting. Council member notification will be in the form of commission summary minutes. 
(iii)  A notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be posted on the property affected at least five (5) days prior to the commission meeting. A notice of the public hearing shall be published in an official newspaper of the city or a newspaper of general circulation in the city not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled hearing date. Property owners of properties within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed subdivision boundary shall be notified by first class mail of the proposed hearing postmarked at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date. It shall be the project manager's responsibility to ensure that all notification procedures are complied with. 
(iv)  In cases of conditional approval or disapproval, the subdivider shall have the right to appeal the commission's disapproval or any condition(s) of approval to the council. The council may uphold, deny or modify commission action. Decisions of the council shall be final. 
(v)  Property owners within the three hundred-foot hearing notification area may appeal an action by the commission. Council members may also file an appeal of commission action. The city manager may also file an appeal of commission action. All appeals must be submitted in accordance with Article VIII of this chapter and must be filed within fifteen (15) calendar days after commission action. 
(vi)  Council members may also file an appeal of commission action. 
(vii)  The city manager may also file an appeal of commission action. 
(viii)  All appeals must be submitted in accordance with Article VIII of this chapter and must be filed within fifteen (15) calendar days after commission action. 
(ix)  Upon approval of a preliminary plat, a notation of approval shall be stamped on three (3) copies of the plat by the project manager. One (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider and two (2) copies shall be retained by the project manager. 
(x)  If a preliminary plat application is disapproved or conditionally approved by the council, the minutes shall state the specific conditions to be satisfied or reasons for such denial. 
(xi)  The preliminary plat application can be refiled at any time if revision can resolve the reasons for the denial as originally proposed. The new filing of a preliminary plat application for the same tract, or any portion thereof, shall follow the procedures and requirements specified in this section. No additional fee will be required if refiling is initiated within thirty (30) calendar days of council action. 
(d)  Significance of preliminary plat approval. Preliminary plat approval by the commission or council constitutes authorization for the subdivider to proceed with preparation of the final plat and engineering improvement plans and specifications. Preliminary approval is subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The conditions under which approval of the preliminary plat is granted will not be changed prior to expiration date unless by application for a revised preliminary plat. Such application shall follow the same procedures as the original approval. 
(2)  Approval is valid for a period of two (2) years from the date of approval, and thereafter, such approval shall be deemed to have expired. 
(3)  Preliminary plat approval may, upon written application to the commission by the subdivider and payment of an application fee as approved by resolution of the city council, be extended for an additional one (1) year if, in the opinion of the commission, there is no change in conditions within or adjoining the preliminary plat which would warrant a revision of the original preliminary plat and the applicant demonstrates to the commission that substantial effort is being applied to create a final plat. 
(4)  Preliminary plat approval shall be automatically extended for an additional one-year period upon submission of a final plat application submitted within six (6) months prior to the normal expiration date. In no case shall preliminary plat approvals exceed a total of four (4) years. 
(5)  If preliminary plat approval expires prior to application for final plat approval, the plat shall be resubmitted for preliminary approval as a new case and the subdivider shall be required to pay a new fee. 
(6)  The preliminary plat shall not be recorded. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88; Ord. No. 2260, § 6, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 31-25. - Final plats. 
(a)  Pre-final plat submittal and review. Prior to application for a final plat, the subdivider shall submit to the project manager six (6) copies of a prefinal plat for review by the project team. The pre-final plat shall conform to the approved preliminary plat and any conditions of that approval imposed by commission or council; and shall contain all information and conform to all requirements for final plat preparation as specified in subsections (b) and (c) hereof. Upon review of the pre-final plat, the project manager shall advise the subdivider of any necessary revisions to be made on the plat prior to final plat application submittal. 
(b)  Final plat submittal: 
(1)  The subdivider or his authorized representative shall submit the following materials to the project manager: 
(i)  A completed final plat application form. 
(ii)  A nonrefundable final plat filing fee to compensate the city for the costs of examining and processing the subdivision plat and subsequent field investigations. The required fee for subdivision plats shall be approved by resolution of the city council. 
(iii)  Four (4) paper copies of the final plat reproduced in the form of blue or black line prints on a white background. 
(iv)  One opaque linen or mylar copy of the final plat for recordation. 
(v)  One reproducible mylar copy of the final plat. 
(vi)  One eight and one-half-inch by eleven-inch reduced transparent positive of the final plat. 
(vii)  One paper copy of the final plat reduced to a scale of one inch equals six hundred (600) feet (1" = 600(). 
(viii)  One copy of the final draft of the deed restrictions (covenants, conditions, and restrictions) to be recorded with the final subdivision plat. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the final plat application, the project manager shall check the plat for conformity to the approved preliminary plat and compliance with the requirements for final plats as set forth in subsection (c) hereof. 
(c)  Final plat requirements: 
(1)  All final subdivision plats shall be designed to comply with the requirements of the specific zoning district within which it is located. Any zoning amendment necessary shall have been approved by the council prior to final council action on the final plat. 
(2)  No parcel shall be divided in such a way that any division of such parcel shall contain more dwelling units than are permitted by the zoning regulations for the district in which such parcel is situated. 
(3)  The project manager shall submit the final plat application together with the staff recommendations to the city council. 
(4)  The final plat shall substantially conform to the approved preliminary plat, and shall be in compliance with all appropriate city standards, codes, specifications, and requirements. 
(5)  Any information required as part of the final plat submittal shall be shown graphically, or by note on plans, or by letter, or by combination thereof, and may comprise several sheets showing various elements of the required data. 
(6)  The final record plat of a subdivision shall be drawn in waterproof ink on linen or other nonshrinking material on a sheet not to exceed twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches in overall dimensions, and shall have a left margin of two (2) inches. All final plats requiring more than one sheet shall have a cover sheet indicating the entire subdivision and the proposed sections to be found on the corresponding individual pages. The final plat shall be drawn to an accurate scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch (1 inch-100 feet). 
(7)  All final plats shall contain the following information: 
(i)  A title which includes the name of the subdivision and its location by number of section, township, range, and county. 
(ii)  Name, address, registration number, and seal of the registered land surveyor preparing the plat. 
(iii)  Name, address, and registration number of the registered civil engineer responsible for the preparation of the engineering improvement drawings that are necessary for the proposed subdivision. 
(iv)  Scale (written and graphic), north arrow, and date of plat preparation. 
(v)  Boundaries of the tract to be subdivided fully balanced and closed showing all bearings and distances and mathematical calculations, determined by an accurate survey in the field. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof. 
(vi)  Any excepted parcel or parcels within the plat boundaries shall be accurately described by bearings and distances determined by an accurate survey in the field. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof. 
(vii)  Location and description of cardinal points of primary interest to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on the plat shall be referenced. Each of two (2) corners of the subdivision traversed shall be tied by course and distance to separate survey monuments approved by the city. 
(viii)  Names, centerlines, right-of-way lines, courses, lengths and widths of all streets, alleys, and easements; radii, points of tangency and central angles of all curvilinear streets and alleys, and radii of all rounded street line intersections. 
(ix)  Location and dimensions of all lots shall be shown. Lot dimensions and appropriate bearings shall be indicated for at least one side lot line and either the front or rear lot line assuming additional dimensions are equal to those shown. In areas subject to flooding, minimum finished first floor elevations shall be shown in conformance with chapter 17 of the City Code. 
(x)  All lots shall utilize a lot numbering system or be numbered consecutively throughout the plat. Tracts for school sites, parks or other public uses shall be so designated, lettered or named, and clearly dimensioned. 
(xi)  The accurate outline of all property which is offered for dedication for public use and of all property that may be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of the property owners in the subdivision. 
(xii)  Name, book, and page number of adjacent recorded subdivisions, with location of existing adjacent lots, easements and rights-of-way shown, or notation "unsubdivided" where appropriate. All proposed conditions shall be graphically differentiated from existing conditions on adjacent properties and on excepted parcels within the plat. 
(xiii)  Provide on the final plat such easements in such locations and widths as required. In addition, the following notation shall be placed upon all final plats: "Except for construction and improvements by governmental entities and certificated public utilities, construction and improvements within easements shall be limited to only the following: 
a.  Wood, wire or removable section-type fencing. 
b.  Construction, structures or buildings expressly approved in writing by all public utilities and the City of Glendale which use or shall use the utility easement." 
(xiv)  Statement and acknowledgement of the dedication of all streets, alleys, tracts, drainageways, utility easements, and other easements for public use by the persons holding title of record, by persons holding title as vendees under land contract, and by spouses of said parties, if jointly owned. If lands dedicated are mortgaged, the mortgagee shall also sign the plat. Dedications shall include a written location by section, township, and range of the tract. The dedication shall include direct wording stating the City of Glendale as the new owner of any tracts or parcels being dedicated. A quit claim deed or a warranty deed must be provided giving the City of Glendale ownership of dedicated tracts or parcels. The project team will have the discretion as to which title document is most appropriate. If the plat contains private streets, provisions shall be made so that the public utilities reserve the right to install and maintain utilities above, on, and below such private streets or ways. (See Appendix E of this chapter for examples of dedications and acknowledgments for plats. [3]) 
(xv)  The following certifications must be included on the final plat: 
a.  Certification by a registered land surveyor preparing the plat that the plat is correct and accurate, and that the monuments described in it have been located as described. 
b.  Certification of plat approval by the city planning director, city engineer (or designated representative), and city council. (See Appendix E of this chapter for examples of certifications and approvals of plats. [4]) 
(xvi)  The following note must be included on the final plat: "NOTE: This subdivision is located within the City of Glendale water service area which has been designated as having an assured water supply under A.R.S. section 45-576." (For subdivisions not located within the City of Glendale water service area, consult with the city engineer for the appropriate statement of assured water supply.) 
(xvii)  The following note must be included on the final plat: "NOTE: All new utilities and all existing utilities, except electrical transmission lines carrying 69 Kv or more, within or contiguous to this site, shall be placed underground." 
(xviii)  The location of appropriate vehicular nonaccess easements shall be included on the plat. 
(xix)  For subdivisions with amended development standards approved as a planned development, a typical maximum building envelope containing minimum building setbacks and maximum lot coverage permitted shall be noted on the plat. Sufficient typical examples must be included to avoid possible misinterpretation of irregular, nonstandard lots. 
(d)  Final plat approval: 
(1)  An application for approval of a final plat shall not be filed unless there is an approved preliminary plat for the proposed subdivision as provided for in Article II, section 31-24 of this chapter. 
(2)  An applicant for final plat approval shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable chapters of the Glendale City Code. 
(3)  An applicant shall submit all of the documents, information, data, and other requirements for final plat approval to the project manager and shall furnish all information and materials needed to satisfy the requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  In addition to the requirements of the preceding paragraphs, the applicant shall provide to the project manager any additional information, documents, or other material relevant to the application that the project team reasonably believes is necessary in order for the council to evaluate, analyze, and understand the subject matter of the application. 
(5)  An application for final plat approval shall not be deemed to have been filed or properly submitted until all of the above listed requirements have been complied with. Compliance shall be determined by the project manager. 
(6)  The procedure for approval, amendment, or disapproval of final plat applications shall be as follows: 
(i)  The city council shall approve or disapprove applications for final plat approval pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(ii)  Upon receipt of a final recommendation on an application for final plat approval from the project team, the project manager shall take necessary action to add the final plat application to the agenda of the next available regular meeting of the council, whereupon the council shall either approve or disapprove the final plat application. 
(iii)  Approval: 
a.  If the council approves the plat, the mayor and city clerk shall transcribe a certificate of council approval upon the plat, first making sure that the other required certifications and dedications have been duly signed and acknowledged. (See Appendix E of this chapter for examples of approvals for plats. [5]) 
b.  After council approval of a final plat and compliance with Article IV of this chapter, the subdivider shall pay to the city the fee charged by the Maricopa County Recorder for the recordation of the plat, and the project manager shall then promptly record the plat with the Maricopa County Recorder, pursuant to A.R.S. section 9-463.01(I). 
(iv)  Amendment: 
a.  If the council finds that the plat requires amendment, the application shall be tabled until the amendments can be satisfactorily accomplished and the application rescheduled for council action. 
b.  There shall be no amendments to the application or plat without the express approval of both the council and the subdivider. 
(v)  Denial: If the council disapproves the plat, the minutes shall state the reasons for such denial. The final plat ap-plication may be refiled at any time if revision can resolve the reasons for the denial as originally proposed. The new filing of a final plat application for the same tract, or any portion thereof, shall be treated as a new project and will follow the procedures and requirements specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix E to Ordinance No. 1561, from which this chapter derives, is not set out herein but is kept on file and available for inspection at the office of the city clerk. 

--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix E to Ordinance No. 1561, from which this chapter derives, is not set out herein but is kept on file and available for inspection at the office of the city clerk. 

--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix E to Ordinance No. 1561, from which this chapter derives, is not set out herein but is kept on file and available for inspection at the office of the city clerk. 

Sec. 31-26. - Citizen participation plan. 
(a)  Every application which requires a public hearing shall include a citizen participation plan which must be implemented prior to the first public hearing. 
(b)  The purpose of the citizen participation plan is to: 
(1)  Ensure that applicants pursue early and effective citizen participation in conjunction with their applications, giving them the opportunity to understand and try to mitigate any real or perceived impacts their application may have on the community; 
(2)  Ensure that the citizens and property owners of Glendale have an adequate opportunity to learn about applications that may affect them and to work with applicants to resolve concerns at an early stage of the process; and 
(3)  Facilitate ongoing communication between the applicant, interested citizens and property owners, city staff, and elected officials throughout the application review process. 
(c)  The citizen participation plan is not intended to produce complete consensus on all applications, but to encourage applicants to be good neighbors and to allow for informed decision making. 
(d)  At a minimum the citizen participation plan shall include the following information: 
(1)  Which residents, property owners, interested parties, political jurisdictions and public agencies may be affected by the application; 
(2)  How those interested in and potentially affected by an application will be notified that an application has been made; 
(3)  How those interested and potentially affected parties will be informed of the substance of the change, amendment, or development proposed by the application; 
(4)  How those affected or otherwise interested will be provided an opportunity to discuss the applicant's proposal with the applicant and express any concerns, issues, or problems they may have with the proposal in advance of the public hearing; 
(5)  The applicant's schedule for completion of the citizen participation plan; 
(6)  How the applicant will keep the planning department informed on the status of their citizen participation efforts. 
(e)  The level of citizen interest and area of involvement will vary depending on the nature of the application and the location of the site. The target area for early notification will be determined by the applicant after consultation with the planning department. At a minimum, the target area shall include the following: 
(1)  Property owners within the public hearing notice area required by other sections of the ordinance codified in this section; 
(2)  The head of any homeowners association or registered neighborhood within the public notice area required by other section of the ordinance codified in this section; 
(3)  Other interested parties who have requested that they be placed on the interested parties notification list maintained by the planning department. 
(f)  These requirements apply in addition to any notice provisions required elsewhere in the ordinance codified in this section. 
(g)  The applicant may submit a citizen participation plan and begin implementation prior to formal application at their discretion. This shall not occur until after the required preapplication meeting and consultation with the planning department staff. 
(Ord. No. 1952, § 8, 7-22-97) 
Sec. 31-27. - Citizen participation report. 
(a)  This section applies only when a citizen participation plan is required by the ordinance codified in this section. 
(b)  The applicant shall provide a written report on the results of their citizen participation effort prior to the notice of public hearing. This report will be attached to the planning department's public hearing report. 
(c)  At a minimum, the citizen participation report shall include the following information: 
(1)  Details of techniques the applicant used to involve the public, including: 
(i)  Dates and locations of all meetings where citizens were invited to discuss the applicant's proposal; 
(ii)  Content, dates mailed and numbers of mailings, including letters, meeting notices, newsletters and other publications; 
(iii)  Where residents, property owners, and interested parties receiving notices, newsletters, or other written materials are located; and 
(iv)  The number of people that participated in the process. 
(2)  A summary of concerns, issues and problems expressed during the process, including: 
(i)  The substance of the concerns, issues, and problems; 
(ii)  How the applicant has addressed or intends to address concerns, issues and problems expressed during the process; and 
(iii)  Concerns, issues and problems the applicant is unwilling or unable to address and why. 
(Ord. No. 1952, § 8, 7-22-97) 
Secs. 31-28-31-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 31-41. - In general. 
(a)  All subdivisions within the city shall be designed in conformance with the city's subdivision design expectations prepared by the community development group and adopted by the city council. (See Appendix F for information. [6]) 
(b)  Except where expressly modified by the council each subdivision and the plat thereof shall be in conformity with the standards set forth or referred to in this article, the Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction of the Maricopa Association of Governments, and the City Design Guidelines for Site Development and Infrastructure Construction. 
(c)  All lots or parcels created by the subdivision of land shall have their own access to a public street improved to standards hereinafter required. Private streets shall not normally be permitted. However, if the council finds that the most logical development of the land requires that lots be created which are served by a private street or other means of access, and makes such findings in writing with the reasons therefor, then such access may be allowed; however, private streets must be improved to city standards to include an easement for utility and public safety access at least equal to the city standard right-of-way for local, residential streets. Where private streets are authorized, the subdivider will be responsible for providing guards or other means of denying access by the general public. A statement shall be included on each final plat with approved private streets that private streets shall be maintained to city standards by an authorized homeowners' association at said association's expense. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix F to Ordinance No. 1561, from which this chapter derives, is not set out herein but is kept on file and available for inspection at the office of the city clerk. 

Sec. 31-42. - Lot design. 
(a)  The size, shape and orientation of lots in the subdivision shall be appropriate to the location of the proposed subdivision and to the type of development contemplated. 
(b)  To properly provide for adequate safety and for the welfare of the public, corner lots for residential use shall be platted wider than interior lots in order to permit conformance with the required street side yard requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  The depth-to-width ratio of the subdivided lot should not be greater than three (3) to one (1). 
(d)  Side lot lines should be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines, and should be straight unless dictated by topography or other physical reasons. Rear lot lines should avoid acute angles with side lot lines and should normally be straight. 
(e)  No remnants of property shall be left in the subdivision which do not conform to lot requirements, unless required and dedicated for a private utility or public purpose. 
(f)  All subdivisions shall result in the creation of lots which are capable of being lawfully built upon. Except for parcels to be maintained as open space, no subdivision shall create lots which are physically unsuitable for improvement due to size or shape, steepness of terrain, location of watercourses, problems of sewerage or driveway grades, or other natural physical conditions. 
(g)  Lots having double frontage shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials, to provide ingress and egress in commercial or industrial subdivisions, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
(h)  Lots adjoining major arterial, arterial, or collector streets shall be platted deeper than interior lots in order to permit conformance to yard and building setback requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, and to provide protection from noise, air pollution and visual impacts of traffic. 
(i)  Wherever practical, all subdivisions created within any single-family residential zone should be designed to facilitate solar access and energy efficiency. 
(j)  Lots shall be graded in such a manner as to preclude excessive grade differences (e.g., two (2) feet) between adjacent lots or between lots and adjacent streets. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Cross reference- Lots, App. A, §§ 65-69. 
Sec. 31-43. - Street design. 
(a)  The minimum required street right-of-way widths for all streets shall be as required by the current City of Glendale Design Guidelines for Site Development and Infrastructure Construction. 
(b)  Cul-de-sacs shall be not longer than four hundred (400) feet and should terminate in a forty-five-foot back-of-curb radius turnaround at the closed end. The project team may approve an equally convenient form of turnaround where exceptional conditions or unusual topographic conditions exist. 
(c)  Temporary dead-end streets may be approved by the project team where necessary to give access to or permit a satisfactory subdivision of adjoining land. Streets shall extend to the boundary of the property and the resulting dead-end street may be approved with a temporary turnaround having a minimum pavement radius of forty-five (45) feet measured to the edge of pavement. 
(d)  Street jogs shall have a minimum centerline offset of one hundred fifty (150) feet for local streets, four hundred (400) feet for collector streets, and five hundred (500) feet on arterials. 
(e)  Street intersections should be carefully designed to eliminate dangerous traffic movements. The angle of the intersection shall not vary from ninety (90) degrees by more than fifteen (15) degrees. 
(f)  Street grades, curves, and sight distances shall be subject to approval by the city to ensure proper drainage and safety for vehicles and pedestrians. Designs shall be in accordance with the city Design Guidelines for Site Development and Infrastructure Construction unless specific changes are approved, in writing, by the city engineer. 
(g)  Standard utility locations shall be as required by current City of Glendale standards and specifications. 
(h)  Local streets shall be designed to minimize through traffic by creating discontinuities, offsetting street intersections, and using curvilinear alignments. 
(i)  Names of streets shall be consistent with the natural alignments and extensions of existing streets and the (MAG) Address and Street Assignment Policy. New street names shall not duplicate in whole or in part, or be confusing with existing names. 
(j)  Streets intersecting an arterial or major arterial street shall do so at a ninety-degree angle. 
(k)  Local street patterns shall be designed in a manner to minimize four-way local street intersections. 
(l)  Local circulation systems and land development patterns shall be designed so that there will be no detraction from the efficiency of bordering arterial routes. 
(m)  Proposed streets, as designated by the city, shall be extended to the tract boundary to provide future connection with adjoining unplatted lands. 
(n)  Half streets shall be avoided except where essential to development of the subdivision and where the dedication of the other half is impractical. 
(o)  The functional classification of streets shall be assigned by the city and are included in the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) Cross references-Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 30; street and alley right-of-way widths and setbacks, App. A, §§ 70, 71. 
Sec. 31-44. - Alley and easement design. 
(a)  Easements shall be provided and dedicated where deemed necessary for specific purposes for use by the general public, corporations, or the City of Glendale. 
(b)  An easement prohibiting vehicular access from the major arterial or arterial street side of a double frontage lot is required. The minimum width for this easement is one (1) foot. 
(c)  The subdivider shall dedicate a right-of-way or easement for storm drainage conforming substantially with the line of any watercourse that traverses the land, or, at the option of the city, the subdivider shall provide by dedication further and sufficient easements or construction, or both, to dispose of such surface and storm water in accordance with Chapters 17 (Floodplain Management) and 18.5 (Grading and Drainage Regulations) of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Sec. 31-45. - Block design. 
(a)  Blocks shall normally have sufficient width for an ultimate layout of two (2) tiers of lots of the size required by the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Blocks shall not normally be less than three hundred (300) feet in length (measured from the property lines), except where it is necessary due to unusual conditions of the property being subdivided and not merely convenience. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Secs. 31-46-31-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - MINIMUM REQUIRED SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 31-71. - In general. 
    It shall be the responsibility and the duty of the subdivider to improve or agree to improve all streets, pedestrian ways, alleys and easements in the subdivision and adjacent thereto required to serve the subdivision and all other subdivision improvements as specified in section 31-72 hereof. No permanent improvement work shall be commenced until improvement plans and profiles have been approved by the project team. Improvements shall be installed to the permanent line and grade and to the satisfaction of the engineering department, and in accordance with the City of Glendale Design Guidelines for Site Development and Infrastructure Construction. Cost of all inspections shall be paid by the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Sec. 31-72. - Minimum improvements required. 
    [The following minimum improvements shall be required for all subdivisions:] 
(a)  Grading, curbs and gutters, paving, drainage, and drainage structures necessary for the proper use and drainage of streets, alleys, and pedestrian ways, for the public safety. 
(b)  Site grading and drainage, taking into consideration the drainage pattern of adjacent improved and unimproved property and treating upstream areas, where appropriate, as though fully improved. 
(c)  All streets, alleys, and pedestrian ways shall be constructed to widths and grades shown on the improvement plans and profiles. The subdivider shall improve the extension of all subdivision streets and pedestrian ways to any intercepting or intersecting streets. Access to subdivisions shall be provided by paved streets improved to city standards. 
(d)  Sidewalks shall be installed as shown on the improvement plans and profiles in accordance with city policy. 
(e)  Sanitary sewer facilities connecting with the existing city sewer system shall be installed to serve the subdivision with a separate private lateral for each lot and to grades and sizes shown on the plans. 
(f)  Stormwater drains and retention facilities shall be installed as shown on the plans. 
(g)  All irrigation facilities to remain within the boundaries of the subdivisions or in an abutting one-half street or alley right-of-way shall be tiled in accordance with the standards of the owning agency and/or relocated as may be directed by the city and owning agency requirements. 
(h)  Water mains and fire hydrants connecting to the water system shall be installed per city standards and as per approved plans. Mains and individual lot services shall be of sufficient size to furnish adequate water supply for each lot or parcel in the subdivision and to provide adequate fire protection. 
(i)  Parking bays where required or permitted. 
(j)  Street name signs and other traffic control devices shall be installed by the city at subdivider's expense. 
(k)  Landscaping and irrigation systems shall be installed in accordance with the City Landscape Ordinance [Chapter 19 of the Code] and approved by the city landscape architect. 
(l)  Permanent monuments, barricades and traffic safety devices shall be placed as required by the engineering department. 
(m)  Street lighting facilities shall be provided in accordance with Appendix A, Zoning, and Chapter 26.5 of the Glendale City Code. 
(n)  All existing and proposed telephone, electric power, cable television, or other wires or cables either within the development or with public rights-of-way immediately adjacent to the development shall be placed underground. Equipment appurtenant to the underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal cabinets and concealed ducts may be aboveground provided acceptable visual screening is provided. The developer shall make necessary arrangements with the parent utility companies for both the installation of new underground facilities and conversion of existing overhead facilities to underground facilities. Application for waiver of the underground utility conversion requirements may only be made for electrical facilities with line voltage of sixty-nine thousand (69,000) volts or higher, and only at the time of the subdivision plat approval process. Each such application for waiver shall be considered individually and acted upon by the city council in conjunction with the subdivision approval process. 
(o)  Provisions shall be made for any railroad crossings necessary to provide access to or circulation within the proposed subdivision, including grade crossing protections as may be required by the Arizona Corporation Commission. 
(p)  A wall with decorative blocks and irregular alignment, or other screening materials, to be approved by the project team, shall be required adjacent to arterial and major arterial streets. 
(q)  Streets, sewer and water utilities, and all other improvements shall comply with the City of Glendale Design Guidelines for Site Development and Infrastructure Construction. 
(r)  All underground installations shall be constructed prior to surfacing the street. Service stubs to platted lots within the subdivision for underground utilities shall be placed to such length as not to necessitate disturbance of street improvements when service connections are made. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) Cross references-Building regulations, Ch. 9; cable television, Ch. 10; floodplain management, Ch. 17; grading and drainage regulations, Ch. 18.5; landscaping, Ch. 19; mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, Ch. 23; outdoor light controls, Ch. 26.5; planning and development, Ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 30; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 33; zoning, App. A. 
Secs. 31-73-31-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENGINEERING PLANS 

Sec. 31-81. - Engineering plans required. 
(a)  The subdivider shall be responsible for the preparation of complete engineering plans, prepared by an Arizona registered civil engineer, satisfactory to the project team for construction of required improvements. The plans shall be based on the approved preliminary plat and be prepared in conjunction with the final plat. 
(b)  The final plat shall not be presented to council until all engineering plans for water, public sanitary sewer facilities, grading, street construction, street lighting, landscaping, and all other required improvements have been approved by the project team. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) Cross references-Grading and drainage regulations, Ch. 18.5; landscaping, Ch. 19; outdoor light control, Ch. 26.5; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 30; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 33; street and alley right-of-way widths and setbacks, App. A, §§ 70, 71. 
Secs. 31-82-31-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ASSURANCE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 31-91. - In general. 
(a)  The building safety director shall deny final approval of any building permit or clearance for occupation (certificate of occupancy) of any building until all the required improvements set forth in this chapter are completed and the work inspected and accepted by the city engineer for all required improvements, unless a cash or surety bond is posted with the city as provided in section 31-92 of the chapter. 
(b)  Where improvements include work in the rights-of-way for major arterial or arterial streets, work shall be assured as provided in section 31-92 herein in an amount equal to the cost of such improvements as estimated by the subdivider's engineer and approved by the project team. Such assurance must be provided by the subdivider and approved by the project team prior to scheduling the final plat for council approval. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88; Ord. No. 1597, § 2, 4-11-89) 
Sec. 31-92. - Acceptable methods of assurance. 
    The following methods may satisfy the guaranty requirements of section 31-91: 
(a)  Post performance bonds from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the State of Arizona. The bonds shall be payable to the City of Glendale and shall be in an amount at least equal to the cost, as estimated by the subdivider's engineer and approved by the project team, of the construction, installation and dedication of the uncompleted portion of the required improvements. 
(b)  Establish a cash escrow account with the city or a bank or similar financial institution acceptable to the city. The amount of the cash escrow account shall be at least equal to the cost, as estimated by the subdivider's engineer and approved by the project team, of the construction, installation and dedication of the uncompleted portion of the required improvements. The written agreement between the subdivider and the city or the escrow agent creating the escrow account shall provide: 
(1)  That the principal and accumulated interest shall be held in trust by the city or the escrow agent until released in whole or part by the city and may not be used or pledged by the subdivider for any purpose during the period the escrow account is in effect. 
(2)  That in case of a failure on the part of the subdivider to complete the required improvements within the specified time period, and upon notice by the city to the subdivider, the escrow funds shall immediately, without further action, be made available to the city for use in completion of those improvements. 
(c)  Provide a letter of credit from a bank or other financial institution or person maintaining an office in Maricopa County which is acceptable to the city. The letter of credit shall provide the following: 
(1)  That the creditor guarantees in an amount equal to the cost, as estimated by the subdivider's engineer and ap-proved by the project team of the construction, installation and dedication of the required improvements. 
(2)  That in case of failure on the part of a subdivider to complete the required improvements within the specified time period, and upon notice by the city to the subdivider, the creditor shall, without further action, immediately pay to the city such funds as are necessary to complete the required improvements, up to the limit of credit stated in the letter. 
(3)  That the letter of credit may not be withdrawn or reduced in amount, until released by the city. 
(d)  Execute a written agreement between an approved lending institution and the subdivider, stating that funds sufficient to cover the cost of the required improvements, as estimated by the subdivider's engineer and approved by the project team, have been committed to be loaned by the lending institution to the subdivider. The agreement shall provide that such funds in the stated amount are specifically allocated and will be used by the subdivider, or on his behalf, only for the purpose of completing the required improvements. The city shall be the beneficiary of such agreement, or the subdivider's rights thereunder shall be assigned to the city. The city engineer shall approve each disbursement of any such funds. The agreement may also contain terms, conditions and provisions normally included by lending institutions in loan commitments for construction funds, or as may be necessary to comply with statutes and regulations applicable to such lending institutions. 
(e)  Provide such other assurances or security as the community development group may recommend and the mayor and council may approve as appropriate and necessary to secure completion of the required improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Sec. 31-93. - Deferral of waiver of improvements. 
(a)  Upon the recommendation of the project team the mayor and council may waive, prior to final plat approval, the completion of any improvements which in their judgment are not required in the interests of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  Whenever it is deemed necessary by the city council to defer, for a period exceeding two (2) years, the construction of any required improvements because of incompatible grades, future planning, inadequate or lack of connecting facilities, or for other reasons, the subdivider shall pay his share of the costs of the future improvements to the city to an account specified by the city engineer prior to final plat approval. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88; Ord. No. 1597, § 2, 4-11-89) 
Sec. 31-94. - Assurance requirements. 
    The alternative assurances described in section 31-92, above, are subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  Such assurances shall be satisfactory to the city attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution. 
(b)  The period within which the required improvements must be completed shall be incorporated in the documents creating the assurance, and shall not in any event exceed two (2) years from the date of final plat approval. The project team may, upon proof of difficulty, recommend to the mayor and council extension of the completion date described in the assurances. 
(c)  The mayor and council may, at any time during the period of the assurance, accept a substitution of principal or sureties. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Sec. 31-95. - Inspection and acceptance of improvements. 
    The city engineer shall provide for inspection of required improvements during construction to ensure their satisfactory completion. If the city engineer finds upon inspection that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the city's construction standards and specifications, the subdivider shall be responsible for completing or replacing such improvements as to the specifications of the city. The city will not accept dedication of the required improvements nor release any assurance until the city engineer has issued a statement of completion and acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Sec. 31-96. - Reduction of assurances. 
    The amount of an assurance may be reduced upon actual dedication of improvements, and then only to the ratio that the improvement dedicated bears to the total improvements indicated on the plat. Where a subdivider completes and offers to dedicate the required improvements for a portion of the final plat, assurances for such improvements may only be reduced where the improvements can be used and maintained independently of improvements required for the entire plat. For example, temporary cul-de-sacs may be required for incomplete streets; water and sewer facilities should be capable of independent operation; and adequate access for public safety vehicles should be provided. In no event shall assurances described in subsections 31-92(a) and 31-92(c) be reduced below twenty-five (25) percent of the principal amount of each assurance. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Sec. 31-97. - Assurance of construction of subdivision improvements and the performance bond. 
    Forms for assurance for construction of subdivision improvements and the performance bond must be approved by the city attorney prior to their use. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88; Ord. No. 1597, § 2, 4-11-89) 
Secs. 31-98-31-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MINOR LAND DIVISIONS 

Sec. 31-111. - In general. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, a minor land division shall constitute the following acts, and shall be subject to the provisions of this article: 
(1)  "Land splits" as defined in article I, section 31-4 of this chapter. 
(2)  The division of improved or unimproved land or lands for the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or future, into two (2) or three (3) lots, tracts, or parcels of land, and when a new street is not involved. 
(3)  The division of improved or unimproved land or lands for the purpose of financing, sale, or lease, whether immediate or future, into more than two (2) parts, and when the boundaries of such property have been fixed by a recorded plat. 
(b)  The preparation, submittal, review, and approval of all minor land divisions located within the city shall proceed through the following progressive stages, except when otherwise provided herein: 
(1)  Pre-application conference with an appointed City of Glendale Community Development Group project manager. 
(2)  Submittal of the minor land division application and map by the subdivider and review through a project team. 
(3)  Approval of the application by the community development group. 
(4)  Recordation of the approved minor land division. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Sec. 31-112. - Pre-application conference. 
    The pre-application conference stage of minor land division review is an investigatory period preceding the preparation and submittal of the minor land division application by the subdivider. The subdivider shall initially present his proposal to the project manager who shall advise the subdivider of specific public objectives, standards, and regulations related to the property and the procedure for minor land division review. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Sec. 31-113. - Minor land division design standards and requirements. 
    Except where expressly modified or permitted by the project team, all minor land divisions shall be in general conformity with the lot, street, block, alley, and easement design standards and requirements specified for subdivisions in Article III of this chapter. All lots created by a minor land division shall conform to existing zoning and the city General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Sec. 31-114. - Minimum required minor land division improvements. 
(a)  Except where otherwise provided in this section, it shall be the responsibility and duty of the subdivider to improve or agree to improve all streets, pedestrian ways, alleys, and easements in the minor land division and adjacent thereto required to service the minor land division, and such other improvements as specified for subdivisions in article IV of this chapter. No permanent improvement work shall be commenced until improvement plans and profiles have been approved by the project team. Improvements shall be installed to the permanent line and grade to the satisfaction of the city engineer and in accordance with the city Design Guidelines for Site Development and Infrastructure Construction. 
(b)  Minor land division improvements shall not be required as a condition of approval for minor land divisions in the following situations: 
(1)  When the division is to allow construction of a single-family dwelling and the project determines that less than fifty (50) percent of the half-street right-of-way for the side of the block on which the property is located would be improved as a result of such condition; or 
(2)  In any case when the project team determines that the improvement of the abutting all street or the installation of the other normally required improvements would be impractical because of considerations such as, but not limited to: type and extent of existing street improvements; inability to establish a proper street grade or alignment; physical barriers such as excessive grade of terrain or washes, ditches, canals, buildings or other structures; or other special circumstances where, in the opinion of the project team, the immediate installation of the improvements is not deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, and that the waiver of the improvement requirements would not impair the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(3)  The project team may require as a condition for the waiver of the required minor land division improvements, the execution of an acceptable form of assurance to the City of Glendale attesting that the owner(s), their heirs, successors, or assigns agree that they will participate in the cost of the improvements abutting their property at a later date whenever it is deemed necessary by the city based upon future development in the immediate area. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Sec. 31-115. - Minor land division applications. 
(a)  Application submittal: 
(1)  The subdivider shall submit the following materials to the project manager for review: 
(i)  Three (3) copies of the minor land division map reproduced in the form of blue or black line prints on a white background. 
(ii)  A completed minor land division application form. 
(iii)  A nonrefundable minor land division application filing fee to compensate the city for the costs of examining and processing the minor land division application and subsequent field inspections. The required fee for minor land division applications shall be in the amount established by resolution of the city council or pursuant to Glendale City Code section 2-3. 
(2)  All submittals shall be checked by the project manager for completeness. If incomplete as to the requirements set forth in this article, the submittal may be rejected and returned to the applicant for revision and resubmittal. 
(b)  Application requirements: 
(1)  All minor land divisions shall be designed to comply with the requirements of the specific zoning district within which it is located. 
(2)  No lot or parcel shall be divided in such a way that any division of such lot or parcel shall contain more dwelling units than are permitted by the zoning regulations for which district such lot is situated. 
(3)  Any information required as part of the minor land division submittal shall be shown graphically, or by note on plans, or by letter, or by combination thereof, and may comprise several sheets showing various elements of the required data. 
(4)  All minor land division maps shall contain the following information: 
(i)  Notation of the map as "A minor land division map for (subdividers name)." 
(ii)  Location by quarter-section, section, township, and range. 
(iii)  Legal description of the property involved. 
(iv)  Name, address, and phone number of subdivider. 
(v)  Scale, north point, and dates of preparation and revisions. 
(vi)  Existing street dedications, utility easements, and lot lines of all adjacent properties must be indicated by subdivision name and Maricopa County Recorder's Office Book and Page number; unsubdivided land must be identified as such. 
(vii)  Name, address, registration number, and seal of the registered land surveyor preparing the map. 
(viii)  Boundaries of the tract to be divided fully balanced and closed showing all bearings and distances determined by an accurate survey in the field. All dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals thereof. 
(ix)  Location and description of cardinal points of primary interest to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on the map shall be referenced. One corner of the minor land division map shall be tied by course and distance to a survey monument approved by the city engineer. 
(x)  All existing and proposed drainage structures and natural drainage features, if required by the project manager. 
(xi)  All existing irrigation structures on the property to be divided. 
(xii)  Location and dimensions of all lots within the minor land division map. All sides of the proposed lots shall be identified by bearings and distances. 
(xiii)  All lots shall be identified by number or letter. 
(xiv)  Proposed street dedications and public utility easements shall be identified by course, length, and width. 
(xv)  The following certifications must be included on the minor land division map: 
a.  Certification by a registered land surveyor preparing the map that the map is correct and accurate, and that the monuments described in it have been located as described. 
b.  Certification of map approval by the land development engineer, community development group. 
(c)  Application approval: 
(1)  The subdivider shall submit all of the documents, information, data, and other requirements for minor land division application approval to the project manager and shall furnish any additional information and materials relevant to the application that the project team reasonably believes is necessary in order to understand the subject matter of the application and to ensure compliance with the requirements of this article. Compliance shall be determined by the project team. 
(2)  The procedures for approval, modification, or disapproval of minor land division applications shall be as follows: 
(i)  The project team shall approve or disapprove applications for minor land divisions pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(ii)  Approval: 
a.  If the project team approves the minor land division application, the land development engineer shall transcribe a certificate of approval upon the map, first making sure that: (1) all conditions of approval have been complied with; (2) the other required certifications have been duly signed; and (3) that any instruments for required street right-of-way dedications have been prepared, executed, and duly recorded. 
b.  After project team approval of the minor land division, certification of approval by the land development engineer and compliance with sections 31-116 and 31-117 hereof, the applicant shall pay to the city the fee charged by the Maricopa County Recorder for the recordation of the map, and the city shall then promptly record the map with the Maricopa County Recorder. 
(iii)  Modification: If the project team finds that the minor land division application requires further modification, the application shall be returned to the subdivider for necessary modification. Such modification(s) must be completed within thirty (30) days of the return to the subdivider or will require a new submittal. 
(iv)  Denial: 
a.  If the project team disapproves of the minor land division application, the subdivider will be furnished a letter stating the reasons for the denial. The application may be refiled if suitable revisions can be made to resolve the conflicts noted by the project team as originally proposed without additional fee if refiled within thirty (30) calendar days of project team action. 
b.  An applicant may appeal a final action by the project team to the city council pursuant to article VIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88; Ord. No. 2260, § 6, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 31-116. - Engineering plans for minor land divisions. 
(a)  If improvements are required for minor land divisions pursuant to section 31-114 herein, the applicant shall be responsible for the preparation of a complete set of engineering plans, prepared by an Arizona registered civil engineer, satisfactory to the project team for the construction of the required improvements. The plans shall be prepared in conjunction with the minor land division map. 
(b)  The minor land division map shall not be recorded until all engineering plans for the recorded improvements have been approved by the project team. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Sec. 31-117. - Assurance for the construction of minor land division improvements. 
    If improvements are required for the minor land division pursuant to section 31-114 herein, no building permit for any lot created will be issued until such improvements are completed and the work accepted by the city engineer. Required improvements may be waived by the project manager if the subdivider provides improvement assurance as outlined in section 31-92 or if all such required improvements have been completed and paid for, as determined by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88; Ord. No. 1597, § 3, 4-11-89) 
Secs. 31-118-31-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 31-131. - Modifications to requirements of chapter. 
(a)  Where, in the opinion of the council, there exists extraordinary conditions of topography, land ownership, or adjacent development, or other circumstances not provided for in these regulations, the council may modify the provisions of this chapter in such manner and to such extent as it may deem appropriate to the public interest. The burden of proof for council determination of a modification rests with the subdivider. 
(b)  In modifying the standards or requirements of these provisions, as outlined above, the council may make such additional requirements as appear necessary, in its judgment, to secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Secs. 31-132-31-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 31-141. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor to record or attempt to record a subdivision plat or minor land division map with the Maricopa County Recorder if such plat or map includes any land within the City of Glendale and such plat or map has not been given approval by the Glendale City Council or community development group or the necessary certifications and signatures of approval have not been obtained as provided for by this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor to attempt to achieve a minor land division or to achieve a minor land division or to attempt to establish a subdivision or to establish a subdivision of any land within the City of Glendale without first having obtained the approval of the Glendale City Council or community development group as provided for by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88) 
Secs. 31-142-31-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - APPEALS 

Sec. 31-151. - Appeal procedure. 
    The following procedure of appeal shall be utilized by all parties authorized to appeal, pursuant to article II, section 31-24(c)(7), (iv) through (viii) of this chapter, decisions reached by an officer, department, board, or commission of the city, except the council, concerning the subdivision and division of land within the City of Glendale. An appeal may be made by such person by filing within fifteen (15) days of said decision, with the community development group, a notice of appeal, on a form provided by the community development group, specifying the grounds for the appeal. An appeal filing fee in the amount established by council resolution or pursuant to Glendale City Code section 2-3 will be required at time of filing except for appeals filed by a council member or the city manager. Such notice of appeal and all papers constituting the record in the action shall be transmitted forthwith through the city clerk to the city council. The city council shall act upon the appeal within sixty (60) calendar days of the date upon which the appeal was filed. Appeals shall be considered by the city council at a public hearing with formal notification as outlined in article II, section 31-24(c)(7)(iii) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-13-88; Ord. No. 2260, § 6, 6-11-02) 
Chapter 32 - SWIMMING POOLS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9; water, sewers, and sewage disposal, Ch. 33. 

Sec. 32-1. - Approval of plans. 
    All plans submitted to the city for swimming pools to be constructed shall show compliance with this chapter and final inspection and approval of all pools hereafter constructed shall be withheld until all requirements of this chapter shall have been complied with. 
(Code 1963, § 27-5) 
Sec. 32-2. - Statement of policy. 
    It is found, determined and declared that the maintenance of private swimming pools, spas, hot tubs or other outside contained bodies of water without appropriate precautionary measures constitutes a severe hazard to the safety of the inhabitants of the city, particularly children. 
(Code 1963, § 27-1; Ord. No. 2046, § 1, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 32-3. - Barriers and enclosures. 
(a)  Required. No person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or person licensed to use the property, upon which is situated a swimming pool or other outside contained body of water designed or used for swimming, dipping or immersion purposes, with a minimum depth of eighteen (18) inches, shall fail to maintain on the lot or premises upon which such pool or body of water is located a barrier meeting the requirements set forth in this section 32-3. 
(b)  Minimum Requirements. Except as otherwise provided, all swimming pools or other contained bodies of water shall meet all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Be entirely enclosed by at least a five (5) foot wall, fence or other barrier as measured on the exterior side of the wall, fence or barrier. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. 
(2)  Have no openings in the wall, fence or barrier through which a spherical object four (4) inches in diameter can pass. The horizontal components of any wall, fence or barrier shall be spaced not less than forty-five (45) inches apart measured vertically or shall be placed on the pool side of a wall, fence or barrier which shall not have any opening greater than one and three-quarter (13/4) inches measured horizontally. Wire mesh or chain link fences shall have a maximum mesh size of one and three-quarters (13/4) inches measured horizontally. 
(3)  Gates for the barrier or enclosure shall: 
a.  Be self-closing and self-latching with the latch located at least fifty-four (54) inches above the underlying ground or on the pool side of the gate with a release mechanism at least five (5) inches below the top of the gate and no opening greater than one-half (1/2) inch within twenty-four (24) inches of the release mechanism. 
b.  Open outward from the pool. 
(4)  The wall, fence or barrier shall not contain openings, handholds or footholds accessible from the exterior side of the barrier that can be used to climb the wall, fence or barrier. 
(5)  The wall, fence or barrier shall be at least twenty (20) inches from the water's edge. 
(c)  Maintenance. Barriers and enclosures required by this section shall be maintained in proper operating order by the owner or occupant. 
(d)  Openings larger than forty-eight (48) inches. Gates or doors opening through the enclosure required by paragraph (b) above which are greater than forty-eight (48) inches in width may be secured by a padlock or similar device which requires a key, electric opener or integral combination in lieu of being equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device as set forth in paragraph (b) above. 
(e)  Exemptions. This section does not apply to: 
(1)  A system of sumps, irrigation canals, irrigation, flood control or drainage works constructed or operated for the purpose of storing, delivering, distributing or conveying water. 
(2)  Stock ponds, storage tanks, livestock operations, livestock watering troughs or other structures used in normal agricultural practices. 
(3)  Public or semi-public swimming pools. 
(4)  Lakes or decorative ponds. 
(f)  Notice. A person shall, on entering into an agreement to build a swimming pool, spa, hot tub or other contained body of water or to sell a dwelling with a swimming pool or contained body of water, give the buyer a notice explaining safety education and responsibilities of pool ownership as approved by the department of health services and a copy of this chapter 32 of the code of the City of Glendale. 
(g)  Violations. A violation of any provision of this section 32-3 shall be deemed a class 1 misdemeanor offense. 
(Code 1963, §§ 27-2, 27-3; Ord. No. 1683, § 2, 4-23-91; Ord. No. 2046, § 2, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 32-4. - Secondary protection. 
(a)  Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to swimming pools, spas, hot tubs or other contained bodies of water (above or below ground) when a residence or living area, in which a child younger than six (6) years of age will, or does, reside, constitutes part of the barrier or enclosure required by section 32-3 and: 
(1)  Such swimming pool, spa, hot tub or other contained body of water is constructed or installed after the effective date of this provision at a single family residence; or 
(2)  An existing swimming pool or other body of water lawfully constructed prior to the effective date of this section, but which does not conform to these regulations, shall become subject to these regulations as a result of any alteration, addition, or expansion of a dwelling unit or guest room having access to such pool, that increases the livable floor area; or 
(3)  The existing single family residence is sold. 
(b)  Requirements. When an event described in paragraph (a) above occurs, one (1) of the following methods of secondary protection shall be provided: 
(1)  Between the swimming pool or other contained body of water and the residence or living area, a minimum five (5) foot wall, fence or barrier to the pool area which meets all of the requirements of section 32-3(b), subparagraphs (2) through (5); or 
(2)  The pool shall be protected by a motorized safety pool cover which requires the operation of a key switch which meets the American Society of Testing and Materials Emergency Standards 13-8-9 and which does not require manual operation other than the use of the key switch; or 
(3)  All ground level doors or other doors with direct access to the area containing a swimming pool or other contained body of water shall be equipped with either: (A) a self-closing and self-latching device with the latch located at least fifty-four (54) inches above the finished floor; or, (B) an alarm placed not less than fifty-four (54) inches above the finished floor and which activates automatically whenever the door is opened. 
If provided, the alarm shall sound continuously for a minimum of thirty (30) seconds beginning within the first seven (7) seconds after the door and its screen, if present, are opened and be capable of providing a sound pressure level of not less than eighty-five (85) dBA when measured at ten (10) feet in any direction. The sound of the alarm shall be distinctive from other household sounds such as smoke detectors, telephones, and door bells. The alarm system may be equipped with a manual means to temporarily deactivate the alarm for a single opening. Such deactivation shall last no longer that fifteen (15) seconds. An off switch is not acceptable. The deactivation switch shall be located at least fifty-four (54) inches above the floor. 
Emergency escape or rescue windows from sleeping rooms with access to the swimming pool or other contained body of water shall be equipped with a latching device not less than fifty-four (54) inches above the floor. All other openable dwelling unit or guest room windows with similar access shall be equipped with a screwed in place wire mesh screen or a latching device located not less than fifty-four (54) inches above the floor; or 
(4)  An alarm maintained in or on the swimming pool or other body of water. The alarm shall be installed so as to activate automatically whenever a person enters the swimming pool or body of water and remain activated until manually turned off. The alarm shall sound continuously within the first seven (7) seconds after a person enters the swimming pool or body of water and be capable of providing a sound pressure level of not less than eighty-five (85) dBA when measured at ten (10) feet in any direction. The sound of the alarm shall be distinctive from other household sounds such as smoke detectors, telephones, and doorbells; or 
(5)  The swimming pool shall be an above-ground swimming pool which has non-climbable exterior sides which are a minimum height of four (4) feet. Any access ladder or steps shall be removable without tools and secured in an inaccessible position with a latching device not less than fifty-four (54) inches above the ground when the pool is not in use; or 
(6)  Latching or locking hard safety cover which may be latched or locked shall be deemed to meet all barrier requirements of this section for any spa or hot tub which is not more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) in width, length or diameter; or 
(7)  Alternative protection not specified herein and providing protection meeting the intent of these requirements is allowed when approved by the building official. 
(c)  Compliance. 
(1)  All plans submitted to the city for swimming pools to be constructed or installed after the effective date of this section shall specify the manner in which compliance with this section shall be accomplished. Submission of the plans shall constitute verification by the builder and owner of compliance with this section and the manner of compliance. 
(2)  If an existing single family residence containing a swimming pool or other body of water is sold after the effective date of this section and secondary protection is required by this section, the buyer shall comply with the provisions of this section no later than thirty (30) days after the date the buyer first takes occupancy of the residence. 
(d)  Maintenance. Secondary protection required by this section shall be maintained in proper operating order by the owner or occupant. 
(e)  Exemptions. This section does not apply to: 
(1)  A system of sumps, irrigation canals, irrigation, flood control or drainage works constructed or operated for the purpose of storing, delivering, distributing or conveying water. 
(2)  Stock ponds, storage tanks, livestock operations, livestock watering troughs or other structures used in normal agricultural practices. 
(3)  Public or semi-public swimming pools. 
(4)  Lakes or decorative ponds. 
(f)  Complaints. All complaints regarding a violation of this section shall be investigated by the fire department. 
(g)  Violations. A violation of any provision of this section 32-4 shall be deemed a class 1 misdemeanor offense. 
(Ord. No. 2046, § 3, 12-8-98) 
Sec. 32-5. - Lighting. 
    Any lights used to illuminate any swimming pool shall be so arranged and shaded as to reflect light away from any adjoining or neighboring premises. 
(Code 1963, § 27-4) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2046, § 3, adopted December 8, 1998 added Section 32-4. Due to an existing Section 32-4, by authority of the city attorney, the previous Section 32-4 has been editorially renumbered as Section 32-5. 
Chapter 32.5 - UTILITY UNDERGROUNDING REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Establishment of municipality owned and operated utilities, Art. XII, § 2. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9; cable television, Ch. 10; utility standards, floodplain areas, § 17-45; garbage and trash, Ch. 18; grading and drainage regulations, Ch. 18.5; landscaping, Ch. 19; outdoor light controls, Ch. 26.5; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 30; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 33. 

Sec. 32.5-1. - Short Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Utility Undergrounding Ordinance of the City of Glendale." (Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 32.5-2. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the undergrounding of new and selected existing utilities to improve the visual character of the community in accordance with the City of Glendale General Plan. 
(b)  The undergrounding requirements of this chapter shall not be applied in a manner inconsistent with any franchise or license agreement between the city and any utility company. 
(Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 32.5-3. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section; and any word, term or phrase not specifically defined in this section shall be defined by reference to state law, city ordinance, or other persuasive authority: 
    Developer/redeveloper: Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, syndication, trust, governmental agency, school district, or other legal entity that is responsible for the development or redevelopment of land. 
    Development/redevelopment: Any project which is included in the criteria for development plan review as discussed in Article XXIX.I, section 102.2, of Appendix A of the Code, as follows: 
(a)  Any new development or construction or change of use; 
(b)  Any expansion of an existing site or building; 
(c)  Any remodeling of an existing use that alters at least twenty percent (20%) of the floor area or site area; or 
(d)  Any remodeling or improvement valued at fifty percent (50%) or more of the value of existing improvements on the site. 
    Existing utility poles and lines: Utility poles and lines that are in place and in operation within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter. 
    New utility poles and lines: Utility poles and lines that are not in place and in operation within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter. 
    Normal maintenance and repair: Those routine or emergency operations conducted by a utility company to repair and/or replace damaged or inadequate conductors or supporting poles. Operations which result in an increase in the number of conductors or number of poles shall not be construed as normal maintenance but shall be categorized as a system upgrade which will require undergrounding. Maintenance and repair will include the practice of "overlashing" a new conductor on an existing, inoperative conductor. 
    Offsite: All easements within and rights-of-way within and adjacent to the development. Adjacent rights-of-way will include property extending from the developer's property lines to the centerline of the adjacent rights-of-way. 
    On-site: The individual lots, parcels, tracts, or structures of the development. 
    Power line extensions: Those primary distribution lines that are to be extended through either a developed or undeveloped area. 
    Primary distribution line: An electric line used for electrical distribution of electrical feeder, single-phase or three-phase, having a voltage rating of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) volts or less. 
    Secondary and service lines: Those utility lines that provide electrical and communications service. 
    System upgrade: Any modification of an overhead utility system that results in an increase in the number of conductors or the number of supporting poles. The addition of a service line to an existing residence or other structure currently being served by an overhead system shall not be construed as a system upgrade. 
    Transmission line: An electric line used for the bulk transmission of electricity between generating or receiving plants and major subdivisions or delivery points, having a voltage rating greater than twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) volts. 
    Underground (undergrounding): The placement of utility lines below ground, with the removal of above-ground poles, wires and structures as applicable. 
    Utility company: The companies, corporations and municipalities who undertake distribution and transmission of electricity, telephone, data, telegraph, radio, television, or telecommunications. 
    Utility poles and line: The poles, structures, wire, aerial cables and related facilities used in the distribution and transmission of electricity, telephone, data, telegraph, radio, television, or telecommunications. 
(Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 32.5-4. - Permits for new or relocated overhead or underground utility lines or utility poles. 
    New or relocated overhead or underground utility lines or poles within off-site areas of development shall not be installed unless a utility permit is granted by the city. New or relocated overhead or underground utility lines or poles within on-site areas of development shall not be installed unless a building permit is granted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 32.5-5. - Undergrounding of overhead utility lines. 
(a)  All new or existing utility lines other than transmission lines shall be placed underground in conjunction with a development/redevelopment project that has been submitted for approval under the provisions of the Code of the City of Glendale. This requirement shall apply to primary distribution lines as well as secondary and service lines, for both on-site and off-site locations, extending to the nearest existing off-site pole, no greater than two hundred fifty (250) feet from the development/redevelopment property line. The required undergrounding shall be completed prior to approval and occupancy of the project. In cases where utility undergrounding construction may not be completed at the time the rest of the project is completed, the developer shall produce written proof from the utility company(ies) that undergrounding will be accomplished and all necessary moneys have been paid to the utility company(ies). 
(b)  The developer/redeveloper or owner of a project shall be responsible to make necessary arrangements with the affected utility companies for the installation of required underground facilities, including arrangements for the payment of any cost, as one of the conditions of plan approval. Nothing contained herein is intended to obligate a utility company to install such underground facilities without reimbursement except where the utility company is acting as a developer/redeveloper. 
(c)  In those instances where poles to be removed include street lights, the street lights will be replaced with freestanding poles and luminaries by the developer/redeveloper or the utility company when acting as a developer/redeveloper as required by section 102.4, Appendix A, of the City Code and Chapter 26.5 of the City Code. 
(d)  The undergrounding requirement shall also apply to all situations where utility companies add new utility poles or lines as a system upgrade or utility line extension. Voluntary grounding as a system upgrade by a utility company shall not constitute "development/redevelopment" as defined in this chapter. 
(e)  The undergrounding requirement shall apply to all situations where a governmental agency is acting as a developer/redeveloper or has initiated a construction effort which requires the relocation of existing overhead utility poles and lines. Nothing contained herein is intended to obligate a utility company to install such underground facilities without reimbursement from the governmental agency for any costs in excess of those not already the obligation of the utility company. 
(f)  Where the need to underground utility lines is generated by a combination of development/redevelopment, utility system upgrade or extension, and/or governmental agency improvement projects, there shall be equitable allocation of the cost of undergrounding. 
(g)  The undergrounding requirement shall not apply to the normal maintenance and repair of existing utility poles and lines provided such maintenance and repair does not include any system upgrade. 
(h)  The undergrounding requirements of this chapter shall not apply to transmission lines. However, transmission poles shall not be used to support other wires or cables in new development/ redevelopment projects. 
(i)  The undergrounding requirement shall apply regardless of the existence of easements for overhead lines. 
(j)  Equipment appurtenant to the underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pull boxes, pedestal cabinets, service terminals, telephone splice enclosures, concealed ducts, or other similar above-ground facilities normally used with or as part of an underground utility system may be maintained above ground. These appurtenances shall be placed out of street view or screened with appropriate landscaping in accordance with the Glendale General Plan. No equipment shall be placed which violates the city standard for unobstructed view as specified in Chapter 30 of the Code. No equipment shall be placed without prior review and approval by the city of siting and screening plans. 
(k)  Above-ground utility structures, including but not limited to electric transformers, utility poles, traffic signal controllers, street lights, fire hydrants, telephone switch gear, natural gas pressure regulators, cable television boxes, backflow prevention devices, etc., shall not be placed anywhere within the limits of a designated equestrian trail. Utilities may be placed underground under equestrian trails provided they will not present a hazard to horses or riders or create a potential for damage to the utility due to equestrian traffic. 
(l)  All above-ground utility structures, including down guy wires (anchors) shall not be placed anywhere within the limits of an alleyway or driveway which may obstruct safe vehicle passage. 
(Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 12-12-89; Ord. No. 1973, § 1, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 2431, § 1, 3-22-05) 
Cross reference- Encroachment of vegetation within city right-of-way prohibited, § 30-62; height of hedges, etc., at intersections, § 30-65; trees at intersection to be trimmed, § 30-66; certain trees prohibited at intersections, § 30-67; limitation on location of new trees, § 30-68. 
Sec. 32.5-6. - Deferments of undergrounding. 
(a)  Deferment of undergrounding off-site utility lines may be requested from the city engineer for a development/redevelopment project with small frontage, where the cost is substantially more per unit length than it would otherwise be if a longer length (usually a minimum of six hundred sixty (660) feet), including the development/redevelopment frontage, were being undergrounded at the same time. At all times, on-site lines shall be placed underground. A request for deferment shall be submitted in writing to the city engineer and shall include the following: 
(1)  The developer/redeveloper shall obtain from the appropriate utility companies a reliable estimate of the current cost for undergrounding that is required along the development/redevelopment frontage, including new and existing lines in the adjacent offsite frontage. 
(2)  The developer/redeveloper shall obtain from the appropriate utility companies a reliable estimate of the current cost for undergrounding a longer, more practical length that includes the development/redevelopment frontage (usually a minimum of six hundred sixty (660) feet). 
(3)  If the project involves improvements in the public right-of-way (sidewalks, landscaping, etc.), and deferment of undergrounding will involve costs of future restoration of those improvements, the developer/redeveloper shall furnish a reliable estimate of such future restoration costs in current dollars. 
(b)  In reviewing a request for deferment, the city engineer shall consider the cost of installing overhead utilities, the cost of undergrounding the utilities, and the status of development in the area affected by the request. 
(c)  If deferment is authorized by the city engineer, the developer/redeveloper shall deposit with the city an in-lieu fee in an amount sufficient to cover all deferred undergrounding and other improvement restoration that would otherwise be required by this chapter. Such in-lieu fee shall be paid as a condition of development plan approval. Moneys received shall be used by the city for undergrounding utilities on and adjacent to the developer/redeveloper's project. Should undergrounding not be started within ten (10) years of approval of the deferment, all moneys deposited by the developer/redeveloper will be returned. 
(d)  Utility companies may request deferment of undergrounding for utility line extensions through undeveloped areas. The request, with justification, shall be submitted in writing to the city engineer. No moneys will be required for this type of deferment, if deferment is granted by the city engineer. 
(e)  If deferment is denied by the city engineer, the developer/redeveloper or utility company may appeal the city engineer's decision to the city council. 
(f)  If deferment is approved by the city engineer, any interested party who is affected by the decision may appeal the decision to the city council. 
(g)  Appeals authorized under paragraph (a) and (f) above must be submitted in writing to the city clerk within thirty (30) calendar days following the city engineer's decision. 
(Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 32.5-7. - Waiver of undergrounding. 
(a)  The requirement for undergrounding may be waived by the city engineer for the following reasons: 
(1)  When the developer/redeveloper or utility company can show that the costs associated with undergrounding are unreasonably disproportionate to the costs for the proposed project, and the criteria for deferment cannot be met as indicated in section 32.5-6. 
(2)  When new utility poles and wires are erected for purely temporary purposes, such as providing temporary building construction power, emergency power, telephone service or the furnishing of power to temporary outdoor activities. However, a building permit for such temporary use shall be obtained from the city. The length of the temporary use shall be specified in the building permit and may not exceed twelve (12) months. Additional six-month permits may be issued upon a written application by the developer/redeveloper or utility company and a finding of necessity by the city. 
(3)  When poles or luminaries, but not wires or other conduits, are used exclusively for street lighting. 
(b)  Requests for a waiver of the undergrounding requirement shall be submitted in writing to the city engineer. 
(c)  In reviewing a request for waiver, the city engineer shall consider the cost of installing overhead utilities, the costs of undergrounding the utilities, and the status of development in the area affected by the request. 
(d)  If a waiver is denied by the city engineer, the developer/redeveloper or utility company may appeal the city engineer's decision to the city council. 
(e)  If a waiver is approved by the city engineer, any interested party who is affected by the decision may appeal the decision to the city council. 
(f)  Appeals authorized under paragraphs (d) and (e) above must be submitted in writing to the city clerk within thirty (30) calendar days following the city engineer's decision. 
(Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 32.5-8. - Waiver for alternate plans. 
    The city engineer may waive for up to one (1) year, portions or all of this chapter when a developer/redeveloper, utility company or governmental agency presents an alternate plan for undergrounding lines which provides greater public benefit and accomplishes the purpose and intent of this chapter and the policies of the Glendale General Plan, than would be accomplished by a strict application of this chapter. Alternate plans may include, but are not limited to, programs such as utility-funded aesthetic improvement programs. 
(Ord. No. 1629, § 1, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 32.5-9. - Conduit required for underground utility lines. 
(a)  All new underground utility lines or any existing underground utility lines undergoing development or redevelopment, as defined in this chapter, shall be placed in conduit. 
(b)  Any existing underground utility lines, undergoing repair or maintenance, which will result in an opening of existing pavement, asphalt or concrete in a street or sidewalk, which is longer than ten (10) feet in length, shall be placed in conduit. 
(Ord. No. 2240, § 1, 2-12-02) 
Chapter 33 - WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), adopted September 27, 2016, repealed the former chapter 33, article II, division 1, §§ 33-16-33-29, division 2, §§ 33-36-33-40, division 3, §§ 33-51-33-60, division 4, §§ 33-71-33-84, division 5, §§ 33-86-33-99, division 6, §§ 33-100-33-100.6, article III, division 1, §§ 33-101-33-111, division 2, §§ 33-126-33-130, division 3, §§ 33-141-33-143, division 4, §§ 33-156-33-159, division 5, §§ 33-171-33-183, division 6, §§ 33-201-33-205, division 7, §§ 33-216-33-221, division 8, §§ 33-231-33-233, 33-238-33-243, 33-245, 33-246, division 9, §§ 33-256-33-259, article IV, §§ 33-261-33-270, article V, §§ 33-271-33-286, article VI, division 1, §§ 33-290-33-293, division 2, §§ 33-300-33-304, division 3, § 33-310, division 4, §§ 33-311-33-316, and enacted a new chapter 33 as set out herein. The former chapter 33 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
    The provisions in this [Chapter] shall apply to all Users of City water, sewer and sanitation services unless otherwise specifically provided in other provisions of the Code. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 33-1. - Definitions. 
    When used in this Article, the following words, terms and phrases, shall have the meanings as provided in this Section: 
    Approved: Accepted by the department as either meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this chapter, or accepted as suitable for the proposed use. 
    City: Refers to the City of Glendale, its employees or other authorized representatives performing certain governmental functions and duties. 
    Contractor: A person licensed to do work in the State for or on behalf of another party to construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, structure, project, development or improvement. The term "contractor" includes subcontractors, specialty contractors, developers, and speculative builders. 
    Contamination: An impairment in the quality of water by sewage, industrial fluids, waste liquids, compounds or other material or fluids, to a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health, welfare or the environment. 
    Customer: The person who has requested and been granted water and/or sewer or service by the City. A Customer may be the owner, operator, tenant, trustee, receiver, manager or occupant of the property connected to the City's water and/or sewer system. Customers shall be financially responsible for payment of water and/or sewer services provided to the premise. 
    Customer account: The account set-up by the City in its billing system, that contains a customer's billing and payment history, name(s), mailing address and other identifying information collected by the City at the time water service is requested or initiated. 
    Customer water supply system: The water distribution facilities within a Customer's premises commencing at the discharge point of the service connection. 
    Deposit: Funds held by the City as security against potential non-payment by Customers for water and/or sewer services. Deposits shall not earn interest while held by the City and shall be refunded as provided in the administrative procedures adopted by the City consistent with this Article. 
    Developer: The person who is responsible for the development of real property that creates a demand for water and/or sewer service. 
    Development: Any improvement of real property which creates demand for domestic water. 
    Notice: A written instrument served by the City. Service of a Notice shall be accomplished by: 
(1)  U.S. regular mail to the last known address of the person to whom it is required to be given; or 
(2)  Personal service upon the person or his/her lawful representative at his residence or place of business; or 
(3)  Filing or recording with a clerk of the superior court or county recorder as provided by applicable law; or 
(4)  Electronic mail to the last known email address provided by the Customer, if the Customer requested electronic notification as the preferred method when establishing his Customer Account. 
    Owner-builder: A person who constructs improvements on the real property he/she owns within the City. 
    Person: Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, association or other business or governmental entity, including the State, or any political subdivision of the State such as a municipality, or a tribal government or subdivision thereof. 
    Premises: Any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Property owner: The person who, according to the title recorded with the Maricopa County Recorder's Officer, owns the real property to which water and/or sewer service is being provided by the City. 
    Shall: The words "shall", "will," and "must" refer to mandatory actions. 
    Structure: Each separate residence, house, store, building or any construction served by a separate water meter. 
    Turn on fee: Refers to the fee assessed to a customer to establish a customer account and turn on the meter at the premise. 
    Premise: Each structure, group of structures, portion of a structure or real property which is served by a separate water meter. 
    User: The Customer as herein defined. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-2. - Request to turn on water and/or sewer service at a service address. 
(a)  Before the city turns on or provides any water or sewer service at an existing service address, the Customer must meet all applicable requirements of this Article and must provide the following information: 
(1)  The name, service address, and telephone number of the Customer/applicant, driver's license number or other forms of identification acceptable to the City; 
(2)  The mailing address of the Customer/applicant, if the mailing address is different from the service address; 
(3)  The name, telephone number and/or address of the property owner or manager for the service address, if different from the Customer; 
(4)  Such other information or documents as the City may deem necessary for billing and collection purposes may include social security or federal employer identification number. 
(b)  Customer information is confidential and will not be released to any party other than the individual(s) listed on the account, unless authorized by the Customer or by applicable law or court order. 
(c)  Any unpaid amounts owed on existing or prior account(s) in the Customer's name must be paid before service will be turned on by the City. Failure to pay any delinquent amount owing on a prior or existing account in the Customer's name may constitute grounds for the City to refuse to turn on the new service. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-3. - Turn-on fee. 
    The City shall charge a turn-on fee for water and/or sewer service turned on at a service address. The turn on fee will be established in an amount set by resolution of the City Council. Such fee will be charged to the Customer Account and billed in the first billing and is nonrefundable. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-4. - Deposits. 
(a)  The City may adopt administrative procedures for determining when a Customer will be required to provide the City a deposit before water and/or sewer service will be turned on. These procedures may also set forth: (i) the amount of the deposit; (ii) how it will be collected; (iii) the criteria for any waiver; (iv) how the deposit will be applied to pay any delinquent amounts on Customer Accounts; and (v) the refund process. The Customer is not entitled to any interest earned on the deposit. The administrative procedures shall be posted on the City's website. 
(b)  A separate deposit may be required for each meter. Unless the deposit is waived, the City will turn on service to the Customer's premise only after the applicable deposit(s) is (are) paid in full. 
(c)  The City may reduce, waive, or increase up to five (5) times the deposit established by resolution of the City Council and contained in Appendix 1 to this Chapter based on the following factors: 
(1)  The Customer's utilities account history; 
(2)  The Customer's credit history; 
(3)  Typical monthly bill for a similar service address; and 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-5. - Miscellaneous customer service fees. 
(a)  Customer service fees in the amount established by City Council resolution pursuant to Glendale City Code section 2-2 may be charged by the City for the following items: 
(1)  Establishing new Customer Accounts; 
(2)  Administration and collection of delinquent Customer Accounts; 
(3)  Fees charged for non-payment due to insufficient Customer funds; 
(4)  Costs incurred by the city for conducting meter field tests, meter bench tests, field visits or inspections; 
(5)  Costs to repair or replace broken meter locks or tampered meters; 
(6)  Prohibited water use fines during a Stage Three Drought Declaration or Stage Four Drought Emergency; 
(7)  Late charges or penalties; or 
(8)  Any other fee or charge the city council deems appropriate. 
(b)  All rates, charges and fees for water, sewer, flood irrigation and other services the City will impose pursuant to this Chapter are identified in the Table entitled "Water, Sewer And Flood Irrigation Services Rate Schedules; and Miscellaneous Customer Service Fees" which is appended to this Chapter as Appendix 1. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-6. - Sales tax. 
    Privilege license (sales) tax shall be added to each bill for water service at the current tax rate provided by the applicable state and City tax codes. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-7. - Notification to water and sewer customers. 
(a)  All notices regarding any matter pertaining to the use of the City water and/or sewer services shall be sent to the Customer's service address unless an alternate mailing address has been provided to and is on file with the City. Alternate mailing addresses may be provided when the Customer makes the request to have the service turned on and should include the Customer's email address for the delivery of billing and other pertinent notifications. To ensure proper delivery of bills and notices, the Customer must report all changes of address and all errors in billing or mailing information to the City within ten (10) business days. 
(b)  All Customers shall be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the sewer user charge rate associated with wastewater flow. The flow rates are based upon the Customer's water usage as billed each January, February and March as calculated in Section 33-173. This is the winter use average. Once the Customer is presented a bill with the annually adjusted sewer charge, the Customer has ninety (90) days to file an appeal with the City for reconsideration of the calculated winter use average, as defined in the City's administrative procedures. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-8. - Meter reading and billing. 
    The City will read meters and calculate charges due for water and/or sewer services at regular intervals. All such charges and associated taxes shall be billed monthly. Services billed outside of the normal billing intervals may be pro-rated, using the minimum or base monthly charges for a standard (30) thirty-day month. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-9. - Due date; penalty for late payment. 
(a)  All charges for water and/or sewer and/or solid waste services shall become due and payable when a bill is created by the City. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of the Customer to pay all charges in full and on a timely basis. 
(c)  All charges for water and/or sewer and/or solid waste services shall become delinquent if payment is not received by the City within nineteen (19) calendar days of the date the bill was created by the City. 
(d)  Failure to pay all charges for water, sewer or solid waste services in accordance with this Section may subject a Customer to: 
(1)  An increase in the amount required as a deposit for the Customer's account with the City, as provided in Section 33-4; and 
(2)  A late fee, as provided in Section 33-5; and 
(3)  Any other penalty for late payment provided in this Chapter or available under any applicable law, including, but not limited to, termination of service in accordance with Section 33-11. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-10. - Adjustments of water and/or sewer charges and fees. 
    The City may establish policies and procedures for adjusting charges and/or fees on a Customer's Account that occurred or may occur as a result of errors, omissions, unusual usage or other extraordinary circumstances. 
(a)  The City may make an adjustment to the amount billed and may recover, credit or refund the difference between the original billing and the corrected billing, when an error, omission, usage discrepancy or other extraordinary circumstance has occurred. Such adjustment will rely on any relevant and credible data, including historical usage data, to determine if an error, omission, usage discrepancy or extraordinary circumstance has occurred and to calculate the applicable adjustment. 
(b)  A Customer who disputes the accuracy of a water and/or sewer charge on a closed Customer Account must present a written complaint or request for adjustment to the City no later than sixty (60) days after the final bill has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-11. - Remedies for delinquent accounts; termination of water or sewer service for non-payment. 
(a)  If all charges due for water and/or sewer service(s) are not paid in full before a bill becomes delinquent in accordance with Section 33-9, the City may terminate service at the service address for which payment is delinquent. Service shall not be terminated until the City sends the Customer written notice and gives the customer an opportunity to cure the delinquency by paying all outstanding past due amounts in full. 
(b)  If the Customer fails to cure the delinquency within the time specified in such notice, the City may terminate water and/or sewer service by disconnecting the service without further notice on or after the date stated in the termination notice. The Customer will be responsible for and will be charged any costs incurred by the City to terminate the delinquent service. 
(c)  Once service is disconnected, a delinquent account fee may be charged to the Customer's Account in addition to any costs associated with the termination of service. The City may use all or any part of the deposit provided by the Customer pursuant to Section 33-4 to pay the delinquent charges. 
(d)  The Customer is required to pay all amounts owed to the City and may be required to provide a new or increased deposit as provided in Section 33-4, before water and/or sewer service is restored to the service address. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the requirement to pay all amounts owed to the City before service is restored in subsection (d) above, the City may establish and implement policies and procedures which allow for deferring, reducing or waiving, in whole or in part, any water and/or sewer charges and fees on a case by case basis. The City may also agree to accept alternate payment arrangements, on a case by case basis. The establishment and implementation of such City policies and granting any such accommodation will occur in the City's sole discretion and is not subject to appeal or challenge. 
(f)  A Customer may dispute any charges billed to an existing, active Customer Account by submitting the dispute in writing to the City within twenty (20) days of the date the Customer's Account becomes delinquent. After review, the City may resolve the dispute or make a further demand for some or all of the delinquent water and/or sewer charges and fees. If City and the Customer are unable to resolve the dispute informally, the Customer may request a formal hearing be held. The City shall set the date of the hearing within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the Customer's request for a hearing. 
(g)  The hearing need not be conducted in accordance with the Rules of Civil Procedure or Rules of Evidence. Both parties may present relevant and credible evidence at the hearing, including oral testimony or written documentation. 
(h)  A written report containing any findings and recommendations will be issued within two (2) weeks of the conclusion of the hearing. The City Manager or his/her designee shall review the report and make a final decision regarding the delinquency of the charges and fees and any request for a reduction, deferment or waiver within thirty (30) days of receipt. The decision of the City Manager or his/her designee is final and may not be appealed. 
(i)  The hearing is open to the public, unless the Customer requests it be held in private. 
(j)  Customers who have filed a written dispute with the City shall not be required to pay the delinquent amount in dispute or be subject to disconnection for nonpayment until a final determination is made by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
(k)  Once there is a final decision, any amount determined to be due and owing must be paid in full by the Customer within ten (10) days of the issuance of the decision, unless other payment arrangements have been made with the City as provided in subsection (e) above. In the event the Customer does not make such payment in a timely fashion, the City may terminate the service(s) without further notice to the Customer. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-12. - Resumption of city service. 
(a)  Once any delinquent charges and fees have been paid in full or the City has agreed to an alternative arrangement in accordance with Section 33-11, the City shall turn the water and/or sewer service back on, unless good cause (e.g., broken or leaking pipes) exists to refuse to resume the service. 
(b)  The City may require a business or commercial customer to pay any outstanding balances or delinquent amounts owed for the service address even if the Customer requesting the resumption of service did not occupy the property when the debt was incurred or prior service was provided. 
(c)  Nothing in this subsection is intended to deny service to a residential Customer who did not physically reside at the service address at the time the Customer Account became delinquent or to condition the resumption of water or sewer service on payment of charges and fees for services provided to prior, unrelated occupants, tenants or owners of residential properties. 
(d)  In addition to the charges and fees due and payable to the City as required by this chapter for turning on water and/or sewer service, the following charges and fees, may also be required to be paid by a Customer for a resumption of service: 
(1)  Labor and materials to install pipes or other equipment to connect the service address with the City sewer mains, or for tapping the City sewer system; 
(2)  Labor and materials to repair, replace or upgrade the service connection so that the service address can be served in a safe and sanitary manner; 
(3)  Any fine or penalty; 
(4)  Any charges associated with cutting, blocking or otherwise discontinuing sewer service. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-13. - City's remedies for unpaid charges and fees. 
(a)  Once the dispute resolution procedures contained in Section 33-11 have been exhausted or a Customer Account has been closed, any debts remaining after applying amounts provided as a deposit may be assigned by the city to a bona fide collection agency for collection. The Customer shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the City in collecting those delinquent funds pursuant to Glendale City Code, section 2-4, collection charges. 
(b)  Lien for unpaid charges. 
(1)  Once the procedures contained in Section 33-11 have been exhausted or a Customer Account has been closed, the City may elect to file a lien on the real property, lot or tract of land that received or benefited from the City's water and/or sewer service. The lien shall be filed in the amount of any debts remaining after applying amounts provided as a deposit. 
(2)  Prior to filing such a lien, the City shall give notice to the property owner that the City intends to file a lien on the property unless all past charges due are paid within thirty (30) days. 
(3)  If delinquent charges due are not paid within the (30) thirty-day grace period, the City shall prepare a "notice and claim of lien" and shall file one (1) copy with the county recorder. The City shall then promptly send, by certified mail return receipt requested, a copy to the property owner at his/her last known mailing address, and shall send a copy to the Customer to the address or the alternate mailing address on the Customer Account. The "notice and claim of lien" shall contain the following: 
a.  A legal description of the property. 
b.  The name of the customer or property owner. 
c.  The amount owed, including; and 
d.  The cost of preparing, processing and releasing the lien, which shall be added to the amount then due. 
(4)  The lien shall attach and remain in effect on the property until all amounts owed are paid in full. The lien may be satisfied upon judgment of foreclosure and order of sale. The City shall have the right to bring an action to enforce the lien in Maricopa County Superior Court. 
(5)  A prior recording for the purposes provided in this Section shall not be a bar to a subsequent recording of a lien for such purposes, and any number of such liens on the same premise may be enforced in the same action. 
(c)  Delinquent service charges may also be collected by a civil suit, instituted in the name of the City, at any time after the charges become delinquent. 
(d)  The remedies provided by this Section shall be cumulative and supplemental to all other remedies provided under this Article or applicable law, notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-14. - Voluntary utility billing donation program. 
(a)  The City hereby establishes a voluntary utility billing donation program to allow users of City services to make voluntary donation of funds to human services programs serving the community. All persons receiving bills for services from the City under the provisions of chapters 18 and 33 of this Code are be eligible to participate in the voluntary utility billing donation program. Donations may be made by Customers paying additional amounts beyond the charges due to the City for their water and/or sewer fees and charges. 
(b)  The City shall determine the form of the donation program. The amount of any donation added to a customer's bill, if any, shall not exceed two dollars ($2.00) per month. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-15. - Reserved. 
Sec. 33-16. - Unlawful utility activities. 
    No person shall, in any way, interfere with representatives of the City in any discharge of their duties under this chapter. Interference may include, but is not limited to, the tapping of any water or sewer pipe, main, or lateral belonging to the City, or the cleaning, laying or connecting of any sewer pipe, main or lateral, digging up or cause to be dug up, any street or alley in the City for the purpose of connecting with the water or sewer systems of the City without first obtaining a permit from the City, failing or neglecting to place the street or alley in its original condition, or maliciously or willfully breaking, damaging, destroying, uncovering, defacing, or tampering with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the municipal water or sewer systems. Any person who interferes with any representative of the City in the discharge of his/her duties under this Article of the City Code shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-17. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Auxiliary water supply: Any water supply on, or available to, premises, other than the potable water supplied by the City of Glendale. These auxiliary waters may include, but shall not be limited to, water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural sources such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, or treated effluent, waste waters or industrial fluids. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the department does not have sanitary control. 
    Backflow: The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either backpressure or back-siphonage. 
    Backpressure: Any elevation of pressure in a Customer's water supply system, above the pressure of the public potable water supply system, which could cause water or other liquids, mixtures or substances to flow from a Customer's water supply system into the distribution system of the public potable water supply system. 
    Back-siphonage: A reversal of the normal flow of water caused by a reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system which causes the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances from a Customer's water supply system into the distribution system of the public potable water supply system. 
    Cross-connection: Any physical connection or other arrangement of piping or fixtures, between a piping system containing potable water and a piping system containing non-potable water, waste fluids, industrial fluids or other fluids of questionable safety for human consumption, through which, or because of which, backflow may occur into the public potable water system. Cross-connections include any temporary connections such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or change-over devices or sliding multiport tube. 
    Distribution system: The network of conduits used to deliver potable water from the source facilities to the customer's water supply system. 
    Domestic water: Water supplied through the pipes of the water system of the city. 
    Emergency fire sprinkler tap: A water tap maintained by the owner or occupant of a building or other structure to be used in the event of a fire or other emergency, and not used in the normal course of use and occupancy of the building or structure; provided that no water meter is installed on such tap. 
    Flood irrigation system: Irrigation system consisting of pipes, gates, laterals, valves, and berms constructed for the purpose of conveying water to private property or public places. 
    Flood irrigation water: Water supplied to or through a flood irrigation system. 
    Hazard, degree of: Evaluation of the potential risk to the public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the public potable water system. 
    House under construction: When water service is available to such house or building and shall end when final building inspection is made at the end of a (3) three-month construction period. 
    Industrial fluid system: Any system containing a fluid or solution which is chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute an actual or potential threat or hazard to human health or welfare, the environment, the City's municipal water system, or a Customer's plumbing system or property if introduced into the public potable water system. This may include, but shall not be limited to, polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters, waste waters and used waters originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalines, circulating cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, or oils, gases, glycerin, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for fire-fighting purposes. 
    Non-potable water: Water which is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable quality for human consumption. 
    Potable water: Any water which is safe for human consumption pursuant to the standards set by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality. 
    Public potable water supply system: The source facilities and the distribution system under control of the city to the point where a Customer's water supply system commences. A Customer's water supply system commences at the discharge point of the service connection. 
    Service connection: The terminal end of a service line from the public potable water system at its point of delivery to the Customer's water system where the department loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water. If a meter is installed between the Customer's water supply system and the public potable water system, the service connection shall be the discharge end of the meter. Service connections shall also include a water connection from a fire hydrant and any other temporary or emergency water connections with the public potable water supply system. 
    Source facilities: All components and facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of potable water to the distribution system. 
    Used water: Any water supplied by the department, from the public potable water system to a Customer's water system, after it has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the sanitary control of the department. 
    Water meter: A City-owned device used for measuring and registering at point of delivery the water that flows from the City's service lines to the Customer's premise. 
    Water service area: All area wherein the City has the right to supply domestic water. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE CONNECTION CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE. 

Sec. 33-18. - Installation of water lines and service connections. 
(a)  The owner or his/her authorized representative of every residential, commercial and industrial parcels, lots or subdivisions where public water services are authorized by the City, unless otherwise notified by the City, shall furnish and install all water lines, service connections, water meter boxes, valves, fittings, and appurtenances necessary to provide and/or comment to each water service. The City may perform the installation work to establish the service connection when the City deems it necessary and in the best interest of the City. If the City performs the installation, the owner and his/her authorized representative shall pay a fee or deposit as authorized by Section 33-4. The City shall approve all materials to be used by the owner or his/her authorized representative, to connect to the City's water supply. 
(b)  Unless otherwise approved by the City, water service connections shall be installed simultaneously with the new water lines and services installed by the developer once the City has approved the final plat for the development. 
(c)  Water lines (in streets bounding a subdivision or lots) shall conform to the City's water distribution master grid system. 
(d)  The owner or his/her authorized representative shall ensure that water services are located nearest the center of the lot, within eighteen (18) inches of the backline of proposed sidewalks, and not within a proposed driveway. Other locations of water services shall have the written approval of the City. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-19. - Temporary construction taps. 
    An applicant for water service for each construction project shall be charged a fee equal to the appropriate size water tap and as established by resolution of the City Council. The fee shall be collected before connecting and receiving water from the City. It shall be the obligation of the applicant to notify the City, in writing, when the construction begins and date of final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-20. - Construction. 
(a)  The owner or his/her authorized representative shall be responsible for constructing all water lines, service connections, water meter boxes, valves, fittings, and appurtenances in accordance with the MAG standard details and specifications, the City's plumbing code, and the City's standard details, and under the inspection of the City. Mylar reproducible "as-built" plans with the tap location measured from property line and bearing the registered civil engineer's seal and number shall be submitted by the owner or his/her authorized representative to the City after completion of installation and prior to release of the right-of-way permit. 
(b)  The owner or his/her authorized representative shall install water meter boxes so that the top surface of the meter box is parallel and level with the finish grade of proposed sidewalk. 
(c)  The owner or his/her authorized representative shall be responsible for ensuring that piping entering or exiting the water meter box shall be positioned to ensure proper alignment for the installation of the water meter. The piping shall not be crimped or deformed in a manner that impedes or restricts the flow of water. Property owner side of the connection shall be constructed and maintained in accordance to City standards. 
(d)  If residential lots of the approved subdivision need to tap directly into an existing active water main, the owner or his/her authorized representative shall dig all trenches for the service line and make all cuts to expose the water main as directed by the City. The owner or his/her authorized representative shall also be responsible for backfilling all trenches and cuts made, along with providing a final surface patch on the pavement, according to MAG standard specifications. 
(e)  When the residential subdivision is completed, or when each phase is completed, the owner or his/her authorized representative shall pressure test and chlorinate the entire system in accordance with the MAG standard specifications and to the satisfaction of the City. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-21. - Guarantee of water system construction. 
    The service connections installed by the owner or his/her authorized representative shall be guaranteed against any and all defects by the owner or his/her authorized representative for a period of one (1) year after the acceptance of the installations by the City. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-22. - Wet taps. 
    A City-approved Contractor shall make all wet taps from the City's energized water system. When wet taps are needed, the contractor/owner shall make all cuts to expose the water main in sufficient size to allow the Contractor enough room to make the necessary wet tap. The Contractor/owner shall also furnish and install the saddle, tapping sleeve and valve. A charge in an amount established by resolution shall be assessed for each wet tap which shall be paid prior to the Contractor making the tap. When the City installs the water service, there is no separate charge for the wet tap. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-23. - Dry taps. 
    The owner or his/her authorized representative shall make all dry taps for service connections in all residential, commercial and industrial parcels, lots or subdivisions and all required fire hydrant dry taps. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-24. - Determination of meter size. 
    Proper water meter size shall be determined in accordance with tables provided for such purpose in the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted and amended by the City. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-25. - Obstruction of meter, etc. 
(a)  No person shall place upon or about any valve, valve box, water meter box or water gate connected with the City water service system any obstruction, 
(b)  Fifteen (15) days after proper notification to the owner or his/her authorized representative, the City may remove trees, shrubs, plants and bushes or any other obstruction if all identified obstructions, within a (3) three-foot radius of the water meter box have not been properly removed. 
Sec. 33-26. - Service connection repairs. 
(a)  The City shall inspect, ensure their proper working order, make all repairs on mains, meters, and services, and check all valves and fire hydrants and any other portion of the water and/or sewer system. 
(b)  The Customer may be billed by the City for the cost of any repair or replacement of mains, meters services valves, hydrants or other equipment necessitated by the Customer-caused damage. Customer may also be responsible for, and charged for, any increase in the amount of water or sewer services required to fully serve the property or service address. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-27. - Maintenance of water service lines. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Article, the property owner shall maintain all water service lines and connections within his property in accordance with City's plumbing code. All meters, except those damaged by the Customer or property owner, shall be maintained and repaired by the City at its expense. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-28. - Property owner responsibility for certain leaks or damages. 
    Property owners are responsible for all leaks or damages that result from leaks from any equipment on the owner's side of the meter to the property. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-29. - Interruption of service-Generally. 
    Water and/or sewer service may be shut off from the City's main at any time due to emergencies or for the purpose of making repairs, extensions or any other necessary work. Notice will be given where reasonably possible. The City shall not be liable for any damages that may occur as a result of water and/or sewer service being interrupted for any purpose. Users who have any machinery, material, process or plant that requires a constant supply of domestic water or sewer service shall install at their premise such water storage facilities as may be necessary to prevent any damage that could occur if the City's water service supply may, for any reason, be interrupted or discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-30. - Interruption of service-Street work. 
    All persons engaged in street work, including but not limited to grading, re-grading, filling and trenching, paving or repaving shall give the City written notice any time such work has the potential to remove, displace or change any water service mains, pipes, fittings, meters, gates or other appurtenances to the water or sewer service system of the City. The notice shall be delivered to the City not less than three (3) days before the services may be so affected. Any failure to furnish such notice shall make such person liable to the City for all damages resulting to the water service system of the City from such work and may subject the person to other civil penalties consistent with this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-31. - Valve keys. 
    It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to use, construct, or, dispose of any key or other valve opening device on the City water supply system without the permission of the City. Violators shall be liable for all costs of repairs necessitated by their actions and may subject the person to other civil penalties consistent with this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-32. - Tampering with fire hydrants. 
    It is unlawful for any person to destroy, impair, damage, disable or tamper with any fire hydrant. A violation of this Section shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor. Violators shall be liable for all costs of repairs necessitated by their actions and may subject the person to other civil penalties consistent with this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-33. - Emergency fire sprinkler systems. 
(a)  The design for emergency fire sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the City and shall be approved by the City prior to their installation by any person. 
(b)  The property owner and/or his/her authorized representative shall dig all trenches and make all cuts for pipes and appurtenances for emergency fire sprinkler lines as required by the City in the City approved plans. The emergency fire sprinkler line shall be inspected and approved by the City before being backfilled. The property owner and/or his/her authorized representative shall also be responsible for backfilling all trenches and cuts made, along with providing a final surface patch on the pavement, according to MAG standard specifications. Mylar reproducible "as built" plans, showing the location of the emergency fire sprinkler line from the tap to the property line and bearing the registered civil engineer's seal and number, shall be submitted by the property owner and/or is authorized representative to the City after completion as required by the City in the City approved plans of installation and prior to release of the right-of-way permit. 
(c)  The property owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the sprinkler line/main up to its connection with the City's system. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-34. - Installation of fire hydrants. 
    The property owner and/or authorized representative shall furnish and install fire hydrants in accordance with City specifications and standards at locations designated and approved by the City. The installation of hydrants, including all necessary valves and appurtenances, shall be at the expense of the property owner and/or his/her authorized representative, shall be inspected by the City and upon completion, shall be dedicated to the City. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-35. - Removal of water from fire hydrants; authorization. 
    No person shall remove, or attempt to remove, water from a fire hydrant, except as directed by officers of the fire department. A violation of this Section shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor. Violators shall be liable for all costs of the water lost/used and repairs necessitated by their actions and may subject the person to other civil penalties consistent with this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-36. - Use of meter in removal of water from fire hydrant. 
    All water removed from a fire hydrant, except that water removed at the direction of the City in compliance with Section 33-35 above, shall pass through a meter supplied by the City. Water provided at the fire hydrant is for temporary water service. The City shall authorize the amount and/or period of use when the user's application is approved by the City. The meter shall be connected to the fire hydrant. However, if water lines are being used for pressure testing or chlorination, the meter shall be connected to the water line. Meter charges shall be those established by Section 33-56 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-37. - Unauthorized connection to water main; theft of water. 
    No person shall connect any pipe, tube or other instrument to any water main, service pipe, conduit or flume for using, removing or otherwise distributing water belonging to the City, without the prior approval of the City. All water removed from the water system, except as provided in Section 33-35, shall be estimated and charged at a rate determined by the City. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-38. - Discontinuance of service at user's request. 
(a)  If the City determines or otherwise receives notice from the owner or receives notice from the county health officer that a structure has been permanently abandoned or condemned as inhabitable or unsanitary and dangerous to human life, domestic water service shall be discontinued immediately and new charges shall cease to accrue. 
(b)  Any fees or charges incurred prior to the cessation or disconnection of service shall be billed to the Customer within ten (10) business days of the service discontinuance. 
(c)  If a Customer has made a deposit with the City, the balance, if any, of the deposit shall be returned to the Customer after deducting the amount of the charges due. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-39. - Violations. 
    A violation of any Section in this Division (Section 33-18 through Section 33-37) shall be a civil infraction. A person convicted for a first offense of a violation of any Section of this Division shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). A person convicted of a second violation of any Section of this Division shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A person convicted of a third or subsequent violation of any Section of this Division shall be punished by a fine not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The maximum fine for a violation of 33-30, 33-31, 33-32, 33-33, 33-34 or 33-35 shall not exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Secs. 33-40-33-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 33-51. - Water development fees. 
    A water development fee will be assessed for each residential dwelling unit and each non-residential development constructed in the City, as provided in Chapter 28, Article VI. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-52. - Effluent user fees. 
(a)  Users of effluent produced by the City's wastewater treatment plants, including persons who store such effluent for subsequent use, shall pay to the City, an effluent use fee at the rate established by a resolution of the City Council or agreement, as may be applicable. The effluent use fee shall be paid within 30 days of the receipt of any statement or billing. 
(b)  All payments of effluent user fees received under this Section shall be separately accounted for in the utility revenue fund. The effluent user fee will be used only for transmission, production, storage of water supplied by the City and debt service. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-53. - Service connections and meter installation fees. 
(a)  If the City installs meters with a diameter of two (2) inches or less, in accordance with Section 33-18 the property owner and/or his/her authorized representative shall pay a fee, in advance, established by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  If the City installs meters with a diameter in excess of two (2) inches. In accordance with Section 33-18, the property owner and/or his/her authorized representative shall post a cash deposit, with the City in advance, and in an amount established by resolution of the City Council to cover the costs of such work. If the cost is less than the deposit, the remainder shall be refunded to the owner or his/her authorized representative. If the cost of such installation is greater than the deposit, the City shall charge and the owner or his/her authorized representative shall pay the additional amount. 
(c)  The City shall install water meters prior to inspection of rough plumbing. The City shall charge and the owner or his/her authorized representative shall pay the fee established by resolution of the City Council, prior to the installation of water meters. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-54. - Meter testing. 
    Each Customer may request a meter test. Upon payment of the fee established by resolution, of the City Council, the City will arrange to test the Customer's meter. If the meter proves to be inaccurate by more than five (5) percent, the meter test fee shall be refunded to the Customer. If the meter, upon testing, proves to be inaccurate by less than five (5) percent, the fee shall be retained by the City and not refunded to the Customer. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-55. - Relocation of water meter and service tap. 
(a)  The City may relocate five-eighths (?) inch by three-fourths (3/4) inch or 1-inch meters upon the request of the property owner or his/her authorized representative up to a maximum of thirteen (13) feet from its existing location. The property owner or his/her authorized representative will relocate one and one-half (11/2) inch and two (2) inch meters. This relocation will be inspected by the City prior to backfill. The cost of relocating each water meter shall be as established by resolution of the City Council and shall be payable in advance. The property owner or his/her authorized representative is responsible for connecting the existing water service line to the discharge side of the water meter. 
(b)  When the property owner or his/her authorized representative requests that a meter be relocated to a site greater than thirteen (13) feet or requests water meters larger than two (2) inches be relocated from its existing location, a new service connection is required. The cost of making a new service tap and relocating the water meter shall be paid by the property owner in an amount as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(c)  Fees for making a new service tap and relocating the water meter must be paid in advance. Fees for water taps and water meters larger than two (2) inches will be billed the actual cost of materials and labor required for such work. The City shall collect an advance deposit based on an estimate of the cost of the water. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-56. - Bulk water rates and fire hydrant meters. 
    Whenever bulk water is required by the property owner or his/her authorized representative for construction projects, an application shall be made to the City for a fire hydrant meter and the following charges shall be paid: 
(1)  The fee for original installation and removal of meter shall be paid in advance; 
(2)  A meter and fitting deposit. shall be paid in advance; 
(3)  A fire hydrant meter fee; 
(4)  The cost of repairing or connecting a fire hydrant meter; 
(5)  A fee for the amount of water used, which shall be charged at the three (3) inch meter commercial service rate per thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction thereof plus all applicable sales tax. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-57. - Determination of water rates inside and outside the city. 
    Water rates shall be billed City on a monthly basis at the applicable rate established by resolution of the City Council and shall be set forth in Appendix 1 to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-58. - Flood irrigation service. 
    The flood irrigation service rates shall be established by resolution of the City Council pursuant to Section 2-2. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Secs. 33-59-33-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DROUGHT MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 33-81. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is the policy of the City of Glendale that water usage of all City users and Customers shall be curtailed during times of drought. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-82. - Drought management plan. 
(a)  The City shall adopt a Drought Management Plan for curtailing water usage during times of drought. The plan shall be posted on the City's internet website and contain the following: 
(1)  Conditions that may cause the City to declare a drought to exist and to implement the drought management plan; 
(2)  An identification of the levels of drought based on the severity of the drought conditions; 
(3)  An authorization allowing the City Manager to implement the plan, conduct necessary public outreach and take enforcement actions to minimize the impact of the drought; 
(4)  Termination of the drought declaration, if the conditions that triggered the declarations no longer exist; and 
(5)  Any rules and regulations necessary to reduce water use during the drought. 
(b)  Once adopted, all City departments, agencies, employees and contractors and Customers must comply with the provisions of the City's drought management plan, unless an exemption has been granted in accordance with Sec 33-83. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-83. - Exemption. 
    The City's drought management plan provisions may be exempted at the written request of the applicant and approval of the City Manager. The exemption may be granted if the applicant can demonstrate that the granting of such exemption is for the protection of public health and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-84. - Enforcement. 
(a)  For a first violation of any provision of this division, the City shall issue a written notice of first violation and provide educational materials on water conservation, including a copy of the relevant provisions of this chapter, to the Customer violating the provisions of this division. The City shall give the Customer a reasonable period of time to correct the violation. 
(b)  For a second violation of any provision of this division, the City shall issue a written notice of second violation to the Customer and impose fines set by the drought stage. The fine shall be added to the Customer's account. Failure to pay any portion of a Customer's account, including any fines imposed pursuant to this Section, shall subject said account to termination of water service in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  For a third or subsequent violation of this division, the City shall impose a fine equal to twice the previous fine. The fine shall be added to the Customer's account. Failure to pay any portion of a Customer's account, including any fines imposed pursuant to this Section, shall subject said account to termination of water service in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Enforcement of the Drought Management Plan shall be conducted by the City Manager or his designee. 
(e)  Any person against whom a penalty is levied under this Section shall have a right to a hearing before the City Manager or his designee in accordance with Section 33-11. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-85. - Providing for civil fines and penalties. 
    The civil fines and penalties for violation of this division are set forth in Section 33-5, Miscellaneous Customer service fees, and shall be established by resolution of the City Council and set forth in Appendix 1 to this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
DIVISION 5. - BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 33-86. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is: 
(1)  To protect the health and welfare of the citizens of Glendale by preventing the backflow of contaminants or pollutants into the public potable water supply system; and 
(2)  To promote the elimination or control of existing or new cross-connections within a Customer's internal potable water system, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and 
(3)  To provide for a continuing program of cross-connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public potable water supply system. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-87. - Backflow prevention required. 
(a)  An approved backflow prevention method shall be utilized or installed at every service connection to a Customer's water service when the City determines the potable water supplied by the City may be subject to contamination, pollution or other deterioration in quality by conditions within the Customer's water system. 
(b)  The backflow meter prevention method to be utilized or installed shall be determined by the City. The method required by the City shall be sufficient to protect against the potential degree of hazard, as determined by the City, to the public potable water supply from the Customer's water service. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-88. - Hazard potential. 
    The degrees of hazard potential to the public potable water supply and system from a Customer's water supply system shall be determined using the following hazard factors: 
(1)  Health: Any condition, device or practice which, in the judgment of the City, may pose a threat to the health and well-being of the potable water consumers or the City's public water supply. 
(2)  Plumbing: A plumbing cross-connection that is not properly protected by an approved backflow prevention method. 
(3)  Pollution: An actual or potential threat to the quality of the public potable water supply which may constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable. 
(4)  System: An actual or potential threat which may cause severe damage to the physical facilities of the public potable water supply system or which may have an adverse effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-89. - Backflow prevention device approved list. 
(a)  A backflow prevention device shall be any assembly or other means designed to prevent backflow. The following are the recognized backflow prevention devices which the department may require under or Section 33-90. 
(1)  Air gap: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the opening of any pipe or faucet supplying potable water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of said tank, plumbing fixture or other device. 
(2)  An approved air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe or faucet and in no case less than one (1) inch. 
(3)  Reduced pressure principle assembly (hereinafter "RP"): An assembly containing two (2) independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves, and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves at each end of the assembly. 
(4)  Double check valve assembly (hereinafter "DC"): An assembly composed of two (2) independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located test cocks. 
(5)  Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (hereinafter "PVB"): An assembly containing an independently operating, located check valve and an independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly shall be equipped with properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly. 
(b)  A backflow prevention device may be approved by the City if it has received the approval of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California and, for assemblies, has a local manufacturer's parts and service center. 
(c)  The City shall maintain a list of approved backflow prevention assemblies, by type and manufacturer. The list shall be furnished to any Customer required to install a backflow prevention assembly. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-90. - Backflow prevention device required for specified activities. 
(a)  When any of the following activities are conducted on premises served by the public potable water system, a potential hazard to the public potable water supply shall be presumed and a backflow prevention device, of the type specified for that activity herein, must be utilized or installed at the service connection for that service address. 
(1)  Aircraft and missile plants: RP 
(2)  Animal clinics and animal grooming shops: RP 
(3)  Any premises where a cross-connection is maintained: RP 
(4)  Automotive repair with steam cleaner, acid cleaning equipment, or solvent facilities: RP 
(5)  Auxiliary water system: RP 
(6)  Bottling plants, beverage or chemical: RP 
(7)  Breweries: RP 
(8)  Buildings greater than three (3) stories or greater than thirty-four (34) feet in height from curb level: RP 
(9)  Buildings with house pumps and/or potable water storage tank: DC 
(10)  Buildings with landscape fountains, ponds, or baptismal tanks: RP or Air Gap 
(11)  Buildings with sewage ejectors: RP 
(12)  Canneries, packing houses, and reduction plants: RP 
(13)  Car wash facilities: RP 
(14)  Centralized heating and air-conditioning plants: RP 
(15)  Chemical plants: RP 
(16)  Chemically treated potable or non-potable water systems: RP 
(17)  Civil works (government owned or operated facilities not open for inspection by the City): RP 
(18)  Commercial laundries: RP 
(19)  Dairies and cold storage plants: DC 
(20)  Dye works: RP 
(21)  Film processing laboratories: RP 
(22)  Fire systems-American Water Works Association classes 1, 2, 3. All systems six (6) inches in size and larger or any system constructed of a piping material not approved as a potable water system material per the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the City: DC 
(23)  Fire systems-American Water Works Association Classes 4, 5, 6: RP 
(24)  Fire systems-Where backflow protection is required on the industrial/domestic service connection that is located on the same premises, both service connections will have adequate backflow protection for the highest degree of hazard effecting either system. 
(25)  Flood processing plants: RP 
(26)  Schools and colleges: RP 
(27)  Holding tank disposal stations: RP 
(28)  Hospitals and mortuaries: RP 
(29)  Medical and dental buildings, sanitariums, rest and convalescent homes engaged in the diagnosis, care or treatment of human illness: RP 
(30)  Irrigation systems (not to include single-family detached residences): 
a.  Service addresses having separate systems used in elevated areas or with drip irrigation: RP 
b.  Service addresses having non-potable water piping (lawn sprinklers) two (2) inches and smaller: RP 
(31)  Laboratories using toxic materials: RP 
(32)  Manufacturing, processing, and fabricating plants using toxic or nontoxic materials: RP 
(33)  Mobile home parks: RP 
(34)  Motion picture studios: RP 
(35)  Multiple services, interconnected: RP 
(36)  Oil and gas production facilities: RP 
(37)  Paper and paper production plants: RP 
(38)  Plating plants: RP 
(39)  Portable insecticide and herbicide spray tanks: RP or Air Gap. 
(40)  Power plants: RP 
(41)  Radioactive materials processing facilities: RP 
(42)  Restricted, classified, or other closed facilities: RP 
(43)  Rubber plants: RP 
(44)  Sand and gravel plants: RP 
(45)  Sewage and storm drainage facilities: RP 
(46)  Shopping centers: DC 
(47)  Street sweepers, steel wheeled rollers: RP or Air Gap. 
(48)  Water trucks, water tanks or hydraulic sewer cleaning equipment: RP or Air Gap. 
(49)  Hotels, motels and resorts: RP 
(50)  Restaurants & bakeries: RP 
(51)  Multi-family: RP 
(b)  When two (2) or more of the activities listed above are conducted on the same service address and served by the same service connection, the most restrictive backflow prevention device required for any of the activities conducted on the service address shall be required to be utilized or installed at the service connection. The order of most restrictive to least restrictive backflow prevention devices shall be as follows: 
(1)  Air gap (most restrictive); 
(2)  Reduced pressure principal assembly (RP); 
(3)  Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (PVB); 
(4)  Double check valve assembly (DC) (least restrictive). 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-91. - Backflow device installation requirements; location. 
(a)  Backflow prevention devices shall be installed by the Customer, at the Customer's expense and in compliance with the standards and specifications adopted by the City, at the service connection. The device shall have a diameter at least equal to the diameter of the service connection. 
(b)  The device shall be in an accessible location approved by the City. A reduced pressure principle device and pressure vacuum breaker device shall be installed above ground. A double check valve device may be installed, at the Customer's option, below ground in a vault which meets standard specifications established by the City. 
(c)  When a Customer desires a continuous water supply, two (2) or more backflow prevention devices shall be installed parallel to one another at the service connection to allow a continuous water supply during testing of the backflow prevention devices. When backflow prevention devices are installed parallel to one another, the sum of the areas of the diameters of the devices shall be at least equal to the area of the diameter of the service connection. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful, and punishable as a misdemeanor, for any person to bypass or remove a backflow prevention device without the approval of the City. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-92. - Installation of backflow prevention devices for fire sprinkler systems. 
(a)  When a backflow prevention device is required for a water service connection supplying water only to a fire sprinkler system, the device shall be installed at the service connection in compliance with the standard specification adopted by the City. 
(b)  If the City, determines that a fire sprinkler system shall have a continuous water supply which may not be interrupted during testing of the backflow prevention device, the Customer shall install, at his expense, two (2) backflow prevention devices parallel to one another at the service connection. The diameter of each assembly shall be at least equal to the diameter of the service connection. 
(c)  Modifications of an existing service connection supplying water solely to a fire sprinkler system shall require the entire system to comply with the requirements of Section 33-18 and Section 33-90. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-93. - Inspections. 
    A Customer's water service shall be open at all times during business operations at the service address for inspection by authorized personnel of the City. The inspection shall be conducted to determine whether any cross-connections or other hazard potentials exist and to determine compliance with this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-94. - Test; maintenance; records. 
(a)  The Customer shall test and service backflow prevention devices at least once a year. If the testing reveals the device to be defective or in unsatisfactory operating condition, the Customer shall perform any necessary repairs, including replacement or overhaul of the assembly, if necessary, which will return the device to satisfactory operating condition. 
(b)  If the City or Customer learns or discovers, during the interim period between tests, that a device is defective or in unsatisfactory operating condition, the Customer shall perform any necessary repairs, including replacement or overhaul of the device, which will return the device to satisfactory operating condition. 
(c)  The annual testing shall be performed by an individual certified and approved to conduct such testing by the City. A list of certified, approved and recognized individuals will be maintained by the City and will be available upon request to all persons required to install or maintain a backflow prevention device. 
(d)  The Customer shall maintain records, on forms approved by the City, of the results of all tests and all servicing, repairs, overhauls or replacements of the backflow prevention device. A copy of the records shall be promptly submitted to the City after completion of the activity for which the record is made. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-95. - Modification of backflow prevention requirements. 
    If the City determines, after inspection of the Customer's system, that a backflow prevention device less restrictive than that required in Section 33-90 will provide adequate protection of the public potable water supply from the degree of hazard potential by the Customer's water service the City may, in its sole discretion, approve an alternative backflow device accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-96. - Discontinuance of water service; notice. 
(a)  If the City discovers that a Customer: (i) has not installed a required backflow prevention device; or (ii) that a backflow prevention device has been improperly tested or maintained, bypassed or removed; or (iii) that an unprotected cross-connection exists in the Customer's water system, the water service to that service connection shall be disconnected. The service shall not be restored until the condition is remedied. 
(b)  Water service to a fire sprinkler system shall not be subject to disconnection under this Section. If a situation, which would otherwise result in discontinuance of water service in subsection (a) above, is not remedied within the time provided in a notice sent to the Customer may be issued a citation for a misdemeanor offense. Each day the situation is allowed to continue thereafter shall constitute a separate violation of this Section. 
(c)  Prior to disconnecting any water service because a condition set forth in subsection (a), above, exists, the City shall send a notice to the Customer describing the condition and notifying the Customer the condition must be remedied within forty-five (45) days after mailing of the notice by the City. If such condition is not remedied within said forty-five (45) day period, the City shall send a second notice, by certified mail, to the Customer notifying the Customer that water service will be disconnected in fifteen (15) days if the condition is not remedied within such time period. 
(d)  The City may disconnect, without notice, water service to any Customer when the City discovers that the Customer's water service is contaminating the public potable water supply. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-97. - Retroactive application. 
(a)  The provisions of this division shall apply to all new and existing water Customers. 
(b)  Backflow prevention devices installed prior to enactment of this code, and which do not comply with the requirements set forth in this Article, shall be replaced with devices which comply with the standards set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-98. - Fees. 
(a)  A monthly service fee may be established by City Council resolution to cover the costs of implementing and enforcing this Article and, if established, shall be charged to every Customer who is required to install a backflow prevention assembly. The fee shall be included in the Customer's monthly water bill. 
(b)  Fees for backflow prevention device testing by the City shall be established by City Council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-99. - Plan review. 
    All backflow prevention devices which will be installed shall be shown and specified on all required building and engineering plans. City approval of the intended device installation is required prior to issuance of any building or engineering permit. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 33-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    ADEQ: Arizona Department of Environmental Quality. 
    Approved laboratory procedures: The measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes in accordance with analytical procedures as established in title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, part 136 as revised, that are performed by an environmental laboratory licensed by the state pursuant to A.R.S. § 36-495, et seq. 
    Average quality: The arithmetic average (weighted by flow value) of all the daily determinations of a concentration, made during a calendar month. 
    AZPDES: The Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, which is the State program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment and bio-solids requirements under A.R.S. Title 49, Chapter 2, Article 3.1 and 18, A.A.C. 9. Articles 9 and 10. 
    Best management practices (BMP): Measures or practices used to reduce the amount of pollution entering the sanitary sewer system, surface water, air, land or ground waters. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature of twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Branch sewer: A term for a sewer which receives sewage from lateral sewers from a relatively small area. 
    Building connection or sewer tap: The connection to the public sewer and the extension therefrom of the sewer to the property line in an alley or street, or to the easement line in an easement, whichever is applicable, depending on the location of the public sewer. 
    Building official: The Director of the Development Services Department or any successor City department with responsibility for building safety, or his /her designee. 
    Building sewer or house sewer: The extension from the building drain to the building sewer connection or other place of disposal. 
    Categorical standards: Those standards promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under the authority of Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which apply to a specific category of industrial user and which are published in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N (parts 405-471). 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD): The quantity of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidation of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Commercial user: Any nonresidential user which provides a service connected with commerce and which is not classified as an industrial user. The City maintains a list of the types of businesses that are commercial users and has the authority to classify specific users. 
    Composite sample: A combination of individual samples obtained at regular intervals over a specified time period. The volume of each individual sample shall be either proportional to the flow rate during the sample period (flow composite) or constant and collected at equal time intervals during the composite period (time composite). 
    Composite sample quality: The concentration of some parameter tested in a "composite sample." 
    Cooling water: The clean wastewater discharged from any heat transfer system; including but not limited to, condensation, air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, water. 
    Daily average limitation: The maximum allowable concentration in a discharge as measured in a representative sample during a sampling day. In determining compliance with the daily average limitation, City samples shall not be combined with non- City samples. 
    Developer: Any person engaged in the organizing and financing of a wastewater collection system within an area contributing to a branch, main, or a trunk sewer of the City sewage works. Developer may also include a sub-divider or a legally-constituted improvement district. 
    Discharge: The disposal of any sewage, pollutant(s), water or any liquid from any sewer user into the sewage works. 
    Domestic user: Any user who discharges only domestic wastewater. 
    Domestic waste: A typical, residential-type waste which requires no pretreatment under the provisions of this Article before discharging into the sanitary sewer system, excluding all commercial, manufacturing and industrial wastes. 
    EPA: The United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Establishment or plant: Any establishment or plant producing liquid waste, with or without suspended solids, required to be discharged into the City sewer system. 
    Free access: The ability of City personnel to enter user facilities under safe and nonhazardous conditions with a minimum of delay to inspect any and all parts of the user's facility. 
    Food/Waste: Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
    Generator: A person who generates wastewater. 
    Grab sample: An individual sample of effluent collected in less than fifteen (15) minutes without regard for flow or time of day. 
    Grab sample quality: The concentration of some parameter tested in a "grab sample." 
    Industrial discharge: Any introduction into the POTW of a nondomestic pollutant which: 
(1)  Is produced by a source which would be subject to any categorical standards or pretreatment requirements if such source were to be discharged to the POTW; and 
(2)  Contains any substance or pollutant for which a discharge limitation or prohibition has been established by any categorical standard or pretreatment requirement. 
    Industrial user: A person who discharges process wastewater and does not meet the definition of "significant industrial user." 
    Industrial user permit or permit: The permit granted by the City which each industrial user must first obtain prior to causing or allowing any industrial discharge to the POTW. 
    Industrial waste: Any liquid, free-flowing waste, including cooling water, resulting from any industrial or manufacturing process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources, with or without suspended solids excluding uncontaminated water. 
    Inflow: Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer system (including sewer service connections) from sources such as roof leaders, cellar drains, foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections between storm sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basis, cooling towers, storm waters, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage. 
    Instantaneous limitation: The maximum allowable concentration in the discharge at any time as measured in a grab sample. In determining compliance with the instantaneous limitation, City samples will not be combined with non-City samples. 
    Interference: A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes, or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal. An interference may cause a violation of any requirement of any environmentally related permit issued by a governmental entity (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or may prevent sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); and state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Lateral sewer: A sewer which discharges into a branch or other sewer and has no other common sewer tributary to it. 
    Main sewer: A sewer which receives sewage from two (2) or more branch sewers as tributaries. 
    Maintenance: Keeping the treatment works in a state of repair, including expenditures necessary to maintain the capacity (capability) for which the works were designed and constructed. 
    National pretreatment standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limitations promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1317, et seq.) which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5. 
    Natural outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, or other body of surface or ground water. 
    New source: Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that Section, as stated in detail in 40 CFR 403.3(K). 
    North American Industry Classification System (NAICS): A coded classification of industries utilizing a six (6) digit coding system based upon economic activity developed by the U.S. Department of Commerce and designed to replace the SIC System of classification and published in the North American Industry Classification System Manual in 1997. 
    Notice: A written instrument served by the City, as follows: 
(1)  By use of ordinary mail to the last known address of a person to whom it is required to be given; or 
(2)  By personal service upon a person or his lawful representative; or 
(3)  By filing or recording with a clerk of the Maricopa County Superior Court or County Recorder. 
    NPDES permit: A national pollution discharge elimination system permit, issued to the City by the EPA, which imposes federal standards governing the quality of the treated effluent discharged from the POTW. 
    Oil and grease: The measure of oil and crease content of a sample as determined by EPA Method 413.1, or other equivalent test method approved by the City. 
    Oil and grease (TPH): The measure of the petroleum and mineral oil content of a sample as determined by EPA Method 418.1, or other equivalent test method approved by the City. 
    Pass through: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, violates any requirement of the POTW NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or which causes or contributes to a violation of an applicable numeric or narrative water quality standard. 
    Permit: A written control mechanism that the City issues to particular users or classes of users under the authority of Chapter 33 of the City Code. 
    Permittee or permit holder: Any person, or entity that owns, operates, processes or controls an establishment or plant being operated under a valid permit to discharge wastewater into the City sewage works. 
    Person: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, state, municipality, Indian tribe, political subdivisions of the state or federal governmental agency or any other legal entity, including their legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
    pH: The logarithm of reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant: Any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes. 
    Pollution: Any man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water. 
    Pollution prevention: Source reduction and other practices that reduce or eliminate the creation of pollutant through: 
(1)  Increased efficiency in the use of raw materials, energy, water, or other resource, or 
(2)  Protection of natural resources by conservation. 
    POTW: Publicly owned treatment works and connecting sewer collection system which are owned and/or operated, in whole or part, by the City and which provide the City with waste water collection and disposal services. 
    POTW residuals: All POTW effluent and/or solids, including sludge, scum, screenings and grit, which are the by-product of wastewater treatment operations and which must be discharged to the environment for ultimate disposal and/or reuse. 
    Pretreatment: The physical, chemical, biological or other treatment of any industrial discharge prior to its introduction into the POTW, for the purposes of: 
(1)  Reducing the amount or concentration of any pollutant; or 
(2)  Eliminating the discharge of any pollutant; or 
(3)  Altering the nature of any pollutant characteristic to a less harmful state. 
    Pretreatment requirements: All of the duties or responsibilities imposed upon POTW users by this Article. 
    Producer: Any person who owns, operates, possesses or controls an establishment or plant, whether or not a permittee. 
    Properly shredded garbage: Garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-fourth of an inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer: A lateral, branch, main or trunk sewer controlled and maintained by the City. 
    Recycling: A material that is used, reused, or reclaimed. A material is used if it is either: (1) employed as an ingredient (including its use as an intermediate) to make a product; however a material will not satisfy this condition if distinct components of the material are recovered as separate end products (as when metals are recovered from metal containing secondary materials)), or (2) employed in a particular function as an effective substitute for a commercial product. A material is reclaimed if it is processed to recover a useful product or if it is regenerated. Examples include the recovery of lead values from spent batteries and the regeneration of spent solvents. 
    Replacement: Those expenditures made for obtaining and installing equipment accessories and/or appurtenances during the useful life of the treatment works which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance of the treatment works for which they were designed and constructed. 
    Representative sample: A composite sample obtained by flow proportional sampling techniques where feasible. When the City determines that flow proportional composite sampling is not feasible, the City may allow or conduct composite sampling by time proportional techniques or by compositing of one (1) or more grab samples. 
    Residential dwelling unit: One (1) or more rooms in a dwelling or a portion of a dwelling designed for occupancy by one (1) family for living purposes and having its own cooking and sanitary facilities. 
    Sanitary sewer: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage: A combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. As used in this Article, the terms sewer system or sewerage works shall have the same meaning and definitions as sewage works. 
    Sewer: A pipe of conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer tap: See "building connection." 
    Significant industrial user: This term includes: 
(1)  All users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N (parts 405-471). 
(2)  Any other user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW's (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
    Significant noncompliance: An industrial user is in a state of significant noncompliance (SNC) when violations meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter, including instantaneous limitations; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of all of the measurements for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit, including instantaneous limitations, multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC equals one and four-tenths (1.4) for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and one and two-tenths (1.2) for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum long-term average, instantaneous limitation, or narrative standard) that the City determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under this chapter to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, which the City determines will adversely affect the operation of implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slug load: Any pollutant discharged to the POTW in such volume or strength as to cause interference. In particular, any pollutant concentration, quantity or flow rate which, during any period of fifteen (15) minutes or more is greater than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantity or flow rate for such pollutant during normal operations. 
    Source reduction: Any practice which: 
(1)  Reduces the amount of any pollutant or contaminant entering any waste stream or otherwise released into the environment (including fugitive emissions) prior to recycling, treatment or disposal; and 
(2)  Reduces the hazards to public health and the environment associated with the release of such substances, pollutant or contaminants. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC): A coded classification of industries based upon economic activity developed by the U.S. Department of Commerce as published in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget. 
    Standard methods: The procedure as described in the most current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater published by the American Health Association, or the most current edition of Manual of Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes published by the U.S. EPA. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain: A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Suspended solids (SS): Solids measures in milligrams per liter that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device, as defined Standard Methods. 
    System design capacity: The design capacity for normal domestic waste water as established by accepted engineering standards. 
    Total organic carbon (TOC): The total of all organic compounds expressed in milligrams per liter as determined by the combustion-infrared method prescribed by approved laboratory procedures. 
    Treatment parameter: A fundamental characteristic of sewage around which treatment is designed, such as, but not limited to, flow, BOD, and suspended solids. 
    Trunk sewer: A sewer which receives sewage from many tributary main sewers and serves as an outlet for a large territory. 
    Upset: An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with technology-based permit effluent limitations because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the permittee, excluding such factors as operational error, improperly designed or inadequate treatment facilities, or improper operation and maintenance or lack thereof. 
    User: Any person, lot, parcel of land, building, premises, municipal corporation or other political subdivision that discharges, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the sewage system. 
    User Class: A grouping of users with similar wastewater flow and strength of sewage discharge. User classes include, but not limited to single-family, multi-family and commercial. 
    Waste minimization: An activity which eliminates or reduces the amount of any pollutant from entering the waste stream or the environment. Such activity may include a change in raw materials, operational improvement, process improvement, product reformulation, reuse or reclamation. 
    Wastewater: Any liquid or water-carried pollutant, including an industrial discharge, which is introduced into the POTW from any person, dwelling, commercial building, industrial facility or institution. 
    Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently. 
    Zero process discharge user: A user that only discharges domestic wastes or have no discharge, but generates significant quantities of hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants or high concentrations of hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants in its waste stream which, if discharged, would be regulated by this chapter. Such facilities may be regulated by requiring them to have zero discharge of process wastes, thus allowing only domestic wastes to be discharged. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-102. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This Article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the City and enables the City to comply with all applicable, local, state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR, part 403). 
(b)  This Article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing Customer's capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the programs established herein. 
(c)  The objectives of this Article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants into the wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants into the waste water system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludges from the system; and 
(4)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-103. - State requirements. 
    State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-104. - City's right to alter requirements. 
    If consistent with State law, the City reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the waste water disposal system if necessary to comply with the objectives presented in Section 33- 102, subsection (c) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-105. - Enforcement generally. 
    The provisions of this Article are made for the benefit of the users of the City sewage works, for the protection of the sewage works, and to protect the quality of the effluent of the sewage treatment plants. Enforcement shall in no case be willfully ignored by any City official or employee, with the exception of applicable state and federal requirements, such as the pretreatment regulations which, the City may, suspend if compliance with such regulations will cause an interference or upset to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-106. - Rules and enforcement responsibilities. 
(a)  The City Manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to promulgate for the design, construction operation and maintenance of the City's sewer system. 
(b)  The City Manager or his/her designee shall have the authority over all field operations of the City's sewer system, including flow test measurements, quality of waste, service connections, line construction plus the operation and maintenance of all sewer system facilities. The City shall issue all permits for the construction and connection to the system, and collect all fees for the same. The City shall negotiate all agreements with all parties for the expansion and/or joint use of the City's sewer system. 
(c)  The City Manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to determine and collect all flow service rates and to make such regulations as necessary for same, including the ordering of a discontinuance of service for non-payment of required service fees. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-107. - Distribution of revenues and utilization of funds. 
(a)  Funds shall be established for the proper distribution of sewer revenues. Such funds shall include, but not be limited to; the following: 
(1)  Sewer system operations and maintenance fund; 
(2)  Sewer system replacement and extension fund; and 
(3)  Sewer system debt retirement fund. 
(b)  Service revenues shall be distributed to the funds identified in subsection (a) in the following proportion: 
(1)  The applicable portion of the sewer user charge revenues shall be allocated to the sewer system operations and maintenance fund; 
(2)  The applicable portion of the sewer user charge revenues shall be allocated to the sewer system replacement and extension fund; and 
(3)  The applicable portion of the sewer user charge revenues shall be allocated to the sewer system debt retirement fund. 
(c)  The sewer system operations and maintenance fund shall be utilized for personal services and operational expenses associated with the provision of sewer system services. The sewer system replacement and extension fund shall be utilized for equipment replacement expenses associated with the provisions of sewer system services. The sewer system debt retirement fund shall be utilized in servicing the debt of retirement of sanitary sewer bonds. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-108. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any user who has violated any provision of this Article or any order, rule, regulation or permit issued hereunder, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. In addition to any such penalty, the City may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses of litigation from such user found to have violated any provision of this Article. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties and costs recoverable under subsection (a) above, a user shall also be liable for all charges for abating sampling, testing, discharges waste containing non-permissible quantities of prohibited substances into the City sewer system. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties and remedies provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this Section, the City may seek and recover a civil penalty of not more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per day per violation from any user who violates Glendale City Code, chapter 33, Article III, divisions 7, 8 and 9, or is in significant noncompliance as defined in Section 33-101. 
(d)  The user shall also be liable for any fines or penalties imposed on the City by any other government regulator, including ADEQ or EPA, which results from the user's discharge. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-109. - Termination or suspension of sewer service for non-compliance. 
(a)  The City shall have the authority to discontinue sewer service to a service address for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to pay a charge assessed by the City for unauthorized discharges; or 
(2)  Failure to abate or correct an unauthorized discharge as required by the City; or 
(3)  Discharging any unauthorized substances, material, water or waste as prohibited by this Article or the City; or 
(4)  Discharging any substance, material, water or waste, including any hazardous substance, pollutants or contaminant, which creates or threatens to create an imminent and substantial threat to human health or the environment; or 
(5)  Any other violation of this chapter, except as otherwise provided therein. 
(b)  Such service shall not be restored until such violations have been discontinued or eliminated and all outstanding charges paid. The discontinuance of sewer service shall be accomplished by physically cutting and blocking the building connection. A charge in the amount established by resolution shall be paid to the City for terminating and restoring sewer service. 
(c)  In addition, the City shall have the authority to suspend sewer service without notice to the industrial user when such action is necessary to prevent, eliminate minimize or abate an actual or threatened discharge which may present an imminent endangerment to public health, welfare, or the environment. 
(d)  The person responsible for the discharge shall pay any fees assessed by the City within ten (10) days of the date such assessment is made and shall discontinue the unauthorized discharge as directed or ordered by the City. In the event the unauthorized discharge is not corrected or within ten (10) days, the outstanding discharge is hereby declared to be an environmental or public nuisance according to Section 18-4(b) of the City Code and shall be abated according to such provision and any implementing policies or regulations. The City may seek to abate such environmental or public nuisance itself or seek an order from a court of competent jurisdiction. The remedy provided herein shall be in addition to any other remedy authorized by [the City]. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-110. - Falsifying information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this ordinance, or wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-111. - Service outside city limits. 
(a)  All sewer service provided to users outside the corporate limits of the City shall be charged a rate and fees, including a connection fee, as determined by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  City sewer service offered to users outside the City limits shall be provided subject to compliance by such users with all terms of this Article and the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Secs. 33-112-33-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 33-126. - Permit. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, take any action to alter, adversely impact or otherwise affect any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City. 
(b)  Each person making application for a building connection shall present a valid plumbing permit issued by the City as a prerequisite for the approval of the requested building connection. All applications for building connections to be constructed by City shall be accompanied by the current fee for such work. 
(c)  Each person taking any other action that may adversely impact or otherwise affect the City sewer system shall also apply for a permit by describing the action to be performed and the expected impact or affect. All such applications shall also be accompanied by the City approval fee. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-127. - Building connections. 
(a)  All building connections shall be installed at the property owner's expense. according to City building codes. The design, number, location, manner of connection and size of all building connections installed shall be subject to the approval of the City. Building connections shall be installed on lateral sewers only, unless specifically authorized and approved by the City. All building connections shall be constructed in accordance with the City Code and any standards and specifications approved with the City. 
(b)  The City may perform the building connection for sewer lines of four (4) inches or greater if the City deems it necessary and in the best interest of the City. If the City performs the building connection, the property owner shall pay a connection fee. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-128. - Records. 
    The City shall keep a record of all sewer connections made, the purpose for which they are to be used, together with the name of the owner of the premise, his agent or representative. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-129. - Sewer wet taps. 
    The City shall make all taps from the City's sewer system. When taps are needed, the owner shall make all cuts to expose the sewer main in sufficient size to allow the City field crews enough room to make the necessary tap and provide shoring when required. The owner shall also furnish and install the saddle tee with collar or "wyes." A charge in an amount established by the City shall be assessed for each tap and shall be paid prior to the City making such tap. When the City installs the sewer service, there shall be no separate charge for the tap. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-130. - Sewer development fees. 
    A sewer development fee is assessed for residential dwelling units and non-residential developments constructed in the City, as provided in Chapter 28, Article VI. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Secs. 33-131-33-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWER EXTENSIONS 

Sec. 33-141. - Generally. 
(a)  Sanitary sewer facilities connecting with the existing City sewer system shall be installed to serve a subdivision. Each property within the subdivision shall be served by a separate private lateral. The lateral shall be constructed to grades and sizes shown on the plans submitted to and approved by the City, pursuant to Chapter 31 of this City Code. 
(b)  In new developments where public sewers are authorized by the City, public sewers shall be constructed at the Developer's expense. Detailed plans and specifications for public sewer extensions must be approved by the City prior to construction. The engineering cost for the preparation of plans and specifications, the staking of the location of the new public sewers, the cost of inspecting the construction, and preparation of as-built plans shall be paid by the developer. The City will perform one or more inspection(s) during construction to ensure compliance with the City approved plans. 
(c)  The City shall retain ownership of all public sewer lines, pumping stations, treatment facilities, and equipment and other appurtenances to the sewer system maintained, or accepted for maintenance except for laterals or service lines installed to service private property. In no case shall the owner of any premise or connection have the right to claim any part except where otherwise provided in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-142. - Approval and general standards. 
    No public sewer extensions shall be made until the plans and specifications are approved by the City. Public sewer extensions shall be constructed in accordance with standards and specifications as set forth in the Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction as sponsored and distributed by the Maricopa Association of Governments. Such document is on file with the City. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-143. - Special provisions for sewer taps and extension. 
    All public sewer extensions for residential, commercial and industrial parcels, lots or subdivisions must be authorized by the City and constructed at the property owner or developer's expense. The City may authorize the owner or his authorized agent, to install building connections with "wyes" and connect the building sewers to the building connection under the following provisions: 
(1)  That the construction of public sewer, building connections and connections of building sewers to the building connections, shall be made under the supervision of a registered civil engineer, holding registration in this state, who shall submit three (3) copies of the "as built plans," bearing the registered civil engineer's seal and number, to the City. It shall be the duty of the registered civil engineer to require that all building connections serving lots, parcels or subdivisions upon which no buildings are connected be effectively sealed until such time as the building will be constructed on the lots left vacant. Such sealed connections shall be inspected and approved by the City before being backfilled and shall be identified on the "as built plans." Effective seal shall consist of vitrified clay stoppers inserted in the bell of the sewer, extending to the property line in the alley, or to the curve line in the street from the public sewer, which stopper shall be jointed according to the City's specifications. Stoppers shall be permanently flagged by attaching one (1) piece of a length of copper wire to the stopper and the other end to a broken piece of clay pipe which shall be placed under the soil's surface directly over the end of the sewer pipe. 
(2)  Before any sewer connection is commenced, plumbing permits shall be obtained by the owner or his/her authorized agent from the City. 
(3)  When the "as built plans" are submitted to the City, a record will be made of all building connections. The City shall inspect the connections to ascertain that all requirements of the City plumbing code have been fulfilled. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Secs. 33-144-33-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 

Sec. 33-156. - Compliance. 
    It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain within the City any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-157. - Additional requirements authorized. 
    No statement contained in this Article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health departments of the state and county or any agency of the Federal Government, including but not limited to, EPA. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-158. - When allowed. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer does not service a geographic area within the City, or is not located in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, the sewer serving a property shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system. Such private sewage disposal system shall comply with the provisions and recommendations of the state department of health services, the sanitary code of the county health department. and any applicable provisions of this City Code. Such installations must be approved, in writing by the City prior to requesting any permit from the county. Such private sewage disposal system shall be constructed, maintained, and operated at all times in a safe and sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-159. - Abandonment. 
(a)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to serve a property then served by a private sewage disposal system, the property owner may, at his/her sole expense, connect to the public sewer and abandon the existing private system(s) servicing the property. 
(b)  When public sewer service becomes available in an area using private systems, a property owner may continue to operate and maintain the private system provided such private system is operating properly and does not pose any actual or threatened risk to human health, welfare or the environment or is a public or environmental nuisance. 
(c)  The property owner that can be saved by a public sewer shall immediately make modifications to connect to the public sewer and abandon the existing private system(s) servicing the property when: (1) the private sewer requires repair or modifications which requires a County permit; or (2) an actual or threatened risk to human health, welfare or the environment exists and cannot be repaired. 
(d)  Any septic tank, cesspool or similar private sewage disposal facilities abandoned pursuant to this Section shall be filled with suitable material in accordance with all applicable state and county regulations within ninety (90) days after the date the private system is abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Secs. 33-160-33-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CUSTOMER CHARGES 

Sec. 33-171. - Generally. 
(a)  In order to provide for protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City, a system of charges for sewer service is hereby established. 
(b)  All Customer charges and fees and all of the billings and collections of the same shall be established by resolution of the City Council and shall be set forth in Appendix 1 to this Chapter. 
(c)  In accordance with the provisions of this Article, the City shall establish Customer charges before the treatment works constructed with grant funds received from the Environmental Protection Agency as authorized by Title II of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, are placed in operation. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-172. - Costs determination for sewer use charges. 
    Sewer use charges shall be based upon the City's determination of the cost of providing sewer services including the following: 
(1)  The total applicable costs of salaries and benefits of employees engaged in operating sewer service. 
(2)  Applicable maintenance expenses, including parts, materials, and services incurred in providing sewer service. 
(3)  Applicable replacement costs necessitated for the provision of sewer services. 
(4)  Appropriate indirect costs of all City departments providing sewer related services, such as purchasing, accounting, billing and administration. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-173. - Use class rate calculation formula. 
(a)  Sewer use charges shall be calculated on the following formula for the each user class: 

Sewer Use Charge Formula 
Uc = Use charge. Vq = Volume of wastewater (in thousands of gallons) contributed to system by user per month, as established in subsection (b). Vom = Unit cost of sewer service allocable to volume of wastewater (that portion of O & M allocable to flow divided by total flow in MG). Bs = Concentration of BOD (Biochemical oxygen demand) in milligrams per liter. Bom = O & M cost for treatment of a unit of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). Ss = Concentration of suspended solids in milligrams per liter. Som = O & M cost for treatment of a unit of suspended solids. Nc = Number of Customers. Adm = Administrative and billing costs.  
(b)  That wastewater volume (Vq) for uses shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Single-family residential Customers as defined by the City: The volume of wastewater contributed by single-family residential Customers shall be set at ninety (90) percent of the average monthly water billed during the preceding January, February and March. If the City determines that adequate meter information is not available for billing a single-family residential Customer, then the Customer will be charged an average monthly billing for that user class. 
(2)  Multi-family residential and commercial Customers as defined by the City: The volume of wastewater contributed by multi-family residential and commercial Customers shall be set at ninety-five (95) percent of the average monthly water billed during the preceding January, February and March. If the City determines that adequate meter information is not available for billing a multi-family residential or commercial Customer, then the Customer will be charged an average monthly billing for that user class. 
(3)  Each industrial Customer will be considered a separate user class . City shall determine the individual factors to be applied to the monthly water meter reading to determine the monthly sewage flow. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-174. - Establishment of sewer user rate schedules. 
(a)  Sewer use charge rate schedules for all user classes will be established by resolution of the City Council using the formula noted in Section 33-173. and shall be set forth in Appendix 1 to this Chapter. 
(b)  Sewer user classes based on wastewater flow, BOD, and SS shall be established for the purpose of setting rate schedules. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-175. - Reserved. 
Sec. 33-176. - Proportionate distribution. 
    The City Council shall review, not less often than every two (2) years, the contribution, operation and maintenance costs and other charges assessed to users of the City's sewer system. Such fees and changes shall be assessed and collected to: 
(1)  Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users and user classes as required herein; 
(2)  Generate sufficient revenues to pay the total operation and maintenance costs necessary to the proper operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the sewerage system; and 
(3)  Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the costs of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year and adjust the rate accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-177. - Precedence of user rates established by resolution. 
    The sewer user rate changes as established by resolution of the City Council shall supersede any terms or conditions of agreements or contracts between the City and users to the contrary. Such rates shall be consistent with the requirements of Federal Water Pollution Act. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-178. - Other sewer service charges. 
    The City Council may require users of the City's sewer system to pay additional charges to cover the following costs: 
(1)  The annual debt service charges for the retirement of sanitary sewer bonds and debt service recovery; 
(2)  The cost of billing and collections; and 
(3)  The cost of industrial waste services. All such additional charges shall be imposed on all Customers on an equitable basis, as determined by City Council. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-179. - Temporary charge for single family dwellings with individual septic tanks. 
    Until the City can acquire additional sewer trunk line capacity, a charge for capital outlay and debt service and an administrative and billing charge will be assessed owners of single family dwellings with individual septic tanks. The owner of the single family dwelling must execute an agreement in a form approved by the City assuming responsibility for service to the individual septic systems. At such date that the City acquires sufficient trunk line capacity to allow the individual septic system owners to connect to the City's sanitary sewer lines, the owner shall connect to the City's system. After connection to the City's system, the full user charge rates as set by City Council resolution for all single family owners shall apply and be paid by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-180. - Reserved. 
Sec. 33-181. - Determination of wastewater quantity and billings. 
(a)  The fees and charges to be paid pursuant to this chapter shall become effective after each Customer's first regular meter reading for users with installed water meters that are to be billed on the basis of water consumption . For Customers billed on a flat rate, the fees and charges established herein shall be effective on the first month after the rates established herein become effective. 
(b)  Any affected user who fails or refuses to install a water meter to any source of water supply used, within thirty (30) days after written notice by the City, shall be charged on water usage estimated by the City. 
(c)  A user that discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids into the City sewer system, either directly or indirectly, will be charged for the cost of treating such waste-water. It is the burden of the user to demonstrate the percentage of metered water entering the City sewer system. In the absence of suitable data to make such a determination on the proportionate amount of metered water, the sewer user charge will be based on the total amount of water supplied to the services address. The City may require or permit the installation of additional water or sewer meters at such party's expense and in such a manner as to determine the quantity of water to be used in the determination of the sewer charge. In the event such additional water or sewer meters are installed, an additional monthly charge in an amount established by the City shall be assessed by the City and paid by the Customer. The additional monthly charge shall be equal to the cost of reading and computing the flow of each such meter and such additional charge shall be added to each sewer charge bill rendered. 
(d)  After installation of approved measuring equipment, the user shall conduct a test on such measuring equipment at least once every twelve (12) months to determine its accuracy. The results of this calculation shall be furnished in writing to the City within thirty (30) days of its performance. Those users seeking renewal of an industrial user permit or an interim industrial user permit shall file the results as part of the report required in this Article. It shall also be the user's responsibility to notify the City within a reasonable time in advance so that the City may, if it chooses, have a witness present during such test. If upon reviewing any such test results, the percentage of accuracy is found to be within the accuracy tolerance as established by the manufacturer's specifications, such measuring equipment shall be determined to have correctly measured the quantity metered. If, however, upon review any such test the percentage of accuracy is found to be in excess of the accuracy tolerance specified by the manufacturers, then such measuring equipment shall be immediately adjusted, recalculated, repaired or replaced to register correctly the quantity delivered to the sewer system. 
(e)  All users of non-City supplied water shall furnish to the City either: (1) a certified meter reading of water delivered to its property; or (2) a copy of the billing from the water supplier. In this event, the user's charges will then be calculated and the same conditions will apply as if the City were the supplier of water to the user. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Secs. 33-182-33-216. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - GENERAL USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 33-217. - Responsibility for cleaning, repair, and replacement of sewers and connections. 
    The property owner shall be responsible for the cleaning, repair, and replacement of sewers and connections to the public sewer line, except when the cleaning, repair or replacement requires excavation of a public street, public right-of-way (e.g. a public alleyway) or sidewalk. If the cleaning, repair or replacement of the sewer connection requires excavation of a public street, public right-of-way or sidewalk, the City shall undertake such cleaning, repair or replacement at no cost to the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-218. - Unsanitary disposal of wastes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or permit to be deposited, in an unsanitary manner, upon public or private premise within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-219. - Treatment of polluted wastes required. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge to any outlet within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any sewage, industrial wastes, or other hazardous substance, pollutant or contaminant, except where treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-220. - General user requirements. 
    It shall be unlawful for any user to discharge or cause to be discharged to the sewage works: 
(1)  Inflow, as defined in Section 33-101. 
(2)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard to the sewage works. In no case shall pollutants be discharged with a closed cup flashpoint less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty (60) degrees centigrade), or pollutants which cause an exceedance of ten (10) percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) at any point within the sewage works for any single reading or more than five (5) percent for any two (2) consecutive readings. 
(3)  Solid or viscous pollutants, petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through or that will cause obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference or damage with the sewage works. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing a hazardous substance, pollutant, contaminant toxic, radioactive, poisonous or other substances in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, cause corrosive structural damage, constitute an actual or potential threat to human health, welfare or the environment, or create any hazard to the sewage works or in the receiving waters of the sewage works or pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(5)  Any waters with a pH less than five (5.0) standards units (S.U.) or greater than ten and five-tenths (10.5) S.U. 
(6)  Any waters with a temperature greater than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-six (66) degrees centigrade) or heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no event heat in such quantities that the temperature at the head-works of the POTW treatment plant exceeds one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (forty (40) degrees centigrade). 
(7)  Any water or waste that has in any way been diluted, as a substitute for pretreatment, for the purpose of obtaining compliance with any categorical standard or pretreatment requirement imposed by this chapter except where dilution is expressly authorized by any categorical standard. 
(8)  Any water or waste that could cause a violation of any categorical standard or pretreatment requirement. 
(9)  Any water or waste that is transported from the point of discharge to the POTW by any septic tank pumper, chemical waste hauler, or similarly transported unless the transporter has first: 
a.  Disclosed to the City the origin, nature, concentration and volume of all hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants to be discharged; and 
b.  Obtained the consent of the City to discharge. 
(10)  Any water or waste which could cause interference or pass through with POTW operations. 
(11)  Any discharge that exhibits a characteristic of a hazardous waste, or contains a substance that is listed as a hazardous waste pursuant to either Arizona Administrative Code R18-8-261 or title 40, Code of Federal Regulations part 261, whichever is applicable, whether or not the discharge is otherwise subject to hazardous waste regulations. 
(12)  Any water or wastes exceeding the limits for the following parameters expressed in the total form except as otherwise indicated: 
Table 1 
INSTANTANEOUS EFFLUENT LIMITATIONS 
Substance Limit Benzene 35ug/L Chloroform 2,000 ug/L mg/L = milligrams per liter ug/L = micrograms per liter  
(13)  Any of the following prohibited substances: 
4, 4'-DDE 
4, 4'-DDT 
Aldrin 
BHC-Alpha 
BHC-Beta 
HC-Gamma (lindane) Heptachlor 
Heptachlor epoxide 
Polychlorinated biphenyl compounds. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-221. - Authority of city to establish permissible limits, approve waste discharges, impose charges. 
(a)  The City shall have the authority to regulate the volume and flow rate of discharge to the sewage works, and to establish permissible limits of concentration for various specific substances, materials, waters or wastes that can be accepted into the sewage works, and to specify those substances, materials, waters or wastes that are prohibited from entering the sewage works. 
(b)  The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having: 
(1)  A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred (300) milligrams per liter by weight; or 
(2)  Containing more than three hundred fifty (350) milligrams per liter by weight of suspended solids; or 
(3)  Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in Section 33-220; or 
(4)  Having an average daily flow of greater than twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons, shall be subject to the review and approval of the City. 
(c)  The City shall impose charges on any user of the City's sewage works who discharges wastes having characteristics that differ from normal sewage or containing non-permissible quantities or prohibited substances into the public sewer system. The charges so imposed shall be based on the extra costs incurred by the City in surveillance, sampling and testing of the discharges, for additional operating and maintenance expenses, or for any other action required to identify, handle, process or supplement normal activities due to the unauthorized discharge of excessive strength or unusual character wastes, plus overhead charges. Failure by a user to pay the charges and to provide any corrective measures as the City may require to prevent further unauthorized discharges, after due notice by the City and being given a reasonable time to comply, shall be sufficient cause to discontinue sewer service to the service address. 
(d)  The City shall ensure POTW user compliance with the requirements of this Article. In carrying out this responsibility the City has authority to: 
(1)  Issue or amend (as applicable) class A and class B wastewater discharge permits. Once issued, a permit: 
a.  Will be for a period of time not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be terminated by revocation by the City or upon voluntary surrender of the permit by the permittee at an earlier date; 
b.  Is non-transferable by the permittee; 
c.  Will specifically identify all applicable discharge prohibitions and limitations which the City will enforce; 
d.  May be amended as deemed appropriate by the City; 
e.  May contain monitoring requirements; 
f.  May contain reporting requirements; 
g.  May contain requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
h.  May contain required notifications; 
i.  May contain requirements for a plan to control slug discharges and spills. The plan shall contain at a minimum: 
1.  A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; and 
2.  A description of stored chemicals; and 
3.  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response; 
j.  May require implementation of Best Management Practices (BMPS) to reduce or eliminate the amount of hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants discharged to the POTW; 
k.  May contain requirements to control or reduce the concentrations of any of the substances identified in Sections 33-220 and 33- 232(3) through the use of best management practices; 
l.  May contain standard permit conditions; 
m.  May contain other conditions and requirements as deemed reasonably necessary by the City to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, protect against damage to the POTW and to ensure user compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(2)  A permit may be revoked by the City for good cause, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Failure to notify the City of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
b.  Failure to provide prior notification to the City of changed conditions pursuant to Section 33-231; 
c.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the waste-water discharge permit application; 
d.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
e.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
f.  Refusing to allow the City timely access to the facility premises and records; 
g.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
h.  Failure to pay fines and penalties; 
i.  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
j.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
k.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the permit application; 
l.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
m.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the permit or requirement of this chapter. 
(3)  Receive and analyze all self-monitoring reports and notices submitted by industrial users. 
(4)  Randomly sample and analyze effluent from POTW users and conduct those surveillance and inspection activities needed to identify, independently of any information supplied by such users, occasional or continuing noncompliance with any categorical standard or pretreatment requirement. 
(5)  Investigate instances of noncompliance with any categorical standard or pretreatment requirement when notice of any actual or probable noncompliance has been received by the City or any representative of the City. 
(6)  Notify POTW users of noncompliance with categorical standards or pretreatment requirements discovered by the City. Such notice shall also contain a demand for any appropriate corrective action, which may be necessary to meet the applicable requirements of this Article. Any POTW user will be allowed opportunity to respond to an order of the City before any enforcement action against such user is initiated, unless the discharge is a threat to the public health, safety and welfare or the environment, in which case the City may initiate enforcement action without giving notice. 
(7)  Comply with the public participation requirements of 40 CFR and A.R.S. § 49-391 in connection with the City's enforcement of any pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(8)  Impose appropriate penalties for noncompliance with any of the requirements of this Article. Such penalties may include any or all of the following: 
a.  Suspension or revocation of any industrial user permit for the failure of an industrial user to comply with the pertinent requirements of such permit. 
b.  Termination of POTW services. 
c.  Restricting or otherwise limiting allowable discharges. 
d.  Requesting that the City commence criminal and/or civil action against any user violating any requirement of this chapter. 
(9)  Annually publish, in the largest daily newspaper published in the City, public notice of all industrial users who at least once during the prior calendar year were in significant noncompliance (SNC). SNC is determined at any time of the year, except that for chronic and technical review criteria (TRC) violations, SNC is determined at the beginning of each quarter using the prior six (6) months. Chronic and TRC SNC is determined four (4) times during the year and the total evaluation period covers fifteen (15) months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against such users during the calendar year. 
(10)  Notify industrial users of applicable pretreatment standards and any applicable requirements under Section 204(b) and 405 of the Clean Water Act and subtitles C and D of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
In addition, the City shall: 
a.  Determine which actual or threatened discharge to the POTW will cause interference with the POTW or will present (or may present), an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of any person and/or to the environment; 
b.  Abate any actual or threatened discharge which would violate any categorical standard or pretreatment requirement imposed by this ordinance. In the minimum, the City will be able to promptly plug or disconnect any sewer service connection to the POTW; 
c.  Correct or mitigate any injury to the environment, the POTW or to any other property as a result of any discharge in violation of a categorical standard or pretreatment requirement imposed by this Article. 
    The City shall file with the City clerk three (3) copies of all federal statutes and regulations cited by this Article in order to allow regulated users adequate opportunity to be informed of the applicable federal requirements herein incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Secs. 33-222-33-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - INDUSTRIAL USER AND PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 33-231. - General industrial user requirements. 
    All industrial users shall: 
(1)  Comply with the categorical standards, pretreatment requirements, and all other requirements imposed by this chapter upon POTW users. Upon the effective date of any federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industry subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than the effluent limitations imposed under this chapter, shall immediately supersede those limitations. 
(2)  Comply with the orders of the City designed to implement the categorical standards, pretreatment requirements and all other requirements imposed by this chapter. 
(3)  Within ninety (90) days of the adoption of this chapter, and prior to the discharge of wastewater to the POTW by any new user thereafter, file a written notice with the City which identifies: 
a.  Name and address of the existing or prospective users; 
b.  Business location(s) served or to be served by the POTW; 
c.  Nature, concentration, and amounts of any substance present at, or intended to be present at such business location(s) which, if discharged to the POTW, could constitute an industrial discharge; and 
d.  Nature and concentration of all pollutants currently discharged to the POTW from such business location(s). 
(4)  Carry out and maintain an adequate record of all self-inspection and self-monitoring activities necessary for the user to know at all times whether or not such user is introducing any industrial discharge to the POTW. 
(5)  Assist the City to determine the exact nature, concentration, and volume of any hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant intended for discharge to the POTW. Therefore, upon request, any user or industrial user shall promptly: 
a.  Allow the examination and copying of all relevant records or documents available to the user; 
b.  Allow the inspection of all business locations served by the POTW, including all pretreatment equipment, methods and activities utilized by the user at such locations; 
c.  Install and maintain, at the user's expense, convenient and adequate monitoring and/or sampling point(s) needed by the City for monitoring and/or sampling purposes; 
d.  Allow the taking and removal of samples from any wastewater discharged or intended for discharge, to the POTW; and 
e.  Provide the City with any other information, including, but not limited to, chemical analyses of wastewater and architectural or engineering design data, drawings, etc., which are reasonably needed by the City for the purpose of determining such user's compliance with the requirements of this division. 
(6)  Not cause an industrial discharge without having first obtained, or applied for, a permit pursuant to the requirements of this chapter; 
(7)  Comply with any demand by the City to immediately halt any actual or threatened discharge to the POTW when the City has given notice that such actual or threatened discharge: 
a.  Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of any person or to the environment; or 
b.  Will cause interference with or pass through the POTW operations. 
(8)  Immediately give notice to the City of any discharge, including an accidental discharge, which is in violation of any categorical standard, pretreatment requirement, or permit condition imposed by this chapter. Such notice shall also describe: 
a.  The location of the discharge; 
b.  The known or estimated nature, concentration and volume of the discharged pollutant(s); 
c.  The type of assistance desired from the City; and 
d.  Any corrective action(s) undertaken, being undertaken, and/or to be undertaken by the user. 
(9)  Initiate all appropriate correction action(s) required by the City which are needed to: 
a.  Prevent any further injury to human health or safety, or to the environment, the POTW, and/or any other property; 
b.  Promptly repair all or part of any injury or damage caused by such discharge; and 
c.  Ensure that such a discharge does not occur again. 
(10)  Pay all sewer fees charged by the City for the wastewater collection and disposal services provided by the POTW pursuant to the requirements of this division. Such service fees will apply equally to all POTW users and will be determined by each user's proportionate share of the POTW operating and maintenance costs. The proportionate share will be based on such factors as the strength, volume and flow rate of wastewater discharged to the POTW by each user. 
(11)  Reimburse the City for all extraordinary expenses incurred by the City in insuring such POTW user's compliance with the applicable requirements of this division. An extraordinary expense is any cost not otherwise reimbursed from the normal collection of sewer fees. Therefore, extraordinary expenses include, but are not limited to, the costs in: 
a.  Issuing permits; 
b.  Conducting inspection, surveillance and monitoring activities; 
c.  Obtaining laboratory analyses of waste samples; 
d.  Taking enforcement actions against users not in compliance with the requirements of this division; and 
e.  Carrying out any measure needed for the protection of human health or safety, the environment, the POTW, or any other property in order to correct or mitigate any harm caused by the violation of any categorical standard or pretreatment requirement. 
(12)  Be financially responsible for all injury, damage, and/or loss suffered by any person as a result of any industrial discharge, by such user, which violates any categorical standard, pretreatment requirement, or permit condition enforced pursuant to this chapter. In particular, such user shall be liable for the: 
a.  Personal injury suffered by any person as a result of such discharge; 
b.  Costs reasonably incurred by any person in correcting, or otherwise mitigating, any adverse environmental impact which resulted from such discharge; and 
c.  Economic loss and property damage suffered by any person as a result of such discharge. 
(13)  Fully comply with this division. If the results of the user's self-monitoring wastewater analysis indicate a violation has occurred, the user must: 
a.  Inform the City of the violation within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation; and 
b.  Repeat the wastewater sampling and pollutant analysis and submit in writing the results of the repeat analysis within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation, unless the City requires it sooner. 
(14)  Sign all permit applications using the appropriate signatory: 
a.  For a corporation: By a corporate officer or other persons performing a similar policy or decision-making function for the corporation; 
b.  For a partnership or sole proprietorship: By a general partner or the proprietor, respectively; or 
c.  For a government entity: By the appointed or elected official, chairman, or principal executive responsible for operations at the facility. 
(15)  Insure that all applications, correspondence, reports, and self-monitoring reports are signed by a duly authorized representative of the person described in subsection (14) of this Section. Any change in signatures or positions shall be submitted to the pretreatment officer in writing within thirty (30) days after the change. 
A person is a duly authorized representative only if: 
a.  The authorization is made in writing by a person described in subsection (14) of this Section; and 
b.  The authorization specified either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the regulated facility or activity, such as the position of plant manager, superintendent, or position of equivalent responsibility. (A duly authorized representative may thus be either a named individual or any individual occupying a named position). 
(16)  Certification. Any person signing a document under this Article shall make the following certification: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-232. - Significant industrial user requirements. 
    In addition to all other requirements each industrial user who discharges an industrial discharge into the sewage works and is designated as a significant industrial user by the City shall also: 
(1)  Obtain a wastewater discharge class A permit from the City. Any application for a class A permit or an amended class A permit shall contain the information specified in the application form or such other information as may be requested by the City. Any person intending to commence any new industrial discharge(s), or any additional industrial discharge(s) not already allowed pursuant to an existing permit, shall apply for a new or amended permit at least ninety (90) days prior to initiating such discharge(s). 
(2)  Comply fully with all requirements and conditions of any permit. Once a permit is issued, no industrial user shall: 
a.  Make any new or increased industrial discharge. 
b.  Make any change in the nature of its industrial discharge(s) if such change will cause any new or increased industrial discharge. 
c.  Fail to give notice to the pretreatment officer of not less than ninety (90) days prior to any facility expansion, production increase, or process modifications which results or may result in new or increased discharges or a change in the nature of the discharge. 
d.  Fail to give advance notice to the pretreatment officer of any planned changes in the permitted facility or activity which may result in noncompliance with permit requirements. 
(3)  Provide all of the pretreatment necessary to comply with the categorical standards and pretreatment requirements imposed by this division. In addition, there shall be no discharge of any water or waste exceeding the limits for the following substances that are expressed in the total form except if otherwise indicated: 
Daily Average Effluent Limitations Substance Arsenic 0.13 mg/L Cadmium 0.047 mg/L Copper 1.5 mg/L Cyanide 2.0 mg/L Lead 0.41 mg/L Mercury 0.0023 mg/L Selenium 0.1 mg/L Silver 1.2 mg/L Zinc 3.5 mg/L  
(4)  Maintain a continuous discharge record which clearly identifies: 
a.  Dates and times of all industrial discharges; and 
b.  Nature, concentration(s), and volume(s) of all such discharges. 
(5)  Provide the City with all the same self-monitoring reports and notices which the industrial user is required to submit to any other authority in accordance with the provisions of 40 CFR part 403.12. In particular, the industrial user shall submit: 
a.  Notices which must be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days of the adoption of any categorical standard, including a compliance schedule; 
b.  Notices which must be filed within ninety (90) days of any final compliance date; 
c.  Reports which must be filed by the industrial user semiannually each year; 
d.  The immediate notice which must be given after a slug load release of any industrial discharge; 
e.  The sampling and analysis of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
f.  The maintenance of records by the industrial user; and 
g.  All reporting requirements and maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities as required by chapter 33 of the Glendale City Code. 
(6)  Records required by subsections (4) and (5) of this section shall be required to be retained for a minimum of three (3) years from the date of monitoring activity and shall be made available to the City, upon request, for inspection and copying. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation between the industrial user and the POTW. Such records shall include for all samples: 
a.  The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of the person or persons taking the samples; 
b.  The dates analyses were performed; 
c.  Who performed the analyses; 
d.  The analytical techniques/methods used; and 
e.  The results of such analyses. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-233. - Special discharges. 
(a)  In addition to all other requirements imposed by this division upon industrial users, the following types of industrial users may be required to obtain a class B wastewater discharge permit if the City determines the industrial discharge causes or has the reasonable potential to cause harm or damage to the POTW, worker safety, public safety or the environment: 
(1)  Zero process discharge user. 
(2)  Users that discharge the equivalent of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day of domestic waste as measured by BOD and SS. 
(3)  Discharges of polluted groundwater. 
(4)  Users discharging any of the substances identified in Sections 33-220 and 33-232(3). 
(b)  A class B permit may be issued to a non-significant categorical industrial user as that term is defined in 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2). 
(c)  The industrial user shall comply with all requirements and conditions of a class B wastewater discharge permit issued by the City under Section 33-221. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Secs. 33-234-33-237. - Reserved. 
Sec. 33-238. - Interceptors. 
(a)  Grease, oil, or sand interceptors shall be provided for laundries, restaurants, service stations, auto repair shops, carwashes and other facilities when, in the opinion of the City, such interceptors are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease or oil in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. 
(b)  All grease traps and interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection at all times. 
(c)  Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. The interceptors shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers. When bolted covers are required, the covers shall be gastight and watertight. 
(d)  Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater and bottom sludge and solids. The owner shall keep written records and documentation of all cleaning, repair, calibration and maintenance required to demonstrate compliance with this Section. Records shall be kept at the facility for a minimum of three (3) years and be made available to the City upon request. 
(e)  Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the trap or interceptor from which the waste was removed or any appurtenance of the wastewater collection system is strictly prohibited. 
(f)  All grease traps, oil, sand, and grease interceptors shall be pumped out or cleaned out completely at least once every one hundred eighty (180) days, or more frequently as required by the City, unless otherwise directed in writing by the City. 
(g)  The use of any enzymes, chemicals, or bacteria as a substitute for grease traps or grease trap or interceptor maintenance is prohibited. The use of such additives as a supplement to maintenance may be authorized by the City after a written request including material safety data sheets. Addition of emulsifiers into grease removal devices is strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-239. - Control manholes. 
    When required by the City, the property owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying potentially harmful or industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the City. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-240. - Right of entry for inspection. 
(a)  Any authorized employee of the City shall, upon presentation of his credentials, have free access at all reasonable hours to any commercial or industrial premises connected to the City sewer system for the purpose of making an inspection of the premises to determine the nature and quantity of wastes discharged to the City sewer system. 
(b)  City employees and authorized representatives of the City shall have the right to immediate access, without notice, all premises in the event of an emergency or an actual or threatened imminent and substantial endangerment to human health and/or the environment. 
(c)  Servicemen, pretreatment program inspectors, sanitary engineers, or other employees of the City, whose duty it may be to enter upon commercial or industrial premises to make inspections and collect samples or measure the quantity of wastes discharged to the City sewer, shall be provided with credentials to identify them as authorized representatives from the City. 
(d)  No person, except an employee or authorized representative of the City, shall have or exhibit any credentials of the City. It shall be the duty of each employee or authorized representative of the City, upon resignation or dismissal, to deliver and surrender all City credentials in his/her possession. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-241. - Determination of wastewater quality. 
(a)  The City shall have the authority to undertake whatever tests are necessary to carry out a planned sampling program and to undertake whatever analyses are needed to ensure all commercial and industrial users are in compliance with all terms and conditions of this Article. The BOD test shall be considered the standard test; however, COD or TOC tests may be substituted in cases where it has been determined by the City that the BOD test is not representative of actual wastewater loading. Wastewater characteristics shall be determined by the City on the basis of monitored wastewater discharged, a certified statement from the user, or on the best available data as to the characteristics of such discharges. 
(b)  Any change in the ongoing process employed by a user contributing commercial or industrial waste which results in a variation of more than twenty-five (25) percent in one or more of the effluent loading concentrations shall be reported to the City within thirty (30) days of the change. 
(c)  If it is determined through testing that a significant variation exists between the user's certified data and the discharge characteristics monitored by the City, the City may take any action available under this Article, including, but not limited to, adjusting the sewer use charge based on the monitored data from the original date of certification, unless written communication has occurred notifying the City of changes in loading and giving specific dates of changes. 
(d)  Where sampling and gauging of a specific user is not practical for physical, economic, safety or other reasons, the City may designate values for concentrations of the wastes discharged into the sewer system for all users in the same standard classification or sub-classification. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-242. - Tests and analyses. 
(a)  All tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods. 
(b)  Costs for all tests and analyses conducted by the City on each individual user shall be at the user's own expense. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-243. - Annual publication of list of violators. 
    The City shall annually publish in the local newspaper a list of the users that were not in compliance with pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during the twelve (12) previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the users during the same twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-244. - Reserved. 
Sec. 33-245. - Waste monitoring program. 
(a)  In order to insure continuing compliance with the limitations and restrictions set forth in this Article, each industrial user shall monitor its discharge to the City sewer system by testing the discharge with sufficient frequency to insure that such limitations are not excluded and such restrictions not violated. Such testing may be accomplished by a professional laboratory or, in cases where the user has sufficient testing capability, facilities and expertise, by the user itself. 
(b)  The City may require a laboratory analysis of a user's discharge at any time. Such analysis shall be performed by: 
(1)  An independent laboratory acceptable to the City; 
(2)  A City-operated laboratory; or 
(3)  The user itself. 
    The authority to determine who shall perform the analysis rests with the City Manager, or his/her designee. The City may also require that all costs associated with such an analysis be borne by the user. 
(c)  The user shall permit access to the sampling point or sampling well to the City's representative or the independent laboratory for the purpose of obtaining a sample during any hours of operation by the plant. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-246. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. To claim this trade secret protection, the user must specify at the time of submitting his reports or information, that part he desires to protect. 
(b)  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this Article, the AZPDES permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the City, state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Secs. 33-247-33-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES 

Sec. 33-256. - Protection required. 
    Each permittee under this Article shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials including hazardous substances, pollutant and contaminants, or other wastes regulated by this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-257. - Notice to city. 
    A permittee under this Article shall notify the City immediately upon accidentally discharging wastes in violation of this Article so the City may implement countermeasures to minimize any actual or potential threat to the sewer system and/or the receiving waters. This notification shall be followed, within five (5) days of the date of occurrence, by a detailed written statement describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. Such notification will not relieve permittee of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the sewer system, or for any penalties imposed on the City on account thereof and/or for any enforcement action pursuant to this discharge. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-258. - Notice to employees. 
    In order that officers, agents and employees of permittees under this Article will be informed of the City's requirements, permittees shall make available to their employees copies of this Article together with such other wastewater information and notices which may be furnished by the City from time to time for the purpose of improving and making more effective water pollution control. A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on the permittee's bulletin board advising officers, agents and employees who to call in case of an accidental discharge in excess of the limits authorized by the permit. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-259. - Labels for potential accidental discharge points. 
    Any possible connection or entry point for a hazardous substance, pollutant or contaminant and/or other prohibited substance to the permittee's plumbing or drainage system shall be appropriately labeled to warn operating personnel against discharge of such substances in violation of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OVERSIZE REQUIREMENT AND PARTICIPATION 

Sec. 33-261. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Developer: The person who is responsible for the development of land thereby creating a demand on City water and sewer facilities. 
    Oversize: Occurs when the City requires a developer to install a water or sewer line which has a diameter that exceeds the City's minimum size criteria and the developer's project requirement, as determined by the City Engineer. 
    Participation: City payment of in the increased installation cost necessitated by the City's oversize requirements. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-262. - Oversize requirement. 
    The City may require a Developer to install an oversize water or sewer line in order to meet existing and future system performance requirements. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-263. - City participation in oversizing cost; extent of participation. 
    If the City requires a Developer to install an oversized water or sewer line, the City may agree to pay in the increased cost of the line installation caused by oversizing line to plan for future demand. The City's participation in the increased cost shall be limited to the cost differential factor, between the cost incurred to meet existing demand versus the increase cost to meet future demand, provided for in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-264. - Limitation on participation. 
(a)  The City is not required to pay funds for the oversized line unless agrees to do so prior to the lines' installation. The City may only participate in oversizing costs only if sufficient funds are available in the capital improvement budget at the time the cost sharing expenditure is being proposed. If sufficient funds are not available, the City shall not be responsible or required to pay for any of the increased costs caused by the oversizing requirement. 
(b)  The City shall not participate in oversizing costs for oversized water or sewer lines installed outside the City or for lines installed prior to a receiving such a request for the Developer. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-265. - Installation without city participation. 
    If the City is unable to participate in oversizing costs, the developer must incur the entire cost to install the oversized water or sewer line. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-266. - Cost differential factor. 
(a)  The cost differential factor for participation in oversizing costs shall be determined by the City. The City shall review and revise, as necessary, the cost differential factor; however, in no event shall such review be less than once a year. 
(b)  The cost differential factor shall be on a per lineal foot basis. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-267. - Minimum size criteria. 
(a)  The minimum size criteria for water lines, exclusive of on-site building services, shall be twelve (12) inches in diameter for lines serving commercial and industrial areas, and eight (8) inches in diameter for lines serving residential areas. 
(b)  The minimum size criteria for all sewer lines, exclusive of on-site building sewers, shall be twelve (12) inches in diameter. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-268. - Initiation by developer. 
    The Developer must request participation from the City. The developer must submit the request for participation no later than the time at which the permit applications are submitted. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-269. - Agreement; approval. 
    An agreement by the City to participate in oversizing costs shall be in writing on a form to be provided by the City, and approved by the City Council. This agreement shall contain a provision requiring the developer to dedicate the oversized water and/or sewer line to the City after completion of installation and approval by the City. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-270. - Application of participation. 
    This Article shall not apply to the installation of oversized water or sewer lines before the effective date of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
ARTICLE V. - EXTENSION REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 33-271. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Extension: A water or sewer line which is extended by a developer beyond the City's existing water or sewer system to service the developer's project. 
    Extension reimbursement: Repayment of a portion of the costs to install an extension, to a developer who installs an extension water or sewer line, by a subsequent user of the extension. 
    Subsequent user: Any person who connects to, and is serviced by, an existing extension water or sewer line. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-272. - Extension reimbursement agreements authorized. 
    The City may enter into an extension reimbursement agreement with a Developer who proposes to install an extension water or sewer line to service his/her development. Such an agreement shall provide for the collection, by the City, of a pro rata share of the installation costs for the extension water or sewer line from subsequent users of the extension and reimbursement to the developer. The agreement shall comply with the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-273. - Limitation on extension reimbursement agreements. 
(a)  No extension reimbursement agreement may be entered into by the City for an extension water or sewer line outside the City. 
(b)  An extension reimbursement agreement may only be entered into for those development projects which, in addition to complying with the provisions of this Article, comply with the City's planning objectives. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-274. - Initiation of agreement by developer. 
    A developer who wishes to enter into an extension reimbursement agreement with the City shall submit to the City a written request for such an agreement with the application for an extension permit. The request shall include: 
(1)  A diagram of all properties which are expected to be serviced by the proposed extension. The diagram shall be provided on approved standard quarter-section maps of the City of Glendale or any other standardized atlas system designated by the City. 
(2)  A certification that the ownership of any extension and appurtenances thereto will be dedicated to the City upon completion and acceptance of the work by the City. 
(3)  A statement that the City's cost for inspecting said work shall be paid by the Developer. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-275. - Agreement in writing; authority to execute. 
(a)  An extension reimbursement agreement shall be in writing, signed by the developer or his authorized representative, on a form provided by the City. The provisions of the written agreement shall comply with this Article and shall contain the entire agreement between the City and the Developer. 
(b)  The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to execute the agreement on behalf of the City, after obtaining the review of the City Attorney and approval of the City Council, if necessary according to the Charter and Code. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-276. - Reimbursable extension cost. 
(a)  The extension costs for which a developer may seek an extension reimbursement agreement are the actual construction costs, less any oversizing line cost share paid by the City and the five (5) percent administrative fee provided for in Section 33-284. The Developer may not be reimbursed amount, not to exceed eight (8) percent of the construction cost, for engineering costs. 
(b)  The Developer is not entitled to reimbursement for the costs of installing water and sewer lines within the boundary of the development. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-277. - Bidding for installation of extension lines; approval of construction costs. 
(a)  The selection of a Contractor for the installation of the extension water or sewer line shall be made by competitive bidding. in accordance with A.R.S. Title 34 and any and all applicable provisions of Article 2 of the City Code. The Developer shall submit to the City a notarized copy of all bids received, a copy of the bid tabulation and any information concerning the successful bidder. Both the City and the Developer shall have the right to reject any and all bids. No contract shall be awarded for installation of an extension water or sewer line prior to City approval of the successful bidder. 
(b)  After the Contractor has been selected and approved by the City to perform the extension installation work, the Developer shall submit the total proposed construction costs for the installation plus the projected engineering costs to the City. No construction may commence prior to the City's approval of these costs. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-278. - Allocation of reimbursable costs for extension water line. 
(a)  The reimbursable costs for an extension water line shall be allocated, on a footage basis, to all property, which may be served by, the water line extension. 
(b)  The Developer's property shall be allocated its proportionate share of the installation costs of the extension water line. The Developer shall not be entitled to reimbursement for this portion of the reimbursable extension costs. The Developer may only be reimbursed for the extension costs associated with property outside his development. 
(c)  The front footage for each parcel of premise shall be established by the City. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-279. - Allocation of reimbursable costs for extension sewer line. 
(a)  The reimbursable costs for an extension sewer line shall be allocated, on an acreage service basis, to all property, which may be served by the sewer line extension. 
(b)  The Developer's property shall be allocated its proportionate share of the installation costs of the extension sewer line. The Developer shall not be entitled to reimbursement for this portion of the reimbursable extension costs. The Developer may only be reimbursed for the extension costs associated with property outside his development. 
(c)  The acreage service area for each parcel of property shall be established by the City. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-280. - Collection of allocated reimbursements costs; trust account; payment. 
(a)  The allocated reimbursement extension cost shall be collected by the City at the time the owner or Developer of the property to which extension costs have been allocated applies to the City for a permit to connect to the extension. The allocated reimbursement extension costs must be paid prior to issuance of a connection permit or actual connection to the extension. 
(b)  All funds collected pursuant to the extension reimbursement agreement, less the City's administrative fee as provided in this Article, shall be placed into a separate trust account for the collection and payment of allocated reimbursement extension costs. 
(c)  Payment of collected reimbursement extension costs shall be made to the Developer on an annual basis each thirtieth day of June. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-281. - Service obtained from other source; connection by unassessed parcel; limitation on reimbursement amount. 
(a)  If any parcel of property to which reimbursement extension costs have been allocated receives water or sewer service by means other than the extension of water or sewer lines covered by the agreement, the reimbursement extension costs allocated to that parcel will not be collected and the City shall not be responsible to reimburse the Developer for any extension costs associated with that parcel. 
(b)  If any parcel of property, which has not previously been allocated a pro rata share of the reimbursement extension costs, applies to the City for a permit to connect to the extension, the City shall assess a portion of the reimbursement extension cost, on a front footage or acreage service basis. The City shall collect the pro-rate share of extension costs associated with this parcel prior to issuance of the connection permit or actual connection to the extension. 
(c)  In no event shall the Developer receive an amount which exceeds the total reimbursement extension costs less the developer's allocated share of those costs. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-282. - Dedication of extension line. 
    The extension reimbursement agreement shall provide that the extension water or sewer lines covered by the agreement shall become the property of the City upon completion of installation and acceptance by the City. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-283. - Expiration of agreement. 
    The term of the extension reimbursement agreement shall be for a period of five (5) years from the execution date of the agreement. At the expiration of the agreement, the City shall pay to the Developer all amounts which have been collected by the City on behalf of the Developer and not previously dispersed to the Developer. The Developer shall have no right to reimbursement for any connection to the extension line after the expiration date of the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-284. - Administrative fee. 
    The City's fee for administration of the agreement and collection of the allocated reimbursement costs shall be ten (10) percent of the allocated reimbursement costs. The fee shall be paid in equal shares by the developer and the subsequent users of the extension as follows: 
(a)  The subsequent user of an extension water or sewer line shall pay to the City its allocated reimbursement cost plus an additional five (5) percent of that amount as the subsequent user's portion of the City's administrative fee. 
(b)  The City shall reimburse to the Developer the allocated reimbursement cost (which were collected) less five (5) percent of that amount as the Developer's portion of the City's administrative fee. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-285. - Projected allocation. 
    The extension reimbursement agreement shall include a diagram approved by the City designating the properties which are expected to be served by the extension water or sewer line. The plat (or diagram) must identify the per front footage (water) and per acreage service (sewer) factors to be used for allocation of the reimbursement costs and the front footage (water) and acreage (sewer) assigned to each parcel for purposes of allocating the reimbursement costs. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-286. - Assignability of agreement. 
    The agreement shall set forth the name of the person to whom payment of the reimbursement amount shall be made. The Developer may assign to one party only, with the consent of the City, the right to receive payments under the extension reimbursement agreement. No other assignment of any portion of the extension reimbursement agreement may be made by the Developer or his/her assignee. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-287-33-289. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STORM WATER POLLUTION CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 33-290. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This Article sets forth requirements for the control of pollutants that are or may be discharged to the public storm drain system. The purpose is to improve the quality of storm water discharges and to enable the City to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including but not limited to, the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.), the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 122), and the Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Regulations (Arizona Administrative Code, Title 18, Chapter 9, Article 9). The objectives of this Article are: 
(1)  To reduce the discharge of pollutants from our public storm drain system into receiving waters, waterways, and groundwater; 
(2)  To control the discharge to the public storm drain system resulting from spills, dumping, or disposal of materials other than storm water; 
(3)  To enable the City to comply with the conditions of its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System storm water permit or Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System storm water permit; 
(4)  To prevent discharges that could cause or contribute to damage to the public storm drain system; 
(5)  To promote the proper management of hazardous wastes, hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants and other solid or liquid wastes to prevent their discharge into the public storm drain system; 
(6)  To reduce pollutants in storm water to the maximum extent practicable; and 
(7)  To protect the public health and the environment. 
(b)  This Article establishes discharge prohibitions; authorizes the identification of controls to reduce the discharge of hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants that may be required; provides for necessary inspections, monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; and establishes administrative review procedures. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-291. - Administration. 
    The City Manager is delegated the authority to exercise the powers and perform the duties set forth in this Article and to administer and enforce provisions of this Article. The City Manager may further delegate this authority to a designee. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-292. - Reserved. 
Sec. 33-293. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Article, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
    Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ): The state agency charged with enforcement of environmental laws and regulations. 
    Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (AZPDES) storm water permit: A permit issued by ADEQ which authorizes the discharge of storm water pursuant to Arizona Administrative Code R18-9-A902. 
    Best Management Practices (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to storm water. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from outdoor storage areas. 
    City: The City of Glendale. 
    Clean Water Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 United States Code § 1251 et seq. 
    Discharge: Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, injecting, placing, releasing, leaching, dumping, or disposing into or on any land in a manner that may cause pollution. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA): The federal agency charged with enforcement of environmental laws and regulations. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) storm water permit: A permit issued by EPA which authorizes the discharge of storm water pursuant to the Clean Water Act § 402 (33 U.S.C. § 1342). 
    Notice of Intent (NOI): A form submitted to ADEQ notifying of person's intent to be covered under a separate AZPDES storm water permit, as required by federal and state law. 
    Person: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. 
    Pollutant: Fluids, contaminants, toxic wastes, toxic pollutants, dredged spoil, solid waste, substances and chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers and other agricultural chemicals, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, petroleum products, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and mining, industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes or any other liquid, solid, gaseous or hazardous substances. 
    Pollution: The presence of a pollutant(s) on land or in storm water. 
    Premises: Any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Public storm drain system: All or any part of the publicly-owned and maintained roads, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, storm drains, and dry wells located within public easements, right-of-way, parks, common areas, retention areas, or other publicly-owned or maintained real property designed or used for collecting, holding, or conveying storm water. 
    Release: Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, placing, leaching, dumping, or disposing into or on any land in a manner that can cause pollution. 
    Storm water: Storm water runoff, surface runoff, and drainage. 
    City: The City of Glendale. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Secs. 33-294-33-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITIONS AND CONTROLS TO REDUCE THE DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS IN STORM WATER 

Sec. 33-300. - Prohibitions of non-storm water discharges to the public storm drain system; exemptions. 
(a)  Unless expressly authorized or exempted by this Article, no person shall cause or allow the release to a public right-of-way or public storm drain system of any substance that is not composed entirely of storm water. 
(b)  Unless expressly authorized or exempted by this Article, no person shall use, store, spill, dump, or dispose of materials in a manner that could cause or contribute to the addition of pollutants to storm water. 
(c)  The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this Section provided they are not otherwise significant sources of pollutants to waters of the United States: 
(1)  Discharges authorized by a separate NPDES or AZPDES storm water permit 
(2)  The following categories of non-storm water discharges are permissible unless otherwise prohibited under subsections (d), (e), or (f): 
a.  Water line flushing and other discharges from drinking water sources; 
b.  Landscape irrigation and lawn watering; 
c.  Irrigation water; 
d.  Diverted stream flow; 
e.  Rising groundwater; 
f.  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration; 
g.  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
h.  Uncontaminated foundation and footing drains; 
i.  Uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps; 
j.  Air conditioning condensation and evaporative cooler run-off; 
k.  Natural springs; 
l.  Individual residential car washing; 
m.  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, as those areas are designated under applicable federal and state laws; 
n.  Flows resulting from fire-fighting activities; 
o.  Discharges from potable water sources; or 
p.  Any other activity that is exempted under the City's NPDES OR AZPDES storm water permit. 
(d)  No person shall discharge to a publicly owned right-of-way or the public storm drain system any exempted discharge under subsection (c) paragraph (ii) of this Section if the City identifies and provides written notice to the person that the discharge has the potential to be a source of pollutants to receiving waters, waterways, or groundwater. 
(e)  No person shall discharge to the public storm drain system where such a discharge may result in or contribute to a violation of the NPDES or AZPDES storm water permit issued to the City, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the discharge. 
(f)  No person shall establish, use, maintain, or continue any connection to the public storm drain system which has caused or will likely cause a violation of this Section. Any connection that was permitted or authorized by a governmental entity with jurisdiction and authority will be discontinued upon thirty (30) days written notice by the City to: (a) the last known address of the owner of the premise and by posting notice on the premise; or (b) serving such notice on the person maintaining the connection. This prohibition is retroactive and shall apply to any connection that was made in the past, regardless of whether it was made under a permit or other authorization, or whether it was permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection. 
    City: The City of Glendale. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-301. - Operating facilities or activities. 
(a)  All persons owning or operating premises or who are engaged in activities which are required by federal or state law to submit to EPA and/or ADEQ a Notice of Intent (NOI) to comply with an NPDES or AZPDES storm water permit shall provide a copy of such notice to the City upon request. Facilities required to apply for a storm water permit are identified in 40 C.F.R. 122.26(b)(14). Facilities that qualify for a conditional exclusion for "no exposure" under 40 C.F.R. 122.26 (g) shall submit a copy of the signed certification to the City upon request. 
(b)  All persons engaged in activities which will or may reasonably be expected to result in pollutants entering the public storm drain system shall undertake best management practices (BMPs) to minimize such pollutants, shall provide protection from accidental discharge of pollutants to the public storm drain system and comply with the cleanup and notification requirements of this Article. Such measures shall include the requirements imposed by federal, state, county, or local authorities. BMPs are site- specific and are described in the document "Storm Water Management for Industrial Activities: Developing Pollution Prevention Plans and Best Management Practices" (EPA 832-R-92-006) or other guidance documents available from EPA, Maricopa County Flood Control District, and/or ADEQ. 
(c)  If a BMP is required by the City to prevent a pollutant from entering the public storm drain system, the person shall implement the BMP in the timeframe deemed reasonable by the City. The person receiving the notice of such a requirement may petition the City to reconsider the application of the BMP to the premises or activity. The written petition must be received within ten (10) working days and shall set forth any reasons and proposed alternatives. The City will act within thirty (30) days of the petition. If no action is taken by the City, the petition is deemed denied. If the City denies the petition, and action is not taken by the person within the required timeframe, failure to implement the BMP is considered a violation of this Article. If the person is unable to implement the BMP within the specified timeframe, an extension may be requested from the City. To receive an extension, the person must submit a written request identifying why the person cannot meet the timeframe, submit documentation to demonstrate that efforts have been made to implement the BMPs (i.e., procurement documentation for parts ordered, evidence that technology is not available, etc.), and provide a schedule for implementation of the BMPs. Granting of the extension is subject to the City's sole, unreviewable discretion. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-302. - Construction sites. 
(a)  All persons engaged in construction activities who are required by federal or state law to submit to EPA and/or ADEQ a Notice of Intent to comply with an NPDES or AZPDES storm water permit, shall provide the City with copies of the NOI and the Authorization Document issued by ADEQ prior to issuance of the building or construction permit. Construction activities that will disturb one acre or more of land area or smaller land areas if they are part of a larger common plan of development or sale are required to apply for a storm water permit [40 C.F.R. 122.26(b)(15)]. 
(b)  Any person performing construction shall not cause or contribute to a violation of the AZPDES storm water permit issued to the City. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person causing or responsible for the discharge. Any person performing construction shall undertake BMPs to minimize pollutants (including sediments) from leaving the construction site, shall provide protection from accidental discharge of pollutants to the public storm drain system, and comply with the cleanup and notification requirements of this Article. Site operators shall ensure erosion and sediment control, control waste, and properly dispose of wastes, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality. Such measures shall include the requirements imposed by federal, state, county or local authorities. BMPs are site-specific and are described in the document "Storm Water Management for Construction Activities: Developing Pollution Prevention Plans and Best Management Practices" (EPA 832-R-92-005) or other guidance documents available from EPA, Maricopa County Flood Control District, and/or ADEQ. 
(c)  If the City determines that pollutants may enter the public storm drain system from construction activities at a site less than one acre in size, the City may require site-specific BMPs be submitted and approved by the City prior to issuance of a construction permit. Such BMPs shall be implemented during construction activity. 
(d)  If a BMP is required to prevent a pollutant from entering the public storm drain system from a construction site, the City may order construction activities to cease until appropriate BMPs are in place. A person may petition the City to reconsider the application of the BMP to the premises or activity by submission of a written petition that sets forth any reasons and proposed alternatives; however, construction activities shall not commence until the City approves the BMPs. The City will act within thirty (30) days of receipt of the petition. If no action is taken by the City, the petition is deemed denied. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-303. - Post-construction. 
    Property owners or operators shall ensure proper operation and maintenance of post- construction storm water runoff control mechanisms, including but not limited to, retention basins, drywells, scuppers, and other measures implemented or installed at the site to control or direct storm water runoff. Changes or alterations to storm water mechanisms or storm water management agreements shall not be permitted without formal review and written approval by the City. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-304. - Cleanup and notification requirements. 
(a)  As soon as any owner or authorized representative has actual or constructive knowledge of any discharge which may result in pollutants entering the public storm drain system, such person shall promptly take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery of the source and the extent and proceed with containment and cleanup of such discharge. 
(b)  The owner or authorized representative shall notify the City of the discharge in both of the following manners: 
(1)  By telephone within 24-hours or by 12:00 noon of the next work day if discover of the discharge occurs on a weekend or holiday. If there is a public safety or health issue, call 9-1-1; and 
(2)  By written report submitted to the City within five (5) days identifying the discharge source, extent, pollutant, measures taken to mitigate the discharge, and preventative measures put in place to prevent a subsequent discharge. 
The phone number and address for reporting will be maintained on the City's website under storm water information. 
(c)  Upon request by the City, the owner or authorized representative shall submit a plan that demonstrates how the cleanup of the discharge will be conducted. Cleanup of the discharge shall not begin until the plan is approved by the City. 
(d)  Cleanup of discharges to the public storm drain system will be conducted by the City unless an alternative plan for cleanup is approved by the City. 
(e)  The owner or person who caused or is otherwise responsible for the discharge shall pay all costs associated with the containment and cleanup of any discharge, including any costs borne by the City for cleanup of the public storm drain system. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Secs. 33-305-33-309. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 

Sec. 33-310. - Inspection and sampling; right of entry. 
(a)  Upon presentation of credentials and at all reasonable or necessary hours, all City employees and authorized representatives of the City shall have access to all premises and to all records pertaining any discharge, permit or facility regulated under this division or purposes of ensuring compliance with this Article. Inspection, interviewing, copying, sampling, photographing, and other activities conducted on the premises shall be limited to those which are reasonably needed by the City in determining compliance with the requirements of this Article. All persons shall ensure access is provided such under safe and nonhazardous conditions with a minimum of delay. 
(b)  City employees and authorized representatives of the City shall have the right of immediate access without notice to all premises in the event of an emergency or an actual or threatened imminent and substantial endangerment to human health and/or the environment. 
(c)  In addition to those activities described in subsection (a) of this Section, City employees and authorized City representatives of the City shall undertake any monitoring necessary to ensure compliance with this Article. The City may establish such devices as the City reasonably determines are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Such devices shall be installed so as to minimize the impact on the owner and occupant of the premises. During all inspections as provided in subsection (a) of this Section, City employees and authorized City representatives may take any samples necessary ensure compliance with any applicable permit or Federal, State or local law, regulation or code provision. 
(d)  The City may order any person who causes or contributes to discharges of hazardous substances pollutants or contaminants to the public storm drain system in violation of this Article to undertake such monitoring sampling, analyses, corrective actions and abatement and corrective actions and furnish such reports as the City may specify. The costs of such activities, analyses, and reports shall be borne by the recipient of the order. 
(e)  If the City has been refused access to any premises, the City may seek issuance of an administrative search warrant from the City Municipal Court or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
DIVISION 4. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 33-311. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to ensure compliance with this Article, including the BMPs required by the City, to cease/discontinue discharges of hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants, to provide for civil penalty actions , or to institute legal proceedings through the City Attorney in the appropriate court for civil or criminal enforcement of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-312. - Enforcement plan. 
(a)  The City shall develop an Enforcement Response Plan (ERP) that meets the requirements of the AZPDES or NPDES storm water permit issued to the City and the requirements of this Article. The ERP will include: 
(1)  the authority for the administration to issue notice of violation to person who violated any provision of this Article; 
(2)  the authority for the City to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, negotiated settlement agreements or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any person responsible for noncompliance; 
(3)  the authority for the City to issue a cease and desist order directing a person to immediately comply with all requirements and take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation; 
(4)  criteria for imposing administrative fines and method for calculating the fines; 
(5)  the authority of the City to take any response or remedial action necessary to abate or address a violation of this Article and to seek reimbursement for the cost of such abatement action from the owner or his authorized representative; and 
(6)  any other provision necessary to further the purpose of this division as set forth in Sec. 33-311. 
(b)  The ERP must be approved by the City and posted on the City's website. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-313. - Civil and criminal penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates any requirement of this Article, including any applicable NPDES or AZPDES storm water permit condition, shall be civilly liable to the City for a sum not to exceed two thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) per day for each violation. 
(b)  In addition to any civil penalty imposed under this Article, any person found to be liable for a discharge that results in violation of the NPDES or AZPDES permit issued to the City as described under Section 33-300(e) may be required to reimburse the City for any civil fines or penalties paid by the City for such violations. 
(c)  Any financial penalties imposed by the City under this Article are in addition to any penalties that may be imposed by other regulatory agencies, including ADEQ or EPA. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-314. - Criminal sanction. 
(a)  A person commits unauthorized non-storm water discharges to the public storm drain system by knowingly causing, permitting, facilitating, aiding, or abetting any act prohibited in Section 33-300(a), (b), (d), and (e). 
(b)  A person who violates subsection (a) above shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor and be criminally sanctioned for such violation. 
(c)  Any criminal penalties imposed by the City may be in addition to those imposed by ADEQ or EPA. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-315. - Injunctive relief. 
    A violation of this Article or chapter may also constitute an environmental or public nuisance according to Section 18-4(b) of the City Code and may be abated according to such provision and any implementing policies or regulations The City may seek to abate such environmental or public nuisance itself or seek an order, including requesting the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of any order or other requirement imposed by this Article on activities of the person. from a court of competent jurisdiction. The City may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal or equitable relief under any applicable provision of the City Code or state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 33-316. - Remedies non-exclusive. 
    The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. Each day's noncompliance constitutes a new violation. The City may take any, all or any combination of these actions against a violator. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
APPENDIX 1 - Water, Sewer and Flood Irrigation Services Rate Schedules; and Miscellaneous Customer Service Fees 
    The following rate schedules consolidate fees and charges established by resolution of the City Council for services provided through this Chapter 33. 
    Applicable taxes, fees, and surcharges will be added as required by the State of Arizona, Maricopa County, and City of Glendale regulations. 
  
Water Service (Section 33-57) Effective on : 1/1/2018 1/1/2019 Inside City Base Charge (per meter size) 5/8" x 3/4" $10.20 $10.80 3/4" $13.00 $13.70 1" $18.30 $19.40 1-1/2" $37.20 $39.30 2" $66.30 $69.90 3" $112.00 $118.00 4" $199.00 $210.00 6" $396.00 $418.00 8" $587.00 $619.00 10" $944.00 $996.00 12" $1,397.00 $1,474.00 Volume Rate ($ per 1,000 Gal) Single Family Residential  First 6,000 Gal $2.26 $2.39  Next 9,000 Gal $2.83 $2.99  Next 15,000 Gal $3.97 $4.19  Over 30,000 $5.59 $5.92 Multi-Family Residential  First 6,000 Gal $2.25 $2.36  Next 9,000 Gal $2.82 $2.96  Next 15,000 Gal $3.95 $4.14  Over 30,000 $5.55 $5.85 Commercial  Winter $2.43 $2.58  Summer $3.04 $3.23 Sprinkler  Winter $2.89 $3.22  Summer $3.62 $4.03 Outside City Base Charge (per meter size) 5/8" x 3/4" $13.26 $14.04 3/4" $16.90 $17.81 1" $23.79 $25.22 1-1/2" $48.36 $51.09 2" $86.19 $90.87 3" $145.60 $153.40 4" $258.70 $273.00 6" $514.80 $543.40 8" $763.10 $804.70 10" $1,227.20 $1,294.80 12" $1,816.10 $1,916.20 Volume Rate ($ per 1,000 Gal) Single Family Residential  First 6,000 Gal $2.94 $3.11  Next 9,000 Gal $3.68 $3.89  Next 15,000 Gal $5.17 $5.45  Over 30,000 $7.27 $7.70 Multi-Family Residential  First 6,000 Gal $2.93 $3.07  Next 9,000 Gal $3.67 $3.85  Next 15,000 Gal $5.14 $5.39  Over 30,000 $7.22 $7.61 Commercial  Winter $3.16 $3.36  Summer $3.96 $4.20 Sprinkler  Winter $3.76 $4.19  Summer $4.71 $5.24  
Base charge is pro-rated for partial billing cycle for new and end of service bills. 
Winter rate is effective for bills issued in November through April. 
Summer rate is effective for bills issued in May through October. 
Sewer Services (Section 33-174; 178) 
Group Property Code Effective on: 1-1-2018 1-1-2019 Base Charge 
Inside City 
Outside City   
$9.70 
12.61   
$10.20 
13.26 Volume Rate ($ per 1,000 Gal) Inside City Apartment < 10 units 0 0121 $3.75 $3.95 Apartment >= 10 units 0 0121 $3.75 $3.95 Condominium - single unit 0 0112 $3.75 $3.95 Condominium - multi-unit 0 0111 $3.75 $3.95 Duplex - single unit 0 0103 $3.75 $3.95 M.F. 100/400 - S.F. 200 0 2126 $3.75 $3.95 Mobile Home - single unit 0 0117 $3.75 $3.95 Mobile Home - multi-unit 0 0116 $3.75 $3.95 Multi-family - multi-unit 0 0126 $3.75 $3.95 Residential Clubhouse 0 0108 $3.75 $3.95 Single Family 0 0101 $3.75 $3.95 Townhouse - single unit 0 0107 $3.75 $3.95 Townhouse - multi-unit 0 0106 $3.75 $3.95 Car Wash 2 0209 $2.64 $2.91 Child Care Center 3 0504 $3.07 $3.33 Church 3 0502 $3.07 $3.33 Governmental 3 0503 $3.07 $3.33 Non-profit Club 3 0201 $3.07 $3.33 Office Building 3 0202 $3.07 $3.33 School 3 0501 $3.07 $3.33 Clinic 4 0404 $3.28 $3.58 Convalescent Home 4 0402 $3.28 $3.58 Dentist 4 0405 $3.28 $3.58 Hospital 4 0401 $3.28 $3.58 Laboratory 4 0403 $3.28 $3.58 Veterinarian 4 0406 $3.28 $3.58 Convenience Market 5 0309 $3.17 $3.42 Gas Station - self service 5 0213 $3.17 $3.42 Gas Station w/Conv Mart 5 0214 $3.17 $3.42 Laundromat 5 0210 $3.17 $3.42 Light Manufacturing 5 0206 $3.17 $3.42 Retail/Wholesale 5 0204 $3.17 $3.42 Warehouse 5 0205 $3.17 $3.42 Hotel without Restaurant 6 0203 $3.50 $3.75 Service Business 6 0207 $3.50 $3.75 Bar without Restaurant 7 0208 $3.85 $4.11 Restaurant - takeout only 7 0311 $3.85 $4.11 Hotel with Restaurant 8 0301 $6.96 $7.47 Gas Station - full service 9 0212 $3.75 $3.95 Repair Shop 9 0211 $3.75 $3.95 Market with Meat/Produce 10 0302 $7.34 $7.72 Mortuary 10 0306 $7.34 $7.72 Arena/Stadium 11 0600 $7.41 $7.81 Bakery 11 0304 $7.41 $7.81 Convenience Mkt w/Restaurant 11 0310 $7.41 $7.81 Food Manufacturing 11 0305 $7.41 $7.81 Restaurant 11 0303 $7.41 $7.81 Shopping Center 11 0308 $7.41 $7.81 Auto Steam Cleaning 12 0307 $11.08 $11.69 Outside City Single Family 50 8101 $4.88 $5.13 Mobile Home - multi-unit 50 8116 $4.88 $5.13 Apartment => 10 Units 50 8121 $4.88 $5.13 Apartment < 10 Units 50 8121 $4.88 $5.13 Office Building 51 8202 $4.00 $4.33 Restaurant 52 $9.64 $10.16  
The sewer volume charge is a calculation based on the customer's January, February, and March average water consumption less a percentage for non-sewage use times the rate for each 1,000 gallons. New customers will use the winter average for their class. Some customers will be billed on actual water usage. 
Flood Irrigation Service (section 33-58) Effective July 1, 2016 
DESCRIPTION Effective on July 1, 2016 Effective on April 1, 2017 1.00 Lot - Seven Months $25.84 $27.43 1.25 Lot - Seven Months $29.72 $31.54 1.50 Lot - Seven Months $33.60 $35.66 1.75 Lot - Seven Months $37.47 $39.76 2.00 Lot - Seven Months $41.34 $43.88 2.25 Lot - Seven Months $45.23 $48.00 2.50 Lot - Seven Months $49.10 $52.11 2.75 Lot - Seven Months $52.98 $56.22 3.00 Lot - Seven Months $56.85 $60.34 1.00 Lot - Twelve Months $15.07 $16.00 1.25 Lot - Twelve Months $17.34 $18.40 1.50 Lot - Twelve Months $19.60 $20.80 1.75 Lot - Twelve Months $21.86 $23.20 2.00 Lot - Twelve Months $24.12 $25.60 2.25 Lot - Twelve Months $26.38 $28.00 2.50 Lot - Twelve Months $28.64 $30.40 2.75 Lot - Twelve Months $30.90 $32.80 3.00 Lot - Twelve Months $33.16 $35.20 1.00 Lot - Yearly $180.88 $191.96 1.25 Lot - Yearly $208.02 $220.77 1.50 Lot - Yearly $235.16 $249.56 1.75 Lot - Yearly $262.30 $278.37 2.00 Lot - Yearly $289.43 $307.16 2.25 Lot - Yearly $316.55 $335.95 2.50 Lot - Yearly $343.70 $364.75 2.75 Lot - Yearly $370.83 $393.55 3.00 Lot - Yearly $397.97 $422.35  
Lot code / square feet range 
1.00 / Less than 12,000 
1.25 / 12,001 - 15,000 
1.50 / 15,001 - 18,000 
1.75 / 18,001 - 21,000 
2.00 / 21,001 - 24,000 
2.25 / 24,001 - 27,000 
2.50 / 27,001 - 30,000 
2.75 / 30,001 - 33,000 
3.00 / 33,001 - and larger 
Irrigation Customers have the choice of being billed once for the entire year's service, one-seventh (1/7) of the yearly charge for seven (7) months or one-twelfth (1/12) of the yearly charge for twelve (12) months. Charges will be billed from April through October in Cycles 2 & 3. Customers have the option of being billed on their existing water account or separately under a unique account number. 
Miscellaneous Customer Services Fees Effective October 1, 2014 (1) 
Fee General Fees (Section 33-5)  Establish New Account $22.39  Delinquent Collection Fee $50.35  Collection Agency Referral See section Chapter 2, Art 1, Sec 2.4  Insufficient Fund Check $26.96  After Hour Reconnect $72.76  Door Tag $16.81  Broken Meter Lock $33.58  Meter Tampering $72.76  Unauthorized Use $72.76  Disconnect Notice $1.12  Miscellaneous Field Visit $22.39  Lien Fee $21.14  Late Charge (On Past Due Balance) 1.50% Meter Test Fees (Section 33-54)  Meter Bench Test - 1" and smaller $67.15  Meter Bench Test - 11/2" and larger $111.91  Meter Field Test - 11/2" and larger $22.38 Deposit Fees (Section 33-4) *  Residential Meter (single family) $200.00  Other Property Types - up to 1.5 inch meter $250.00  Other Property Types - 2 inch and larger meter $300.00  * Final deposit requirement determination is subject to section previsions. Water Connection Service (Section 33-18)  Meter Size   0.75 inch $120.16   1 inch $210.29   1.5 inch $480.69   2 inch $600.87   3 inch $1,802.63   4 inch $2,643.87   6 inch $4,807.02   8 inch $9,183.78  Hydrant Meter Install/Relocate Fee $90.13 plus 
$1,642.63 deposit  Marker Ball Inspection Fee $89.52  1 inch to 3/4 inch Fitting Fee $57.07  Service Line Relocate Fee up to 13 FT $120.98  Water Main Re-Test Fee (for new construction after failing two initial tests) $149.53 per riser  
Drought Management Fines (Section 33-85) Effective June 4, 2004 
Fees Prohibited Water Use Fines Stage Three Drought Declaration $75.00 Stage Four Drought Emergency $100.00  
Industrial User and Pretreatment Fees Effective October 1, 2014 (1) 
Fees Temporary Permit or Manhole Entry Permit (Section 33-216(a))  Maintenance fee to defray costs of permitting and inspections. Per each issuance. $89.52 Annual Permit Maintenance Fee (Section 33-232)  Annual maintenance to help defray the costs of monitoring, inspections, enforcement actions and preparation of reports. $1,141.66 Non-Significant Industrial User 'B Level' Permit Application Fee (Section 33-233)  Permit for non-significant industrial users that have the potential to damage the sewer and treatment plant infrastructure. $223.84 Non-Significant Industrial User 'B Level' Permit Annual Maintenance Fee (Section 33-233)  Annual maintenance fee to defray the costs of monitoring, inspections, and enforcement actions of non-significant industrial users. $179.07 Grease Interceptor Re-Inspection Fee (Section 33-238)  Fee for inspection of grease interceptor for restaurants and businesses that are required to maintain grease interceptors after two failed inspections. $120.16 per visit Grease Bearing Waste Discharger Fee (Section 33-238)  Annual maintenance fee for compliance inspections of restaurants and others that are required to maintain grease interceptors to prevent entry of oil and grease into the sewer system and to minimize odor complaints. $179.07  
Administrative Fee (Section 33-284) Effective April 22, 1986 
Fees Developer - percentage of allocated reimbursable costs 5.0% Subsequent user - percentage of allocated reimbursement costs 5.0%  
(1)  These fees were formerly listed in Appendix B - Community Development Fee Schedule. They have been consolidated in this Appendix 1 with the Water and Sewer rate schedules and other related fees. 
(Ord. No. 3003, § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16; Ord. No. R17-101, §§ 1(Exh. A), 2(Exh. B), 10-24-17) 
ARTICLE 1. - PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY 

Section 1.100 - Title. 
    The ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Glendale, Arizona." Within the ordinance text, it shall be cited as "this ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 1.200 - Authority and Purpose. 
1.201 - Authority. 
    This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Section 9-462.01 et seq., of the Arizona Revised Statutes in order to conserve and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
1.202 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this ordinance is to establish land use classifications dividing the city into various zoning districts; provide regulations, prohibitions and restrictions for the promotion of health, safety, convenience, aesthetics and welfare; govern the use of land for residential, commercial, office, industrial and all other uses; regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings and other structures; limit the occupancy and size of yards and open spaces; establish performance and design standards; establish boards and commissions and define the powers and duties of each; provide procedures for changing zoning districts and the standards which govern those districts, use permits, variances and all other permits required by this Zoning Ordinance; prescribe penalties for violations of the ordinance and repeal all ordinances in conflict therewith. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
1.203 - Jurisdiction. 
    This ordinance shall be effective within the incorporated boundaries of the City of Glendale. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
1.204 - Repealer and Severability. 
A.  Ordinance No. 243 New Series and all subsequent amendments to Ordinance No. 243 are repealed. Ordinance No. 184 New Series, creating and establishing the Glendale Zoning and Planning Commission, is repealed. Ordinance No. 1407 New Series, creating mobilehome parks and mobilehome subdivisions is repealed. This ordinance amends and revises all zoning laws, regulations, procedures and restrictions. Whenever any provision of this ordinance refers to or cites a section of the Arizona Revised Statutes and that section is later amended or superseded, the ordinance shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded section of the Arizona Revised Statutes. 
B.  The provisions of this ordinance, insofar as they are substantially the same as the provisions of ordinances repealed in Subsection A of this section, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. The repeal of an ordinance listed in Subsection A of this section shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the ordinance was repealed, nor any suit, prosecution or enforcement proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for a violation of the ordinance repealed. 
C.  It is declared that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance are severable, and if any such section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this ordinance other than the part decided to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
1.205 - Conflict With Other Rules or Regulations. 
    It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this ordinance, or with private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private agreement. Where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction on land, buildings or structures than is imposed or required by other existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. Where other laws, ordinances, or private restrictions are more restrictive, the City cannot enforce the more restrictive laws, ordinances, or private restrictions as a part of this Zoning Ordinance unless authorized by a specific section of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
1.206 - Relationship to General Plan. 
    It is the intention of the City Council that this ordinance implement the planning policies adopted by the Planning Commission and City Council as reflected in the General Plan. The City Council affirms its commitment that this ordinance and any amendments will be in conformity with the adopted planning polices as expressed in the General Plan, specific area plans, and any amendments. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
1.207 - Relationship to Subdivision and Other Regulations. 
    The Zoning Ordinance, along with other regulations of the City of Glendale, including the Subdivision and Minor Land Division Ordinance and Design Guidelines for Site Development and Infrastructure Construction, as amended, is a tool to implement the Glendale General Plan. In regulating future development or redevelopment within the City of Glendale, the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance shall be construed as minimum requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
1.208 - Applicability. 
A.  All buildings, structures and uses of land shall be subject to all provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. Any change to an existing building, structure or use of land, as manifested by a use which requires an increase in parking, change in occupancy, changes to the physical site including drainage or landscaping, additions or modifications to the building after the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, or any amendment shall be subject to all provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
B.  A Planned Area Development (PAD), or Planned Residential Development (PRD) Plan, approved prior to this ordinance, will guide and control development uses permitted for such property. The provisions of this ordinance will apply if a prior plan approved has expired. 
C.  Any use not described and included by this ordinance as being a permitted use, a use subject to conditions, or a use subject to conditional use permit within a specific zoning district is prohibited within that zoning district, and is a violation of this ordinance. Such use shall only be allowed within that zoning district following an amendment to this ordinance in accordance with the procedures prescribed in Section 3.800. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 1.300 - Compliance. 
1.301 - Generally. 
A.  If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance or any amendment, the City may use any one (1) or more of the following actions: 
1.  Issue an order of abatement; 
2.  Issue a Notice and Order to Comply; 
3.  Pursue criminal prosecution; 
4.  Issue a civil citation; or 
5.  Seek an injunction from Superior Court. 
B.  No building permit may be lawfully issued nor shall a Certificate of Occupancy be granted until the Planning Director or his designee has given authorization indicating all requirements of this Zoning Ordinance, all conditions and stipulations of approval, and any other specific project related requirements have been met. 
C.  Violation of stipulations, conditions of approval, or any other requirement of this Zoning Ordinance, of an administratively issued permit, or conditional use permit is a violation of this ordinance and shall subject such permit to revocation if the violation is ongoing or repeated. Revocation of any such permit may be made by the approving entity after notice and hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
1.302 - Enforcement and Penalties. 
A.  The Planning Director shall be responsible for the enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance. 
B.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Zoning Ordinance, or any amendment shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor, punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or by both fine and imprisonment. Any such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation is committed, continued or permitted. The owner, lessee, tenant or other person in possession of any property used in violation of this Zoning Ordinance shall be responsible for any violation whether or not the owner or any related party has committed the prohibited act or acts or has neglected to prevent the performance of the prohibited act or acts by another person. 
C.  In addition to, or independent of the penalties provided above, the City may bring a civil proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce compliance with the terms of the Glendale Zoning Ordinance or to prevent, restrain or abate any violation of the terms of the Glendale Zoning Ordinance. 
D.  Any violation of this ordinance or of conditions or stipulations of issuance of any administrative or conditional use permit or variance is declared to be a public nuisance, and instead of, or in addition to, any other criminal or civil enforcement measure authorized by this ordinance, may be enjoined or restrained by the City as other nuisances are abated under authority of the City Charter and applicable State Law. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 1.400 - Nonconforming Buildings, Structures, Uses, and Lots. 
1.401 - Generally. 
A.  This article provides for the regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures, uses and lots. These regulations are designed to protect the rights of legally existing nonconforming uses, structures and buildings, but not promote expansion or enlargement. The site, building, structure or use will be encouraged to convert to a conforming use in the future. 
B.  Any use or activity lawfully conducted under County zoning regulations at the effective date of annexation or under previous zoning regulations in effect at the adoption of this ordinance, or any amendment, shall be considered a legal nonconforming use under this ordinance. 
C.  The City Council, by ordinance, may authorize the acquisition of private property by purchase or condemnation for removal of nonconforming uses and structures. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
1.402 - Limitations on Nonconforming Buildings and Uses. 
    A legal nonconforming use may continue only in the manner and to the extent that it existed at the time of such enactment, amendment, or annexation, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  No structural or physical alteration shall be made to any nonconforming building, structure, or lot except when required by law or ordinance. This requirement does not prohibit routine repairs or maintenance. 
B.  No expansion shall be made of any nonconforming building, structure, or use unless such expansion conforms to the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. In cases where the nonconforming use occupies a building, structure, or any portion of a site, expanding the use into additional building or land area shall constitute an extension and shall not be allowed. 
C.  Any nonconforming building, structure, or use, or one (1) or more of a group of nonconforming buildings or structures related to one (1) industry and under one (1) ownership, which has been damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot, or act of God, may be reconstructed and used as before, if done within twelve (12) months of such calamity. The City Council, after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission, may determine that such delay in reconstruction was caused by unforeseen circumstances beyond the control of the owner of the premises and permit a reasonable extension of time for reconstruction. Any district requirements may be waived by the City Council provided the area restored is not more nonconforming that existed at the time of the calamity. 
D.  No nonconforming building, structure, or use which ceases to be used for a period exceeding one (1) year or is superseded by a conforming use, shall again be devoted to the nonconforming use except as otherwise provided in the preceding paragraph. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to a different nonconforming use. This shall not prevent a name change or change in ownership of the same nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
1.403 - Nonconforming Lots. 
    Any legal lot existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance, or any amendment, which does not conform with lot area, lot width, or lot depth for the zoning district in which it is located, may be used for any use permitted in that zone district provided all other applicable regulations of this Zoning Ordinance are complied with. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
1.404 - Development Standards. 
    Development standards relate to the size, configuration, and character of development. Development standards include, but are not limited to, items such as parking, landscaping, buffer areas, and setback. Developed property may be nonconforming because the development of the property does not meet current Zoning Ordinance requirements. Property which is nonconforming, due to deficiencies in development standards, shall be regulated as follows: 
A.  No change of use or change to a building structure shall be permitted which creates a deficit or increases an existing deficit in off-street parking spaces, loading areas, or other development standards. 
B.  Any site which is nonconforming due to deficiencies of development standards and which require design review shall, as a requirement of design review, be brought into conformance including, but not limited to, development standards for parking, circulation, driveways, drainage, storage, screening, and landscaping, with the Zoning Ordinance and other applicable codes before any design review can be approved. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION 

Section 2.100 - Rules of Construction. 
    For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this Zoning Ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows: 
A.  Words used in the present tense include the future, words used in singular include the plural and words in the plural include the singular. 
B.  The word "shall" is mandatory. 
C.  The word "person" includes an individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a singular entity, including the federal and state government, another City, county, or school district, except as exempt by law. 
D.  The following words or terms when applied in this ordinance may be used interchangeably unless contrary to the circumstances: lot, plat, parcel or premises; "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words, "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied"; and "building" applies to the word "structure." 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 2.200 - Commonly Abbreviated Terms. 
    The term "City" shall mean the City of Glendale; "Council" shall mean the Council of the City of Glendale; "Commission" shall mean the Planning Commission; and "Board" shall mean the Board of Adjustments. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 2.300 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this ordinance the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    Accessory Building: A detached building whose use is customarily incidental to that of a principal use of the main building or premises. 
    Accessory Use: A subordinate use of a building or land customarily incidental to and conducted on the same lot with the principal use which does not alter the character of the principal use or adversely affect other properties within the district. 
    Acreage, Gross: The acreage within the perimeter of a development tract, plus one-half (1/2) the right-of-way of all adjoining streets and alleys. 
    Adult Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted wherein money-operated, token-operated or credit-operated, or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine in any viewing room of one hundred fifty (150) square feet or less at any one (1) time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult Bookstore or Novelty Store: Any commercial establishment: 
A.  Which as one (1) of its principal business uses offers for sale or rental, for any consideration, any of the following: 
1.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed materials, which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
2.  Films, video cassettes or other video reproductions depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
3.  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, excluding condoms and other birth control and disease prevention products; and 
B.  Which regularly excludes all minors from the premises because of the sexually explicit nature of the items sold, rented or displayed therein. 
C.  For purposes of this definition, twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the establishment's merchandise constitutes a principal business use. 
    Adult Business or Sexually Oriented Business: Any adult arcade, adult bookstore, or novelty store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult theater, nude model studio, semi-nude business, or topless bar. 
    Adult Cabaret: Any nightclub, bar, restaurant or other commercial establishment which features live performances or activities on the business premises that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; provided that a nude model studio is not an adult cabaret, the term "adult cabaret" is intended to apply to businesses which emphasize and seek, through the conduct of any employee or performer, to arouse or excite any patron's sexual desires. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to apply to the presentation or performance of any play, drama or ballet in any theater, concert hall, fine arts academy, school, institution of higher education or similar establishment as a form of expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise. 
    Adult Care Home: A long-term residential care service, licensed by the State Department of Health Services, functioning as a single housekeeping unit in an environment in which staff persons provide supervision, personal care, meals, education, and participation in community activities of not more than ten (10) adult residents who are unrelated to the manager or owner of the adult care home and who require the assistance of not more than one (1) person to walk to or transfer from a bed, chair or toilet, but who are able to self-propel a wheelchair. An adult care home does not include group homes for the disabled, nursing homes, shelter facilities, medical institutional uses, alcoholism or drug treatment centers, or community correctional facilities. This definition shall not apply to a home for the developmentally disabled as regulated by A.R.S. § 36-582 to the extent of state preemption of local zoning regulations. 
    Adult Motel: Any hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
A.  Offers accommodations to the public for any consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of such photographic reproductions; or 
B.  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or 
C.  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
    Adult Theater: Any business establishment, other than an adult arcade or adult motel, used regularly for the business of exhibiting films, video cassettes or other video reproductions depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and from which all minors are regularly excluded because of the sexually explicit nature of such films, cassettes or reproductions. 
    Airport Impact Overlay Area One (AIO-1): Means the area between the sixty-five (65) ldn and seventy (70) ldn noise contour lines developed by the application of day/night average sound level methodology of sound measurement (ldn). 
    Airport Impact Overlay Area Two (AIO-2): Means the area between the seventy (70) ldn and seventy-five (75) ldn noise contour lines developed by the application of day/night average sound level methodology of sound management (ldn). 
    Airport Impact Overlay Area Three (AIO-3): Means the area of seventy-five (75) ldn and greater noise levels as developed by the application of day/night average sound level methodology of sound measurement (ldn). 
    Alley: A public thoroughfare other than a street which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property. 
    Alteration: Any architectural, mechanical, or structural change to a building which requires a permit under the Building Code of the City. 
    Alternative Design Tower: Artificial trees, clock towers, and similar non-traditional structures that are compatible with the existing setting or structures and camouflage or partially conceal the presence of antennas or towers. This includes any antenna or antenna array attached to the alternative design structure. 
    Alternative Tower Structure: Ball field light poles, street lights, electric utility poles, water towers and similar existing structures. This includes any antenna or antenna array attached to the alternative tower structure. 
    Amateur Radio Tower: A free-standing or building-mounted structure, including any base, tower or pole, antenna and appurtenances, intended for airway communication purposes by a person holding a valid amateur radio (HAM) license issued by the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Antenna: The surface from which wireless radio signals are sent from and received by a wireless communication facility. Antenna includes whip antenna, panel antenna, and dish antenna. Any antenna not specifically described herein shall be regulated in conformity with the type of antenna described herein which most closely resembles such antenna. 
A.  Whip antenna is a long and thin device that transmits and/or receives radio frequency signals in a three hundred sixty (360) degree radial pattern. Typically size is two (2) to six (6) inches in diameter and one (1) to eighteen (18) feet in height. 
B.  Panel antenna is a relatively flat rectangle device that transmits and/or receives radio frequency signals in a directional pattern of less than three hundred sixty (360) degrees. Typical size is four (4) to five (5) feet high, six (6) to twelve (12) inches wide, and six (6) to eight (8) inches deep. 
C.  Dish antenna is a bowl-shaped device for the reception and/or transmission of radio frequency communication signals in a specific directional pattern. Typical size is four (4) to six (6) feet in diameter, and one (1) to three (3) feet deep. 
    Antenna Array: One (1) or more whip, panel, or dish antennas used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals. The antenna array does not include the support structure. 
    Antique Shop: A retail business specializing in the sale of merchandise made in, or typical of, a previous era. Typical merchandise includes, but is not limited to, furniture, silverware, glassware, and other collectibles. Items shall not be donated for resale, but may be displayed on consignment. 
    Archaeological Resources: Any material remains of past human life, activities, or habitation which are of historic or prehistoric significance. Such material includes, but is not limited, to pottery, basketry, bottles, weapon projectiles, tools, structures or portions of structures, pit houses, rock paintings, rock carvings, intaglios, graves, skeletal remains, personal items and clothing, household or business refuse, printed matter, manufactured items, or any piece of the foregoing items. 
    Attached Building: A building which has any part of its exterior or bearing wall in common with another building or which is structurally integrated with the main building. 
    Automated Collection Center: A self-contained machine to collect and weigh recyclable consumer materials, to reimburse mechanically the depositor of the materials, and to store temporarily the materials before shipment to a recycling center. 
    Automobile Service Station: A convenience use having pumps and storage tanks from which fuel is dispensed into motor vehicles and the servicing of motor vehicles, including tire repair, minor engine repair, battery changing, storage of merchandise and supplies relating to the servicing of motor vehicles, sale of lubricants, automobile washing and lubrication but excluding major automobile engine or transmission repairs, body work, or other similar activities. 
    Bar: (See "Cocktail Lounge"). 
    Bed and Breakfast Establishment: A dwelling in which five (5) or fewer guest rooms are provided for the overnight lodging of travelers which is occupied by a resident manager or owner. Any dwelling in which more than five (5) guest rooms are provided shall be deemed a hotel. 
    Boardinghouse: A dwelling in which three (3), four (4), or five (5) sleeping rooms are provided which serve as the principal residence of the occupants. A common dining room may be provided for the residents. 
    Building: A permanently located structure having a roof supported by columns or walls. 
    Building Codes: The various codes of the City which regulate construction and require building permits, electrical permits, mechanical permits, plumbing permits, and other permits to do work regulated by chapter 9 of the City Code pertaining to building and building regulation. 
    Building Coverage: That portion of a lot or building site which is occupied by any building or structure, regardless of whether such building or structure is intended for human occupancy. 
    Building Height: The vertical distances measured from the finished grade level to the highest level of the building. 
    Building-Mounted Antenna: Any antenna that is attached to the wall of, or integrated into buildings, church steeples, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, parapets, or penthouses. 
    Building Permit: An authorization to construct a structure as issued by the Building Safety Department and authorized by the Planning Director. 
    Building, Principal: A building which houses the principal use of the lot. 
    Building Setback Line: The required distance between the property line and the closest point of any building or structure. 
    Business Support Services: Establishments which primarily provide goods and services to other businesses including, but not limited to, minor job printing, duplicating, binding and photographic processing, office security, maintenance and custodial services, and office equipment and machinery sales, rentals, and repairing, but no manufacturing of any products. 
    Carport: A permanent roofed structure with not more than two (2) enclosed sides used or intended to be used for automobile shelter. 
    Child: Any person through the age of fourteen (14) years. 
    Child Care: The care, supervision and guidance of a child or children, unaccompanied by parent, guardian or custodian, on a regular basis, for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, in a place other than the child's or children's own home or homes. 
    Child Care Center: Any facility in which child care is regularly provided for compensation for five (5) or more children not related to the proprietor. The proposed child care facility shall meet all requirements for certification by the State Department of Health. 
    Children's Residential Care Facility: A residential care facility with a minimum floor area of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet, minimum parcel size of seven (7) acres, limited to an independent structure, licensed by the State of Arizona, which provides short or long-term care including lodging, meals, special education programs and counseling to children. Residential care is typically between one (1) week and eighteen (18) months. 
    Clinic: A medical facility for the diagnosis and treatment of human patients which may include emergency service, but not overnight housing of patients. 
    Cocktail Lounge: An establishment where the primary use is to serve spirituous liquors to be consumed on the premises. Food may be served as a secondary use. 
    Co-location: The use of a single mount and/or site by more than one wireless service provider. 
    Commercial Kennel: Any establishment at which dogs, cats, or other small animals are commercially cared for, bred, boarded, or trained. Cat and dog hospitals, veterinarian's clinics and hospitals, and small animal grooming facilities are separately regulated. 
    Community Correctional Facility: A facility that provides lodging, meals, counseling, treatment, and rehabilitation to adjudicated delinquents, parolees, and individuals in pre-release (transitional) or diversionary programs from, or in lieu of confinement in, correctional institutions. The facility may also provide educational instruction or training. 
    Complex/Center : A commercial and/or office development defined by shared facilities, including but not limited to, circulation, parking, utilities, storm water retention and landscaping that service the shopping complex/center. 
    Congregate Care Facility: A long-term residential facility for elderly persons within which are provided living and sleeping rooms, a common dining room, laundry services, and room cleaning. Such facilities may also provide other services such as transportation for routine social and medical appointments. 
    Convenience Use: Convenience uses are commercial activities, which have relatively high traffic generation compared to other commercial uses. A use is designated as a "convenience use" if the method of operation includes one (1) or more of the following characteristics: 
A.  Retail gasoline is sold. 
B.  The primary business is the sale of food or drink for consumption, either on or off premises, over a counter, or from an outdoor service window or automobile drive-thru service window. Of the food or drink sold, at least twenty (20) percent is in disposable, carry out, or edible containers. 
C.  Stores less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet where food and drink is sold primarily for consumption off premises. 
D.  Car washes (self-service and/or automated). 
E.  Any commercial use with service designed to be accessed by occupants of a vehicle. 
    Day/Night Sound Level (Ldn): A cumulative aircraft noise index that estimates the exposure in decibels of noise by a weighted sound-level meter for a certain geographic area during a twenty-four (24) hour period. 
    Deferred Presentment Company: A business that makes transactions pursuant to a written agreement in which the licensee accepts a check and agrees to hold the check for at least five (5) days before presentment for payment or deposit. The service provided is commonly known as a "payday loan". 
    Demolition: Any act or process which requires a building permit under the Building Code of the City which destroys in part or in whole a house, building, or other structure. 
    Density, Gross: Gross acreage divided into the number of dwelling units, lots, or spaces. 
    Density, Net: Net acreage, excluding streets, alleys, and other rights-of-way divided into the number of dwelling units, lots, or spaces. 
    Disabled: A person who (1) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities so that the person is incapable of living independently; (2) Has a record of having such an impairment; or (3) Is regarded with having such an impairment. However, disabled shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to controlled substances (as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act [21 U.S.C. § 802], nor shall it include any person whose residency in a group home would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
    Donation Center : A center operated by an organization that collects and sells donated clothing and household items. All such merchandise shall be displayed and stored in an enclosed building. 
    Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Box : Any container, storage unit or structure, other than a primary building, accessory building or shed, that is used for the collection of charitable or for-profit donated items by the general public, including but not limited to clothing, household goods, toys, books, and newspapers. 
    Downtown Promotional Banner: A temporary decorative banner used to promote city-authorized special events within the downtown. 
    Drive-in Theater: An open-air theater designed for viewing by the audience from motor vehicles. 
    Dwelling, Multiple-Residence: A building containing two (2) or more housekeeping units. 
    Dwelling, Single-Residence: A building containing only one (1) housekeeping unit. 
    Dwelling Unit: A room or group of rooms within a building containing cooking accommodations and designed to be occupied exclusively by a single housekeeping unit. 
    Equipment Shelter: A cabinet or building located at the base of or near a wireless communication facility within which are housed, among other things, batteries and electrical equipment. This equipment is connected to the antenna by cable. 
    Fence Height: Fence or wall height shall be measured as follows: 
A.  Where a fence faces a public street, highway or alley, height shall be measured from the top of the curb, or where no curb exists, the center line of the street, highway, or alley. (See Figure D-1). 
B.  Where a fence or wall is between two (2) properties, the height shall be the average measured from each side of the base of the fence as established at the time of final grading. (See Figure D-2). 
C.  A retaining wall will be counted as part of the total wall or fence height where the retaining wall is no greater than two (2) feet horizontal distance from the wall or fence. Where a retaining wall is greater than two (2) feet distance from the fence or wall, the fence or wall height shall be measured from the base of the fence or wall. (See Figure D-3). 
  
  
  
    Floor Area, Gross: The combined area of the floor(s) within the exterior walls of a building. The following are excluded from the floor area: 
A.  Accessory parking lots and structures. 
B.  Attic area with head room less than seven (7) feet. 
C.  Enclosed exterior stairways. 
    Floor Area Ratio: The ratio of gross floor area to the total net area of the parcel expressed as a percent or decimal. Any area included within a basement where the floor level is at least five (5) feet below the adjoining finished grade shall be subtracted prior to calculation of the floor area ratio. Where rounding of numbers is necessary to determine floor area ratio, the nearest one hundredth (.00) shall be used. (See Figure D-4). 
  
    Foster Home: A home occupied as a primary residence by an individual or individuals having the care or control of one (1) or more but not more than three (3) minor children, other than those related to each other by blood or marriage, or related to such individuals, or who are legal wards of such individuals. Such facility must be licensed by the Arizona Department of Economic Security. 
    Group Home for the Disabled: A dwelling shared as their primary residence by at least six (6) but not more than ten (10) handicapped or disabled persons who are not related to the owner or manager of the group home for the disabled and who reside together as a single housekeeping unit, in which staff persons may provide supervision, personal care, meals, education, participation in community activities, counseling, treatment or therapy for the residents thereof, and which may be licensed by, certified by, registered with, or otherwise authorized, funded or regulated, in whole or in part, by an agency of the state or federal government. This definition shall include homes for the chronically mentally ill, group care agencies, and similar residential living arrangements for handicapped or disabled persons. A group home for the disabled does not include adult care homes, nursing homes, shelter facilities, medical institutional uses, alcoholism or drug treatment centers, or community correctional facilities. This definition shall not apply to a home for the developmentally disabled as regulated by A.R.S. § 36-582 to the extent of state preemption of local zoning regulations. 
    Guest House: Living quarters for guests, or servants on the premises in an accessory building or attached to the principal residence. 
    Handicapped: (See "Disabled"). 
    Heliport: Any helistop which also includes all necessary passenger and cargo facilities; helicopter maintenance and overhaul, fueling service, storage, tiedown areas, hangars, and other necessary buildings and open spaces. Heliports include any of the uses of helistops. 
    Helistop: A designated landing area used for the landing and taking off of helicopters for the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers or cargo. No fueling or service facilities are permitted. 
    Home Child Care Center: Any single residence dwelling in which child care is regularly provided for compensation for five (5) or more, but not more than ten (10) children not related to the proprietor. The proposed child care center shall meet all requirements for certification by the State Department of Health. 
    Home Occupation: Any occupation or profession conducted from a principal residence in a residential zoned district, as an accessory use. 
    Hospital: A medical facility for the diagnosis and treatment of human patients including overnight housing of patients. 
    Hotel/Motel: A building which provides six (6) or more guest rooms for the lodging of travelers and other temporary residents, and may include customarily incidental uses such as meeting rooms, restaurants, and cocktail lounges. 
    Household Pets: Small animals which are customarily kept as household pets or which are generally trainable and readily adaptable to urban residences. Household pets may include small domestic animals as well as other nontraditional pets and exotic animals. 
    Housekeeping Unit: One (1) or more individuals living, sleeping, and cooking in a single dwelling unit who share housekeeping tasks and responsibilities as an interdependent unit. 
    Junk Yard: The use of any portion of any lot, whether inside or outside a building, for the dismantling or wrecking of automobiles or other motor vehicles or machinery, or for the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from such dismantling or wrecking, or for the storage or keeping of junk including scrap metal or other scrap materials. 
    Juvenile Group Home: A foster home suitable for the placement of more than three (3) but not more than ten (10) minor children that is licensed by the Arizona State Department of Economic Security; or a dwelling otherwise occupied as a primary residence by an individual or individuals having care, control or custody of more than three (3) but not more than ten (10) persons under the age of eighteen (18) who are not related to the owner or manager of the juvenile group and who reside together as a single housekeeping unit, in which staff persons may provide supervision, personal care, meals, education, participation in community activities, counseling, treatment or therapy for the residents thereof, and which may be licensed by, certified by, registered with, or otherwise authorized, funded or regulated, in whole or in part, by an agency of the state or federal government. Regular or ongoing on-site counseling, therapy or medical treatment is not permitted in a juvenile group home. A juvenile group home does not include shelter facilities, medical institutional uses, alcoholism or drug treatment centers, or community correctional facilities. 
    Laboratory: A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and analyzing, but not including manufacturing of products. 
    Ldn Contour: A line linking together a series of points of equal cumulative noise exposure based on the day/night sound level (Ldn) metric. Such contours are developed based on aircraft flight patterns, number of daily aircraft operations by type of aircraft and time of day, noise characteristics of each aircraft, and typical runway usage patterns. 
    Living Area: The occupied portion of a residence occupied, including interior areas and exterior porches, not including a garage or carport. 
    Loading Space: An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Lodge and Fraternal Associations: An association of persons, whether incorporated or not, for social purpose, but not including groups which are organized primarily to render a service carried on as a business for profit. 
    Lot: A parcel of land, or contiguous parcels under one (1) ownership with frontage or access to a public street, occupied or designed to be occupied as a unit and which has been established by plat, subdivision, or otherwise lawfully permitted. 
    Lot, Corner: A parcel of land located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. 
    Lot Depth: The shortest distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line. (See Figure D-5). 
  
    Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot Line: 
A.  Front. The lot line adjacent to the street, except as follows: 
1.  Corner lot. The shorter of the two (2) lot lines adjacent to the street shall be the front lot line. The other street frontage shall be the corner side lot line. 
2.  Through or double frontage lot. The lot line which is obviously the front by reason of the prevailing custom of the other buildings on the block. The other street frontage shall be a rear lot line. Where such frontage property line is not obviously evident, the planning director shall determine the front property line. 
B.  Rear. The lot line most nearly opposite to the front property line. In the event that the front property line is a curved line, then the rear property line shall be the lot line most nearly opposite a line used to determine front setback line tangent to the front property line at its midpoint. 
C.  Side. Those other lot lines not defined as a front or rear lot line. 
    Lot, Through or Double Frontage: A lot which abuts upon two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets or which abuts upon two (2) streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
    Lot Width: If the side property lines are parallel, the shortest distance between these side lines. If the side property lines are not parallel, the width of the lot shall be the width of the lot at its front setback line. 
    Major Medical Center: A full service hospital and a medical campus of affiliated uses on at least ten (10) acres. 
    Medical Marijuana: All parts of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, and the seed of such plants that may be administered to treat or alleviate a qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with the patient's debilitating medical condition. 
    Medical Marijuana Cultivation: The process by which a person grows a marijuana plant. A facility shall mean a building, structure or premises used for the cultivation or storage of medical marijuana that is physically separate and off-site from a medical marijuana dispensary. 
    Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation Location: An enclosed, locked facility such as a closet, room, greenhouse or other building that does not exceed 250 square feet of cultivation space where a designated caregiver, as defined by A.R.S. § 36-2801(5), cultivates marijuana. There shall be no identification of the location as a Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation Location. Medical Marijuana Cultivation must not be detectable from the exterior of the building in which the cultivation takes place. 
    Medical Marijuana Dispensary: A non-profit entity defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801(11) that sells, distributes, transmits gives, dispenses, or otherwise provide medical marijuana to qualifying patients. A Medical Marijuana Dispensary shall have a single secure entrance and shall implement appropriate security measures to deter and prevent the theft of Marijuana and unauthorized entrance into areas containing marijuana. 
    Medical Marijuana Dispensary Offsite Cultivation Location: The additional location where marijuana is cultivated by a Medical Marijuana Dispensary as referenced in A.R.S. § 36-2804(B)(1)(b)(ii). 
    Medical Marijuana Infusion (or Manufacturing) Facility: A facility that incorporates medical marijuana (cannabis) by the means of cooking, blending, or incorporation into consumable/edible goods. 
    Medical Marijuana Qualifying Patient: A person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having a debilitating medical condition as defined in A.R.S. § 36-2801(13). 
    Medical Marijuana Qualifying Patient Cultivation Location: An enclosed, locked facility such as a closet, room, greenhouse, or other building that does not exceed 50 square feet of cultivation space where a qualifying patient, as defined by A.R.S. § 36-2801(13), cultivates marijuana. The qualifying patient cultivation location must be accessory to the qualifying patient's primary residence. Medical Marijuana Cultivation as an accessory use to the qualifying patient's primary residence must not be detectable from the exterior of the building in which the cultivation takes place. Medical Marijuana Cultivation as an accessory use to the qualifying patient's primary residence shall only be permitted if the residence is located at least 25 miles distant from a Medical Marijuana Dispensary. 
    Minor Work: Any change, modifying, restoring, rehabilitating, renovating, surfacing, or resurfacing of the features of historic property which does not materially change the historic characteristics of the property. 
    Mobile Home: A vehicular portable home designed and built for long-term residential occupancy. A mobile home shall be not less than eight (8) feet in width and thirty-two (32) feet in length, and shall be classified as a mobile home whether or not its wheels, rollers, skids, or other rolling equipment have been removed, or whether or not any addition thereto has been built on the ground, and: 
A.  Contains sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower, and kitchen facilities with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems. 
B.  Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels, on a flatbed, other trailers, or with detachable wheels. Such fabrication shall include a built-in metal frame and hitch for transportation. 
C.  Arrives at the site where it is to be occupied as a complete dwelling unit, including major appliances and furniture, and ready for immediate occupancy except for incidental unpacking and minor assembly operations, such as location on foundation supports and connection to utilities. 
A prefabricated house shall not be considered a mobile home. 
    Mobile Home Park: Any lot, tract or parcel of land licensed and used or offered for use in whole or in part, with or without charge, for the parking of occupied mobile homes and travel trailers and used solely for living or sleeping purposes. 
    Mobile Home Space: A plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one (1) mobile home. 
    Mobile Home Subdivision: A subdivision for residential use by mobile homes exclusively. 
    Modular Housing: Any type of dwelling unit, excluding mobile homes, which may or may not be partially fabricated off the site and delivered to the building site for final assembly and construction. The construction of dwelling units must comply with all applicable building codes and inspections. 
    Monopole: A tower used exclusively for wireless communication that is self-supporting with a single shaft of steel, concrete or wood. 
    Mount: The ground, base pad, or the structure to which a wireless communication facility is attached. 
    Nude, Nudity or State of Nudity: The appearance of the cleft of the buttocks, anus, genitals or areola of the female breast; or a state of dress which fails to opaquely cover the cleft of the buttocks, anus, genitals or areola of the female breast. 
    Nude Model Studio: Any place where a person appears nude or semi-nude, and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons for any consideration, the term "nude model studio" does not include a proprietary school that is licensed by this state; a college, community college or university that is supported entirely or in part by taxation; a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, community college or university that is supported entirely or in part by taxation; or a structure to which all of the following apply: 
A.  A sign is not visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising appears on the premises indicating that a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; 
B.  The business does not otherwise advertise itself as an adult business; 
C.  Where in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and 
D.  Where no more than one (1) nude, or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one (1) time. 
    Nursing Home: A nursing home is an extended health care facility providing lodging, meals, treatment, and skilled nursing care on a long-term basis to individuals who, because of advanced age, chronic illness, or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. 
    Office: A use that provides professional, administrative, or business related services. Production, storage, distribution, or sale of goods or commodities are not included. 
    Open Space: An area that is intended to provide light and air and is designed for either environmental, scenic, or recreational purposes. Open space may include, but is not limited to lawns, decorative planting, walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains, swimming pools, wooded areas, and water courses. 
    Outdoor Sales: The display of products or services which are intended for retail or wholesale purchase not within a completely enclosed building. 
    Plant Nursery (Wholesale): A facility where live plants are grown or propagated for sale to retail operators. 
    Principal Use: The main or primary use on any lot or parcel which establishes the basic land use characteristics of the property, as opposed to an accessory use. In some instances, a property may have more than one (1) principal use. 
    Private Schools: Parochial schools, and other private, primary, or secondary schools certified by Arizona Department of Education, institutions of higher education including athletic fields, playgrounds, dormitories, and swimming pools accessory thereto, on the same lot or parcel of land. Private schools shall not include any type of therapeutic counseling or rehabilitation facilities. 
    Professional Office: Offices where services are provided that require specialized training or professional certification including but not limited to accountant, appraiser, attorney, architect, landscape architect, engineer, surveyor, stockbroker, physician, dentist, chiropractor, massage therapist, psychologist, and optometrist. No goods or merchandise are sold or exchanged. 
    Project: One (1) or more uses, buildings, or tenant spaces designed to function as an integral unit through shared parking and driveways, even though there may be separate ownerships and parcels. 
    Public Utility Facilities Required for Local Service: Local utility installations that typically include neighborhood transmission substations, vaults, water wells and tanks, and distribution equipment. Office, administrative, or fleet operations are not included at these locations. 
    Recreational Facilities, Indoor: Establishments providing indoor amusement or recreation. Typical uses include: martial arts studios, billiard and pool halls, electronic and coin-operated game rooms, bowling alleys, skating rinks, and health and fitness establishments. 
    Recreational Facilities, Outdoor: Long term facilities providing outdoor amusement and entertainment. Typical uses include miniature golf, skateboard parks, amusement parks, go cart race tracks, and batting cages. 
    Recreational Vehicle: A vehicular type of unit forty (40) feet or less in length and eight (8) feet or less in width, primarily designed for temporary living quarters, recreation, camping, or travel use, which either: 
A.  Contains its own motive power as in the case of motor homes, minimotor homes, or recreational vans; 
B.  Is drawn by another vehicle as in the case of travel trailers, tent trailers, camper trailers, or watercraft on boat trailers; or 
C.  Is mounted on another vehicle as in the case of truck campers. 
    Recycling Center: A facility within a completely enclosed building in which recoverable resources such as newspapers, glassware, and metal cans are collected, stored, crushed, and/or bundled for transport to a reprocessing plant. 
    Recycling Container: A collection container that serves as a neighborhood drop-off point for temporary storage of recoverable resources. This facility would generally be located in a shopping center parking lot or in other public/quasi-public areas such as churches, parks, and schools. It is intended for household or consumer use. 
    Redevelopment: Any modification, alteration, remodeling, or new construction to an existing site or structure which requires a permit under the Building Code of the City of Glendale. 
    Residential Use: Long term occupancy of residential structures including single residence and multiple residence dwellings, dormitories, and mobile homes. 
    Resort Hotel: A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms providing a variety of outdoor recreation activities such as golf, tennis, horseback riding, or swimming for guests. A resort may provide services customarily furnished by a hotel including restaurant, gift shop, bar, and convention facilities. A resort may contain dwelling units in conjunction with guests' rooms. 
    Rooftop Mounted Antenna: An antenna that is located on top of roof and is not a wall-mount or an alternative design structure. 
    Satellite Earth Station: A device consisting of an antenna and reflector, having any dimension of more than one and one-half (1-1/2) meters, and is a solid or open mesh configured structure used for reception or transmission of radio energy to or from an earth orbit satellite or celestial body. 
    Scenic Corridor : is the required landscape setback and land abutting the Agua Fria Freeway (Loop 101) between 51 st Avenue and Bell Road. The Scenic Corridor extends 1/4 -mile on both sides of the freeway. This distance is measured from the freeway right-of-way. 
    School: A place of general instruction including colleges, but not including business colleges, child care centers, dancing schools, riding academies, or specialized trade or vocational schools. 
    Semi-Nude or Semi-Nudity: A state of dress which shows the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point, or which shows the male or female buttocks. This definition shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
    Semi-Nude Business: Any commercial establishment, other than an adult cabaret, nude model studio or topless bar, which features employees who appear semi-nude before customers on the business premises. The term "semi-nude business" is intended to apply to businesses which emphasize and seek, through the conduct of any employee or performer, to arouse or excite any patron's sexual desires. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to apply to the presentation or performance of any play, drama or ballet in any theater, concert hall, fine arts academy, school, institution of higher education or similar establishment as a form of expression of opinion or communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion of exploitation of semi-nudity for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise. 
    Setback: The required distance between the property line and the closest point of any building or structure. (See Figure D-6). 
  
    Shelter Care Facility: A short-term residential care service which provides temporary lodging, meals, and counseling to individuals and groups such as the homeless, pregnant teenagers, victims of domestic violence, neglected children, and runaways. Short-term residential care is typically less than thirty (30) days. 
    Sign: Any device (including, but not limited to, letters, words, numerals, figures, emblems, pictures, or any part or combination) used for visual communication which is intended to attract the attention of the public and is visible from the public rights-of-way or other properties. The term "sign" shall not include any flag, badge or insignia of any governmental unit nor shall it include any item of merchandise normally displayed within a show window of a business. 
    Sign, Awning: Signs which are placed on or integrated into fabric or other material canopies which are mounted on the exterior of a building. 
    Sign, Billboard: A sign which is intended to advertise a business, commodity, service, entertainment, product, or attraction sold, offered, or existing elsewhere than on the property where the sign is located. 
    Sign, Construction or Development: A temporary sign providing information about future development or current construction on a site, and the parties involved in the project. 
    Sign, Directional: An on-premises sign that includes information assisting in the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic such as enter, exit, and one-way. (See Figure D-7). 
  
    Sign, Digital Billboard: An identification sign or a sign which is intended to advertise a business, commodity, service, entertainment, product, or attraction sold, offered, or existing on or elsewhere than on the property where the sign is located and intended to be viewed primarily from SR 101. A Digital Billboard shall be internally illuminated, and not capable of movement. 
    Sign, Directory: A sign, other than an identification sign, listing the names, uses, or locations of the various businesses or activities conducted within a building or group of buildings which is centrally located and intended to provide on-site directions. 
    Sign, Fascia: A sign which is mounted against the horizontal piece covering the joint between the top of a wall and the projecting eaves of the roof. 
    Sign, Freestanding: A sign which is erected on its own self-supporting permanent structure, detached from any supporting elements of a building. 
    Sign, Hospital Emergency: Freestanding identification and wall signs that either direct the public to or identify the location of a hospital emergency facility. 
    Sign, Identification: A sign that is designed and intended to identify only the business, place, organization, building, street address, or person on the property on which it is located. 
    Sign, Illuminated: A sign whose surface is artificially lighted internally or externally. 
    Sign, Mansard: A sign permanently affixed to a wall or surface designed to protect the edge of a roof, such surface being no more than thirty (30) degrees from vertical. 
    Sign, Menu: A temporary sign used to inform the public of the list of entrees, dishes, foods, and entertainment available in a restaurant. 
    Sign, Menu Board: A permanently mounted sign displaying the bill of fare for a drive thru restaurant. 
    Sign, Noncommercial: A sign which does not contain information or advertising for any business, commodity, service, entertainment, product, or other attraction. 
    Sign, Nonconforming: A sign lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of this ordinance which does not conform with the requirements of this ordinance. 
    Sign, Open House Directional: A temporary sign used to advertise the sale of a house and direct traffic to the house for sale. 
    Sign, Parapet: A sign attached to that portion of a building's exterior wall that projects above the plate line of a building. 
    Sign, Political: A sign which supports any candidate for public office or urges action for or against any other matter on the ballot of primary, general, or special elections. 
    Sign, Portable: Any sign not affixed to a structure or ground mounted on a site. 
    Sign, Projecting: A sign attached to a building or other structure and extending in whole or in part more than fourteen (14) inches beyond the building. 
    Sign, Reader Panel: A sign designed to permit immediate change of copy either manually or electronically. 
    Sign, Roof: A sign erected on a roof, or signs that project above the highest point of the roof line, parapet, or fascia of the building. 
    Sign, Sale, Lease or Rent: A sign advertising for sale, lease, or rent the property or building upon which it is located. 
    Sign, Shingle: A sign suspended from, and located entirely under a covered porch, covered walkway, or an awning. 
    Sign, Structure: The supports and framework of the sign. 
    Sign, Temporary: A sign not intended or designed for permanent display. 
    Sign, Wall: A sign mounted flat against and projecting less than fourteen (14) inches from, or painted on the wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the face of the wall. This does not include window signs. 
    Sign, Window: A sign affixed to the interior or exterior of a window, or placed immediately behind a window pane so as to attract the attention of persons outside the building. 
    Single Retail Use Gross Floor Area: This includes all enclosed areas which share checkstands, management, a controlling ownership interest, indoor storage areas, outdoor storage areas, loading docks and delivery areas. It also includes any outside area which provides associated services to the public such as but not limited to outdoor merchandise display or snack bar. 
    Small Animal Grooming Facility: An establishment at which dogs, cats, or other small animals are commercially groomed, bathed, or trimmed. There shall be no boarding or overnight keeping of any animals, and all animals shall be kept inside an enclosed, soundproofed building at all times. 
    Specified Anatomical Areas: Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal; the appearance of the cleft of the buttocks, anus, genitals or areola of the female breast; or a state of dress which fails to opaquely cover the cleft of the buttocks, anus, genitals or areola of the female breast. 
    Specified Sexual Activities: Activities that depict, describe, or relate to any of the following activities: 
A.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
B.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
C.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
D.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities set forth in subsections A through C. 
    Storage Shed: One (1) story, detached accessory building used for tools and storage, playhouse, or similar use with a projected roof area of less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
    Story: A space in a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above, or if there be no floor above; then the space between such floor and the ceiling or roof above; provided, however, that where the floor level of the first story is at least five (5) feet below the adjoining finished grade, the space shall be considered a basement and not counted as a story. 
    Street: A public thoroughfare, including road, highway, drive, lane, avenue, place, boulevard, and any other thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Structural Alteration: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or attached to something having location on the ground. 
    Supervisory Care Facility: A facility with characteristics of a group home which has eleven (11) or more individuals. 
    Temporary Office or Construction Trailer: A temporary portable unit for office use which is designed to be transported, after fabrication, on its own wheels, or on a flatbed, other trailer, or have detachable wheels. 
    Thrift Store: A profit or nonprofit business or organization that engages in or specializes in the sale or resale of previously owned or used goods and merchandise from an area greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor area devoted to retail sales and whose merchandise is donated or principally donated. A specialty retail store which sells used merchandise not donated for sale including, but not limited to, used record stores, used book stores, used furniture stores, and sports trading card stores, shall not be considered a thrift store for the purpose of this ordinance. 
    Topless Bar: Any establishment which is required to hold a liquor license under Arizona law and which offers semi-nude performers as entertainment. 
    Tower: A structure consisting of more than a single shaft of steel or concrete used to elevate an antenna for wireless communication or broadcasting. 
    Tower Height: When referring to a tower or alternative structure, the distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the other structure including the base pad. 
    Travel Trailer: A vehicular portable home not exceeding eight (8) feet in width nor more than thirty-three (33) feet in length designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses. Such home shall not exceed the limits set forth by the State for movement over and upon the highways without a special permit. A travel trailer shall not include a motor home, recreational van, tent trailer, camper trailer, watercraft on a boat trailer, or a truck camper. 
    Use: The purpose for which land or a building thereof is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let or leased. 
    Vehicle Repair, Major: The service and repair of major components of vehicles including engines and transmissions. These vehicles may include automobiles, boats, motorcycles, trucks, motor homes, or travel trailers. 
    Vehicle Repair, Minor: An establishment which provides minor service and maintenance of the ancillary systems of vehicles including accessories, lubrication, minor repair and tune-up of engines, and/or washing and polishing services. 
    Warehousing and Distribution: A use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, but excluding bulk storage of materials that are inflammable or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. 
    Wireless Communication Facility: Facility for the provision of personal wireless services as defined by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and any amendments thereto. Wireless communication facilities are composed of two or more of the following components: antenna, mount, equipment shelter, and wall or security barrier. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1874, § 1, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 1947, § 1, 6-24-97; Ord. No. 2002, § 1, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2089, § 1, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 2136, § 1, 5-9-00; Ord. No. 2176, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2206, § 1, 7-24-01; Ord. No. 2280, § 1, 10-22-02; Ord. No. 2386, § 1, 6-22-04; Ord. No. 2532, § 1, 10-24-06; Ord. No. 2763, § 1, 2-22-11; Ord. No. 2805, § 1, 6-26-12; Ord. No. 2976, § 1, 2-23-16; Ord. No. O17-51, § 1, 10-24-17) 
ARTICLE 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Section 3.100 - Administrative Bodies and Officers. 
3.101 - Planning Director. 
    The Planning Director shall carry out all responsibilities of the office of the Zoning Administrator as defined in Arizona Revised Statutes and set forth hereafter. Such duties include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Administration and interpretation of this ordinance, including: clarification of the intent, review of land uses described and included in a zoning district, and delegation of responsibilities for administering procedures and requirements of the ordinance; 
B.  Authorizing administrative relief; 
C.  Enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance, and; 
D.  Preparing application guidelines, forms, and administrative procedures. 
    Additional detail of responsibilities of the Planning Director may be provided in other specific sections of this ordinance. All decisions and interpretations by the Planning Director may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the procedures prescribed in Section 3.700; except as otherwise provided by this ordinance in Section 3.607 for design review decisions. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.102 - Planning Commission. 
A.  Purpose. The Planning Commission provides analysis and recommendations to the City Council related to the City's General Plan, for zoning, ordinance amendments, subdivisions, conditional use permits, and other matters affecting land use, and development within the city. 
B.  Organization. The Planning Commission shall consist of no less than five (5) nor more than seven (7) members appointed by the City Council Each member shall be appointed for a term of two years. In the event of the death or resignation of a member, the vacancy may be filled for the unexpired term. The members of the Planning Commission shall serve without compensation. Change of residence from the city by a member shall create a vacancy on the Planning Commission. 
C.  Officers. The City Council shall select a Chairman of the Planning Commission who shall serve as Chairman for a term of one (1) year, and who shall preside at all meetings and be the head of the Planning Commission. The City Council shall select for a one (1) year term, a Vice-Chairman to act in the absence of the Chairman. The Planning Director or designee shall act as Secretary to the Planning Commission, whose duties will be to record accurate minutes of the proceedings and any such other duties as may be assigned by the Planning Commission. 
D.  Rules. 
1.  The Planning Commission shall adopt guidelines to establish rules and regulations for its governance consistent with the laws of this state, this ordinance and with the City Charter; 
2.  The Planning Commission shall meet at least once a month at such time and place as may be fixed by the Planning Commission; 
3.  Planning Commission members shall be subject to all applicable conflict of interest provisions of State law and the City Charter; and 
4.  A quorum consisting of four (4) members shall be present in order to conduct business. A concurring vote of the majority of the appointed members present shall be required to approve or deny a motion on any public hearing item. 
E.  Powers. The Planning Commission shall have all the powers which are now or may hereafter be given it by the general laws of the state and ordinances of the City to include at a minimum: 
1.  To hear requests for amendments of the text or official zoning map and recommend approval, denial, or approval with conditions to City Council; 
2.  To hear requests and approve or deny conditional use permits as required by this ordinance; 
3.  To prescribe conditions or stipulations for any conditional use permit or amendment to this Zoning Ordinance as may be required to carry out the provisions and intent of this ordinance; 
4.  To hear appeals from any decision made by the Planning Director resulting from the design review process; 
5.  To hear requests to amend the General Plan text or maps and recommend approval, denial, or approval with changes to the requested action; 
6.  To exercise powers of the Airport Zoning Commission pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes, Section 28-8461, et seq.; 
7.  To make recommendations to City Council on the City's Capital Improvement Plans; 
8.  To hear requests for design review approval on certain freestanding identification signs as provided by Section 7.104 of this ordinance. 
F.  Recommendations in Writing. All recommendations made to the City Council by the Planning Commission shall be submitted in writing. A report of all business conducted by the Planning Commission shall be forwarded to City Council in the form of minutes of all regular business meetings and hearings. 
G.  Expenditure. The Planning Commission shall have no authority to make expenditure on behalf of the City or to obligate the City for payment of any sums of money, except as herein provided, and then only after the City Council shall first authorize such expenditure. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2590, § 1, 10-9-07) 
3.103 - Board of Adjustment. 
A.  Purpose. The Board of Adjustment is a quasi-judicial body created to hear requests for relief from the terms of this ordinance and to hear and decide appeals from decisions of the Planning Director. 
B.  Organization. The Board of Adjustment is hereby created and shall be composed of not less than five (5) nor more than seven (7) members who shall be residents of the city and who shall serve without pay. Each member of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed by the City Council for a period of two (2) years. In the event of the death or resignation of a member, the vacancy may be filled for the unexpired term. Change of residence from the city of a member shall create a vacancy on the Board of Adjustment. 
C.  Officers. The City Council shall select a Chairman from among the members of the Board of Adjustment who shall serve as such Chairman for a term of one (1) year and who shall have the power to administer oaths and take evidence. The City Council shall select a Vice-Chairman for a one (1) year term to act in the absence of the Chairman. The Planning Director or designee shall act as Secretary to the Board of Adjustment, whose duties are to keep accurate minutes of all proceedings and all other duties as maybe assigned by the Board of Adjustment. 
D.  Rules. 
1.  The Board of Adjustment shall adopt guidelines to establish rules of procedure for its governance consistent with provisions of this ordinance, laws of this state and the City Charter. 
2.  A quorum consisting of four (4) members shall be present in order to conduct business. A concurring vote of a majority of the appointed members present shall be required to reverse any order or decision of the Planning Director being appealed to the Board, or to approve or deny a request for a variance from the terms and conditions of this ordinance. 
3.  Board of Adjustment members shall be subject to all applicable conflict of interest provisions of State law and the City Charter. 
E.  Powers. The Board of Adjustment shall have all the powers which are now or may hereafter be given it by the general laws of the State and the ordinances of the City including, but not limited to: 
1.  Hearing and deciding appeals from any decision or interpretation made by the Planning Director, except as otherwise provided in the administration and enforcement of this ordinance; 
2.  Hearing and deciding requests for variances from the terms of this ordinance because of special circumstances applicable to a property, including its size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, where the strict application of this ordinance would deprive such property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district; 
3.  Interpreting on appeal or on its own motion, the location of any district boundary line shown on the official zoning map of the City; 
4.  Prescribing any conditions or stipulations for any variance or appeal as it may deem necessary to fully carry out the provisions and intent of this ordinance and which will assure that the adjustment authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other similarly situated or zoned properties. Such conditions may include, but not be limited to, a period of time for the applicant to carry out the terms of a variance or appeal; 
5.  To exercise powers of the Airport Board of Adjustment pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes, Section 28-8473, et seq. 
F.  Ex Parte Contact. Any board member who reviews written communications or engages in verbal communications which are not part of the Board of Adjustment record shall disclose such communication at the time of the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2590, § 1, 10-9-07) 
3.104 - Historic Preservation Commission. 
A.  Purpose. The Historic Preservation Commission shall work with the Planning Commission and City Council on matters of historic preservation; take the initiative in bringing people together on historic preservation issues; review proposed alterations to historic properties, historic districts and archaeological resources through the Certificate of Appropriateness process; and develop, maintain and from time to time amend, a plan for historic preservation in the city. The Historic Preservation Commission shall survey historic properties including archaeological resources, recommend to the Planning Commission and City Council designations for Historic Preservation Districts, initiate designations for historic preservation districts and amendments, and establish guidelines for evaluation of historic properties, including archaeological resources; provide public information and education on preservation, coordinate resources and provide technical assistance, promote revitalization of the City through preservation, and make recommendations to the Planning Commission, City Council and citizens of the City regarding historic preservation. The Commission may also confer with other city, county, regional, state and national historic preservation boards and commissions. The Commission shall initiate plans for the restoration or rehabilitation of privately owned buildings and the preservation of archaeological resources. The Commission shall work with City departments to discourage and prevent unwanted demolition of historic buildings and structures and the destruction of archaeological resources. 
B.  Organization. A Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of seven (7) members who are residents of the city. The members shall serve for terms of two (2) years, except that members of the first Historic Preservation Commission shall serve as designated by the City Council for the following terms: four (4) members for two (2) years and three (3) members for one (1) year. Any vacancy shall be filled by the City Council within a reasonable time after the vacancy occurs, for the unexpired term. The members of the Historic Preservation Commission shall serve without compensation. 
C.  Officers. The City Council shall select a Chairman of the Historic Preservation Commission who shall serve as Chairman for a term of one (1) year, and who shall preside at all meetings and be the head of the Historic Preservation Commission. The City Council shall select for a one (1) year term, a Vice-Chairman to act in the absence of the Chairman. The Planning Director or designee shall act as Secretary to the Historic Preservation Commission, whose duties will be to record accurate minutes of the proceedings and any such other duties as may be assigned by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
D.  Rules. 
1.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall adopt guidelines to establish rules of procedure for its governance consistent with provisions of this ordinance, laws of this State, and the City Charter. 
2.  A quorum consisting of four (4) members shall be present to do business. A concurring vote of the majority of the appointed members present shall be required to approve or deny any motion on any public hearing item. 
3.  Historic Preservation Commission Members shall be subject to all applicable conflict of interest provisions of State law and the City Charter. 
E.  Qualifications. Members of the Historic Preservation Commission are preferred to be persons who have demonstrated special interest, knowledge or experience in historic preservation. At least five (5) members are preferred to have a background in the following disciplines: architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology, or related historic preservation disciplines, such as cultural geography or cultural anthropology. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1805, 5-10-94; Ord. No. 2590, § 1, 10-9-07) 
3.105 - Glendale Historic Property Register. 
    The Glendale Historic Property register is established for the purpose of recording the historic sites, structures, buildings, objects and areas which exist in the City of Glendale and which are zoned Historic Preservation District. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.106 - Historic Preservation (HP) Officer. 
    The Planning Director or his designee shall serve as Historic Preservation Officer. The Historic Preservation Officer shall administer this ordinance and maintain the Glendale Historic Property Register. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 3.200 - Fees. 
3.201 - Generally. 
    Fees for all services as required by this ordinance, including, but not limited to, rezoning, text amendments, use permits, variances, design review, interpretations, and administrative reviews, shall be in the amount established by resolution of the City Council or pursuant to Glendale City Code Section 2-3. All fees shall be due at the time of application or submission of the request. The City of Glendale or the City of Glendale Councilmembers, when acting in their official capacity, shall be exempt from all fees required by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2193, § 1, 5-29-01; Ord. No. 2260, § 7, 6-11-02) 
Section 3.300 - General Procedures. 
3.301 - Application Procedures. 
    The procedures outlined in this ordinance involve a variety of application types. Some requirements are the same for all applications, and some application procedures have unique requirements. In addition, most procedures have detailed user guides prepared and provided by the Planning Director. This Zoning Ordinance and the available guidelines should be read carefully to ensure a complete application is prepared. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.302 - Complete Application. 
A.  The Planning Department will evaluate an application for completeness. An application shall contain an application form, any information specifically required by this ordinance, such additional information specified by the Planning Director, and when required, a fee. An application must be made by the property owner or his authorized agent. An applicant will be notified within ten (10) working days if the application is incomplete. If incomplete, no review or public hearing will be scheduled. If an application fee has been paid, such fee will be refunded if the application continues to be incomplete thirty (30) days after an initial incomplete submittal. 
B.  When an application is determined to be complete, it will be scheduled for a review or public hearing as required by this ordinance. If the review authority (Commission, Board, City Council, or staff) determines additional information is required to adequately evaluate an application, any such additional information shall be submitted by the applicant not later than sixty (60) days from notification of the applicant unless a specific date is otherwise established by the review authority. Failure to provide additional information in the time specified will result in the application being deemed incomplete, the file closed and no refund of application fees made. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.303 - Pre-application. 
    Prior to application for any general plan amendment, rezoning request, special district, conditional use permit, subdivision plat, variance, appeal, design review, or any other review or permit process, a preapplication review with the Planning Department will be required. The purpose of the preapplication review is: 
A.  To familiarize the Planning Department with the request; 
B.  To determine application requirements and familiarize the applicant with the review process and procedures; 
C.  To identify land use and development policies which may affect the outcome of the request; 
D.  To permit a cursory technical review at a conceptual stage to identify conflicts in objectives and to identify potential solutions for those conflicts; and 
E.  To identify the requirements for citizen participation and familiarize the applicant with related issues. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1952, § 1, 7-22-97; Ord. No. 2590, § 2, 10-9-07) 
3.304 - Citizen Participation Plan. 
A.  Every application which requires a public hearing shall include a citizen participation plan which must be implemented prior to the first public hearing. 
B.  The purpose of the citizen participation plan is to: 
1.  Ensure that applicants pursue early and effective citizen participation in conjunction with their applications, giving them the opportunity to understand and try to mitigate any real or perceived impacts their application may have on the community; 
2.  Ensure that the citizens and property owners of Glendale have an adequate opportunity to learn about applications that may affect them and to work with applicants to resolve concerns at an early stage of the process; and 
3.  Facilitate ongoing communication between the applicant, interested citizens and property owners, city staff, and elected officials throughout the application review process. 
C.  The citizen participation plan is not intended to produce complete consensus on all applications, but to encourage applicants to be good neighbors and to allow for informed decision making. 
D.  At a minimum the citizen participation plan shall include the following information: 
1.  Which residents, property owners, interested parties, political jurisdictions and public agencies may be affected by the application; 
2.  How those interested in and potentially affected by an application will be notified that an application has been made; 
3.  How those interested and potentially affected parties will be informed of the substance of the change, amendment, or development proposed by the application; 
4.  How those affected or otherwise interested will be provided an opportunity to discuss the applicant's proposal with the applicant and express any concerns, issues, or problems they may have with the proposal in advance of the public hearing; 
5.  The applicant's schedule for completion of the citizen participation plan; 
6.  How the applicant will keep the planning department informed on the status of their citizen participation efforts. 
E.  The level of citizen interest and area of involvement will vary depending on the nature of the application and the location of the site. The target area for early notification will be determined by the applicant after consultation with the Planning Department. At a minimum, the target area shall include the following: 
1.  Property owners within the public hearing notice area required by other sections of the ordinance codified in this section; 
2.  The head of any homeowners association or registered neighborhood within the public notice area required by other sections of the ordinance codified in this section; 
3.  Other interested parties who have requested that they be placed on the interested parties notification list maintained by the Planning Department. 
F.  These requirements apply in addition to any notice provisions required elsewhere in the ordinance codified in this section. 
G.  The applicant may submit a citizen participation plan and begin implementation prior to formal application at their discretion. This shall not occur until after the required pre-application meeting and consultation with the Planning Department staff. 
(Ord. No. 1952, § 2, 7-22-97) 
3.305 - Citizen Participation Final Report. 
A.  This section applies only when a citizen participation plan is required by the ordinance codified in this section. 
B.  The applicant shall provide a written report on the results of their citizen participation effort prior to the notice of public hearing. This report will be attached to the Planning Department's public hearing report. 
C.  At a minimum, the citizen participation final report shall include the following information: 
1.  Details of techniques the applicant used to involve the public, including: 
a.  Dates and locations of all meetings where citizens were invited to discuss the applicant's proposal; 
b.  Content, dates mailed, and numbers of mailings, including letters, meeting notices, newsletters and other publications; 
c.  Where residents, property owners, and interested parties receiving notices, newsletters, or other written materials are located; and 
d.  The number of people that participated in the process. 
2.  A summary of concerns, issues and problems expressed during the process, including: 
a.  The substance of the concerns, issues, and problems; 
b.  How the applicant has addressed or intends to address concerns, issues and problems expressed during the process; and 
c.  Concerns, issues and problems the applicant is unwilling or unable to address and why. 
(Ord. No. 1952, § 2, 7-22-97; Ord. No. 2590, § 1, 10-9-07) 
Section 3.400 - Interpretations, Administrative Relief, and Administrative Review. 
3.401 - Interpretations. 
A.  The Planning Director shall be responsible for interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance. Interpretations may be considered if there is a question of clarity of any development standard or other provision of this ordinance, or a review is required within the permitted use categories of a specified zone district. 
B.  An application clearly stating the section requiring interpretation or the characteristics of the desired use and zone district in which it is proposed to be located shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the Planning Director with the required fee before an interpretation will be made. All requests for written interpretations shall be filed in the Planning Department. 
C.  The Planning Director shall issue a written interpretation within ten (10) working days of the submission of a completed application and request for interpretation. All interpretations shall be maintained in the Planning Department records. 
D.  Prior to determining that a use is permitted within a specific zoning district, the Planning Director shall find that: 
1.  The use is described and included in the zoning district; 
2.  The intensity of the use will not adversely affect other properties within the district; or 
3.  If there is more than one (1) principal use, all of the principal uses are permitted and that the combination of uses will not alter the basic land use characteristics of each principal use or create a different use which would otherwise be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.402 - Administrative Relief. 
A.  The Planning Director may authorize administrative relief to the property owner of up to ten (10) percent of any development standard unless specifically restricted elsewhere in this ordinance if: 
1.  An application by the property owner, on a form prescribed by the Planning Director, and fee has been submitted; 
2.  Notice, by first class mail, postmarked at least five (5) days prior to the determination to adjacent property owners determined by the Planning Director as potentially affected by the request; 
3.  The proposed improvement requiring relief will not be detrimental to the property requesting relief, any adjacent property or the City; 
4.  The relief granted is the minimum required to meet the needs of the proposed improvement; and 
5.  The relief shall not be contrary to the purpose and intent of this ordinance. 
B.  Any relief authorized by the Planning Director will be documented with findings consistent with the standards above and filed with the building permit records, subdivision case file, or other department files, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.403 - Administrative Review. 
A.  The Planning Director shall review all uses specified in Sections 7.500, standards for uses or accessory uses subject to conditions to determine that all conditions are met. 
B.  An application with the required fee shall be submitted which describes the use in detail and the manner in which it will comply with the specified condition. 
C.  The Planning Director shall issue a written determination within ten (10) working days of submission of a completed application that the use or accessory use does or does not comply with the specified conditions. All determinations shall be maintained in the Planning Department records. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.404 - Appeals. 
    All decisions and interpretations by the Planning Director performed in accordance with Section 3.400 may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the procedures prescribed in Section 3.700. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 3.500 - Initial Zoning Upon Annexation. 
3.501 - General. 
    Areas, upon annexation to the City of Glendale, shall, until officially zoned by City Council, be considered to be zoned as shown on the official zoning map of Maricopa County at the time of an annexation. This zoning shall be effective for a maximum of six (6) months after annexation. Applications for initial City zoning shall be filed and processed as defined in Section 3.800. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.502 - Effect of Annexation on Building Permits. 
    Maricopa County building permits lawfully issued not more than sixty (60) days prior to the effective date of annexation, shall be honored by the City. Within sixty (60) days after the effective date of annexation, the City shall issue a building permit when construction details conforming to City building codes and County zoning regulations, in effect at the time the County permit was issued, are provided to the City. Any fee paid to the County for the County permit shall apply towards the City permit fee and only the balance must be paid to the City before a City permit is issued. 
    A City building permit shall not be required for buildings legally under construction with a building permit issued by Maricopa County prior to the effective date of annexation, and where exterior walls have been completed to the plate line or beyond. The City shall require that building construction be structurally safe and in conformance with pertinent county zoning regulations in effect at the time the county permit was issued. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 3.520 - Amendments to the General Plan- Text and Maps. 
3.521 - General. 
A.  Amendments to the General Plan which change property from one land use designation to another, which impose policies and standards not previously imposed, which modify plan text, or which remove or modify the text or any policy or standard previously imposed, shall be adopted in the manner set forth in this section. 
B.  Amendments to the General Plan can be either major or minor. Major and minor amendments have different hearing requirements as outlined in Section 3.524. 
C.  Major amendments to the General Plan are those that: 
1.  Apply citywide; 
2.  Adopt a new element of the General Plan; or 
3.  Adopt a specific plan that has impact throughout the character area in which it is located. 
D.  All other amendments are considered minor amendments. 
(Ord. No. 1952, § 3, 7-22-97) 
3.522 - Application Process. 
    Applications for amendments to the General Plan shall conform with the provisions of Section 3.300. Applications shall be made in the office of the Planning Department on an application form with required documentation specified by guidelines provided by the Planning Department and accompanied with appropriate fees as required. After the Planning Department has determined that an application is complete, a public hearing with the Planning Commission will be scheduled. 
(Ord. No. 1952, § 3, 7-22-97) 
3.523 - Authorized Applicant. 
A.  An applicant for an amendment to the General Plan Map on any property shall be one (1) of the following: 
1.  The owner of the property; 
2.  One (1) or more of several joint owners of property who own individually or as a group, a majority interest in the property; 
3.  One (1) or both of the property owners where property is held in joint tenancy; 
4.  Seventy-five (75) percent, or more, of the owners of property in the area covered by the application when the application covers more than one (1) property; or 
5.  The Planning Commission or City Council on its own motion at a public meeting. 
B.  The applicant for an amendment to change the text of the General Plan shall be any interested party, or the Planning Commission or City Council on its own motion at a public hearing. 
C.  An application shall be signed by the authorized applicant or an agent of any authorized applicant when the authority of the agent is in writing, notarized, and filed with the application except applications initiated by the Planning Commission or City Council. The signature of such agent shall have the same force and effect as if the application were signed by the principal. 
(Ord. No. 1952, § 3, 7-22-97) 
3.524 - Public Hearing. 
A.  The Planning Commission shall not recommend nor shall the City Council consider any amendment to the General Plan until the request is presented during a public hearing. All public hearings to consider an amendment to the General Plan shall require notice as provided in Section 3.525. 
B.  For major amendments to the General Plan, the Planning Commission shall hold two public hearings in two different locations in the City. For property-specific amendments, one hearing shall be in the general vicinity of the proposed amendment. Both hearings shall require notice as provided in Section 3.525. 
(Ord. No. 1952, § 3, 7-22-97) 
3.525 - Public Notice. 
    No public hearing shall be conducted without first providing notice to the affected parties. 
A.  For a text amendment, a notice shall be placed in the newspaper of general circulation of the area, or newspaper designated by the City Council for legal public notices, advertising the type and nature of the public hearing at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing, the changes shall be published in a "display ad" covering not less than one-eighth (1/8) of a full page. 
B.  For a map amendment, notice shall be provided as follows: 
1.  A notice shall be sent by first class mail to each real property owner, as shown on the last assessment, whose real property is directly governed by the changes. 
2.  All property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property subject to the application as shown on the last assessment of the property shall be sent notice by first class mail, postmarked at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing. 
3.  A notice shall be placed in the newspaper of general circulation of the area, or newspaper designated by the City Council for legal public notices, advertising the type and nature of the public hearing at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing, the changes shall be published in a "display ad" covering not less than one-eighth (1/8) of a full page. 
4.  A notice shall be posted on or near the property in at least one (1) location on a form prescribed by the Planning Director for such public notice. The posted notice shall be placed on the property at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing. It shall not be the responsibility of the City to maintain the posting once erected. 
C.  Notwithstanding the notice requirements set forth in Section 3.525, the failure of any person or entity to receive notice shall not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the action for which the notice was given. No public hearing shall be conducted without first providing notice to the affected parties. 
(Ord. No. 1952, § 3, 7-22-97) 
3.526 - Planning Commission Recommendation. 
A.  On an application to amend the land use map, the Planning Commission may only recommend approval or denial. The planning Commission recommendation will be forwarded to the City Council for public hearing and final action unless withdrawn by the applicant. 
B.  On an application to amend the text of the plan, the Planning Commission may recommend approval, approval as modified by the Commission, or denial. The Planning Commission recommendation will be forwarded to the City Council for public hearing and final action. 
(Ord. No. 1952, § 3, 7-22-97) 
3.527 - Amendments Adopted by Resolution. 
    Amendments to the General Plan Map or text shall be adopted by resolution and become effective immediately upon approval by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1952, § 3, 7-22-97) 
3.528 - Findings. 
A.  Amendments to the General Plan of the City of Glendale shall be approved only if: 
1.  The amendment is consistent with the policies and objectives of the rest of the General Plan; and 
2.  The proposed amendment furthers the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Glendale. 
B.  If the amendment is to the Land Use Map, an additional finding must be made that the proposed change will be compatible with other land uses, existing or planned, in the vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 1952, § 3, 7-22-97) 
3.529 - Re-application. 
    In cases where the amendment has been denied by the City Council, no application for an amendment for the same or substantially the same request and, in the case of a map amendment, on the same or substantially the same property, shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of denial of the amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1952, § 3, 7-22-97) 
Section 3.600 - Design Review. 
3.601 - Purpose. 
A.  To promote development consistent with the City's goals of high quality. 
B.  To ensure that development is compatible with the surrounding area. 
C.  To ensure that on-site and off-site circulation is safe for both motorists and pedestrians. 
D.  To ensure that all necessary public utilities and services are provided in an efficient and aesthetic manner. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.602 - When Review is Required. 
    Design Review is required for single residence, multi-residence, office, commercial, and industrial projects if any one (1) of the following requirements is met: 
A.  Any new development or construction. 
B.  Any change in occupancy as classified by the Uniform Building Code. 
C.  Any expansion of an existing site or building. 
D.  Any remodeling of an existing use that alters at least twenty (20) percent of the floor area or site area. 
E.  Any remodeling or improvement valued at fifty (50) percent or more of the value of the existing improvements on the site. 
F.  Prior to occupancy or use of any commercial or industrial building or site which has been vacant for one (1) year or more. 
G.  Any amendment to an approved design review plan. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.603 - Minor Design Reviews and Waiver of Design Review. 
    Some projects such as single residences, may not need a complete review in accordance with Sections 3.604 and 3.605 even though one (1) of the seven (7) requirements of Section 3.602 is met. The Planning Director may waive full Design Review if it is determined that such review will not further that purpose of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.604 - Submittal Requirements. 
    A Design Review application shall contain: 
A.  Completed application form and fee. 
B.  A site plan. 
C.  Building elevations. 
D.  A conceptual landscape plan and grading and drainage plan. 
E.  Materials and colors exhibit board. 
F.  Proposed signage. 
    The technical information to be included with these items along with the appropriate number of copies of each is described in the application guidelines provided by the Planning Department. 
    Additional information may be required depending on the scale and scope of the project. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.605 - Review and Approval. 
    The City staff shall make the following findings in its evaluation of a project: 
A.  The proposed development complies with all provisions of this ordinance and all other ordinances, master plans, general plans, goals, objectives and standards of the City of Glendale. 
B.  The proposed site development plan's building heights, building locations, access points, and parking areas will not negatively impact adjacent properties or the surrounding neighborhood. 
C.  The proposed development promotes a functional relationship of structures to one another, to open spaces, and to topography both on the site and in the surrounding neighborhood. 
D.  The height, location, materials, color, texture, area, setbacks, and mass, as well as parts of any structure (buildings, walls, signs, lighting, etc.) and landscaping, is appropriate to the development, the neighborhood, and the community. 
E.  Ingress, egress, internal and external traffic circulation, off-street parking facilities, loading and service areas, and pedestrian ways, is so designed as to promote safety and convenience. 
F.  The architectural character of the proposed structures is in harmony with, and compatible to, structures in the neighboring environment and the architectural character desired for the city; avoiding excessive variety or monotonous repetition. 
G.  All mechanical equipment, appurtenances and utility lines are concealed from view and integral to the building and site design. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.606 - Administrative Relief. 
    City development standards may be modified during the design review process by up to ten (10) percent of the required standard upon a finding that all of the following are met: 
A.  The proposed improvement is compatible with the character of the property requesting relief and the adjacent property; 
B.  The proposed improvement requiring relief will not be detrimental to the property requesting relief, any adjacent property or the City; 
C.  The relief granted is the minimum required to meet the needs of the proposed improvement; and 
D.  The relief shall not be contrary to the purpose and intent of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.607 - Denial and Appeal Procedure. 
A.  If the Planning Director or his designee finds that the proposed project has not properly addressed one (1) of the review criteria listed in Section 3.605 of this article or there are other technical deficiencies identified by other City staff reviewers, and adequate resolution of the issue(s) can not be ensured by the applicant, the Planning Director or his designee shall deny the Design Review Application and state the reasons for the denial in a letter to the applicant. 
B.  The applicant may appeal the Planning Director's decision to the Planning Commission if that appeal, including appeal fee, is made in writing to the Planning Director within fifteen (15) days of the decision. The appeal letter shall describe the unresolved issues and describe what design solutions are proposed by the applicant. The applicant shall be notified of the date of the Planning Commission meeting to consider the appeal, a minimum of fifteen (15) days prior to the public meeting. 
C.  The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless an appeal to the City Council is made by the applicant in writing to the Planning Director within fifteen (15) days of the Planning Commission's decision. The appeal letter shall state the reasons for the appeal and be accompanied by the required fee. The applicant shall be notified of the date of the City Council meeting to consider the appeal a minimum of fifteen (15) days prior to the public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.608 - Period of Approval. 
    Design review approval shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval and shall become invalid if a building permit has not been issued in that time. Up to an additional one (1) year may be granted by the Planning Director upon written request by the applicant. The Planning Director shall grant the extension only upon a finding that special circumstances prevented the applicant from obtaining a building permit, and that no changes in City ordinances have occurred which would significantly alter the previous design review approval. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 3.700 - Variances and Appeals.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2531, § 1, adopted Oct. 24, 2006, repealed App. A, §§ 3.701-3.707, 3.710. Furthermore, said ordinance renumbered App. A, §§ 3.708, 3.709, 3.711-3.714 as §§ 3.701-3.706. 

3.701. - Effective Date of the Variance or Appeal. 
    The decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be final thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the public hearing unless an appeal is filed as provided for in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2531, § 1, 10-24-06) 
3.702. - Appeal to Superior Court. 
    The City or any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Adjustment may within thirty (30) calendar days of the Board's decision, file a complaint for special action in Superior Court in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-462.06(K) now in effect or as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2260, § 7, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 2531, § 1, 10-24-06) 
3.703. - Modification of a Variance. 
    Any alteration or expansion of a project for which a variance was approved shall comply with all current provisions and regulations of this Zoning Ordinance. Any request for modification or other change in conditions of approval of the variance shall be reviewed according to provisions of this article as a new application. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2531, § 1, 10-24-06) 
3.704. - Revocation of a Variance. 
    When provisions of this ordinance related to the variance, or conditions or stipulations, made a part of the variance approval, have not been satisfied, the variance may be revoked as follows: 
    The Board of Adjustment shall, by first class mail, notify the holder of the variance of its intention to hold a hearing to consider revocation of the variance. The notice shall be made at least fifteen (15) days prior to date of the scheduled hearing. At the hearing, the Board of Adjustment shall consider evidence from all interested parties, and after deliberation, may revoke the variance or take any actions as may be necessary to insure compliance with the regulations or conditions of the approved variance. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2531, § 1, 10-24-06) 
3.705. - Re-application. 
    Where a variance or appeal has been denied, no application for a variance or appeal for the same or substantially the same issue on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of denial. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2531, § 1, 10-24-06) 
3.706. - Applicability of the Variance. 
    Except as may be otherwise stipulated or provided in this Zoning Ordinance, a variance granted pursuant to provisions of this article shall run with the land and continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure which was subject to the variance. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2531, § 1, 10-24-06) 
Section 3.800 - Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance-Text and Maps. 
3.801 - General. 
    Amendments to this Zoning Ordinance which change property from one (1) zoning district to another, which impose regulations not previously imposed, which modify ordinance text, which amend or modify stipulations or conditions of approval, or which remove or modify the text or any regulation previously imposed shall be adopted in the manner set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.802 - Application Process. 
    Applications for amendment shall conform with the provisions of Section 3.300. Applications shall be made in the office of the Planning Department on an application form with required documentation specified on guidelines provided by the Planning Department and accompanied with appropriate fees as required. After the Planning Department has determined that an application is complete, a public hearing with the Planning Commission will be scheduled. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1952, § 5, 7-22-97) 
3.803 - Authorized Applicant. 
A.  An applicant for an amendment to change the zoning on any property shall be one (1) of the following: 
1.  The owner of the property; 
2.  One (1) or more of several joint owners of property who own individually or as a group, a majority interest in the property; 
3.  One (1) or both of the property owners where property is held in joint tenancy; 
4.  Seventy-five (75) percent, or more, of the owners of property in the area covered by the application when the application covers more than one (1) property; 
5.  The Planning Commission or City Council on its own motion at a public meeting; or 
6.  The Historic Preservation Commission, the Planning Commission or City Council on its own motion at a public meeting, may initiate an amendment to establish or amend Historic Preservation District Zoning. 
B.  The applicant for an amendment to change the text of the Zoning Ordinance shall be an interested party, or the Planning Commission or City Council on its own motion at a public hearing. 
C.  An application shall be signed by the authorized applicant or an agent of any authorized applicant when the authority of the agent is in writing, notarized, and file with the application except applications initiated by the Planning Commission or City Council. The signature of such agent shall have the same force and effect as if the application were signed by the principal. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1805, 5-10-94) 
3.804 - Public Hearing. 
    The Planning Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial on an application for amendment. The recommendation will be forwarded to the City Council for public hearing and final action unless withdrawn by the applicant. All public hearings to consider an amendment to this Zoning Ordinance shall require notice as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.805 - Protests Against Amendment. 
    If the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the area either of the lots included in a proposed change, or those immediately adjacent within one hundred fifty (150) feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite within one hundred fifty (150) feet from the street frontage of the opposite lots, file a protest in writing against a proposed amendment, it shall not become effective except by a favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the City Council. 
    If any members of the City Council are unable to vote on such a question because of a conflict of interest, then the required number of votes for passage of the question shall be three-fourths (3/4) of the remaining membership of the City Council, provided that such required number of votes shall in no event be less than a majority of the full membership. 
    Written protests shall describe the property owned by the protestants with sufficient clarity to determine the location of the protestants property on a map of the City with relation to the area under consideration. Where such property is not adequately described, the City Council may, at its discretion, disregard any such protest. The written protests shall include case number, description of request, the name(s), address of property owned by protesting party, signature, date and basis of protest. If a petition is used, the person circulating the petition shall include their name and their notarized signature. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.806 - Public Notice. 
    All such written protests or petitions shall be filed in the office of the Planning Director no later than 12:00 noon on the Friday preceding the City Council meeting at which such amendment will be considered. 
    The Planning Commission shall not recommend nor shall the City Council consider any amendment to this Zoning Ordinance until the request is presented during a public hearing. No public hearing shall be conducted without first providing notice to the affected parties. 
A.  A notice shall be sent by first class mail to each real property owner, as shown on the last assessment, whose real property is directly governed by the changes. 
B.  All property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property subject to the application as shown on the last assessment of the property shall be sent notice by first class mail, postmarked at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing. 
C.  A notice shall be placed in the newspaper of general circulation of the area, or newspaper designated by the City Council for legal public notices, advertising the type and nature of the public hearing at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing, the changes shall be published in a "display ad" covering not less than one-eighth (1/8) of a full page. 
D.  A notice shall be posted on or near the property in at least one (1) location on a form prescribed by the Planning Director for such public notice. The posted notice shall be placed on the property at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing. It shall not be the responsibility of the City to maintain the posting once erected. 
E.  Notwithstanding the notice requirements set forth in Section 3.806, the failure of any person or entity to receive notice shall not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the action for which the notice was given. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.807 - Amendments Adopted by Ordinance. 
    Amendments to the official Zoning Map or the text shall be adopted by ordinance. Amendments to the text may be considered as an emergency ordinance to become effective immediately upon approval by the City Council. Amendments to the official Zoning Map shall not be considered as an emergency ordinance and shall become effective thirty (30) days after approval unless a later effective date is provided by action of City Council. An ordinance amending the official Zoning Map shall include a legal description of the property affected, which shall be provided by the applicant on a form and in a manner as required by the guidelines prepared by the Planning Director. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.808 - Conditional Zoning. 
    The City Council may approve a zoning change containing conditions which must be met by the applicant and may specify a period of time for the applicant to meet the conditions. In the event the time period expires and the conditions have not been met, the ordinance shall not become effective and may be rescinded as follows: 
    The Planning Director shall, by first class mail, notify the authorized applicant of its intention to hold a hearing to rescind the zoning change. The notice shall be made at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the scheduled hearing. At the hearing, the City Council shall consider evidence from all interested parties and after deliberation may rescind the ordinance or take an action to extend the time period. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.809 - Findings. 
    Amendment to the zoning ordinance and official zoning map of the City of Glendale shall be approved only if: 
A.  The amendment is consistent with the policies and objectives of the Glendale General Plan; 
B.  The proposed amendment furthers the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Glendale; and 
C.  If the amendment is to the official Zoning Map, the proposed change will include any conditions necessary to mitigate any adverse impacts on businesses, persons, or properties adjacent to the requested amendment. 
D.  A finding is made that there are adequate school facilities, if the amendment is to the official Zoning Map, and if Section 3.812 (Adequate school facilities) is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2104, § 2, 10-12-99) 
3.810 - Change of Classification of Requested Zone District. 
    In the event an application is made for an amendment to change the official Zoning Map from a more restrictive district to a less restrictive district, the Planning Commission or City Council may approve the application or grant the amendment for a district which is more restrictive than requested in the application and less restrictive than the existing classification, without the necessity of a new or amended application and without the necessity of giving new or additional notice. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.811 - Re-application. 
    In cases where the amendment has been denied, no application for an amendment for the same or substantially the same request and, in the case of a map amendment on the same or substantially the same property shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of denial of the amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.812 - Adequate School Facilities. 
A.  The provisions of this section shall apply only to applications for residential rezoning which will increase the projected number of students for any school district's school attendance area as a result of the proposed rezoning. The applicability of this section includes applications for rezoning which change zoning classifications from non-residential to residential classifications and rezonings which change residential zoning classifications to a higher density residential classification. A school district's school attendance areas shall be the attendance boundaries adopted for each public school by the applicable school district. 
B.  No rezoning application shall be considered complete under Section 3.302 until the applicant provides a letter from the appropriate school district which certifies any of the following, or the time period for the school district's response to a request for certification has expired under subsection D: 
1.  That the school district has adequate school facilities to accommodate the projected number of new students within the school district's attendance area; or 
2.  That the school district will have adequate school facilities by a planned capital improvement to be constructed within one (1) year and located within the school district's attendance area; or 
3.  That the school district has determined an existing or proposed charter school can provide adequate school facilities; or 
4.  That the applicant and the school district have entered into an agreement to provide, or help to provide, adequate school facilities within the school district's attendance area in a timely manner; or 
5.  That the school district does not have adequate school facilities to accommodate projected growth attributable to the rezoning. 
The projected number of new students resulting from the application for rezoning shall be based upon a student per-household ratio methodology adopted by the appropriate school district. If a school district fails to adopt a student per-household ratio methodology for projecting the number of new students resulting from an applicant's rezoning application, then the school district shall base its certification upon an authoritative source accepted within the education community. 
C.  For purposes of this section, adequate school facilities shall be determined by the appropriate school district in accordance with the minimum school facility adequacy guidelines adopted by the School Facilities Board pursuant to A.R.S. Sec. 15-2011, and any subsequent amendments made thereto, as applied to each individual school site's attendance area for each individual school serving the property being considered for rezoning. 
D.  Applications for rezoning subject to this section shall follow the following procedures: 
1.  At the time of filing an application for rezoning subject to this section, all applicants for rezoning shall provide a copy of a letter delivered to the superintendent(s) of all applicable school districts which contains an offer to meet with school district representatives to discuss the school district's certification required by subsection B above. 
2.  After the filing of the rezoning application, the City shall deliver by certified or registered mail a copy of the application and a site location map to each affected school district located within the area requested to be rezoned. In addition, the City shall request the school district to provide the required certification provided for in subsection B above, on a form to be provided by the City, within thirty (30) days to the City of Glendale care of the Planning Director. For good cause, the thirty (30) day time period may be extended at the request of the applicant or the school district. In the event the City does not receive certification from the school district within thirty (30) days, or any extension thereof, it shall be deemed that there are adequate school facilities for the proposed rezoning. The school district's response time to a request for certification shall be determined by the date of mailing of the request for certification from the City. For purposes of computing the thirty (30) day certification time period, the date of mailing from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. In the event the last day for receipt of the certification occurs on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the applicable certification time period runs until the end of the next work day. 
3.  After providing the certification required by subsection B, or the school district's failure to respond to the request for certification within thirty (30) days, or any extension thereof, the application shall proceed to be processed in accordance with Section 3.800 et seq. of the zoning ordinance and all other applicable ordinances. 
4.  In the event that the appropriate school district certifies that there are not adequate school facilities for the proposed rezoning, the Planning Director shall notify the applicant in writing that the school district has determined that it does not have adequate school facilities for the rezoning. 
(Ord. No. 2104, § 1, 10-12-99) 
Section 3.900 - Conditional Use Permits. 
3.901 - Purpose. 
    The City of Glendale recognizes certain uses which may be appropriate in specific zone districts but have characteristics that, depending upon the location, design, and standards of operation, may have a greater impact than permitted uses on adjoining properties, businesses, or residences within the city. Such uses require a more comprehensive review, including the ability of the City to establish specific conditions for the project in order to mitigate any potential impacts. The Planning Commission can evaluate only conditional uses listed and is empowered to grant, grant with conditions, or deny any application for a conditional use permit. Such review by the Planning Commission is subject to findings and the applicable hearing requirements of this section. The burden of proof shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2590, § 3, 10-9-07) 
3.902 - Application. 
    Applications shall conform with the provisions of Section 3.300. Applications shall be filed with the Planning Department on an application form with the required documentation specified on guidelines provided by the Planning Director with appropriate fees. After the Planning Department has determined that an application is complete, a public hearing with the planning commission will be scheduled. The application, at a minimum, shall include the following: 
A.  Name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is not the owner of the property, the name and address of the owner shall be supplied along with authorization that the applicant is the agent of the owner and may apply for the conditional use permit. Proof of ownership must accompany the submittal. 
B.  A statement describing the proposed use, and any pertinent data required to evaluate the use, including but not limited to: hours of operation, number of employees and shifts, processes and materials involved in the use, and types and volume of traffic generated by the use. 
C.  A list of all owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property subject to the application. The list shall be accompanied by a map showing the location of these properties. 
D.  A site plan including dimensions showing the type and location of buildings, structures, floor plans, parking, landscaping, circulation and other relevant site information. 
E.  Any additional information or plans which may be required by the Planning Director. 
F.  Wireless communication facilities require the following additional information: 
1.  A map of the service area of the proposed facility. 
2.  A map showing all existing or planned facilities within the network of the provider within three (3) miles of the proposed site. Describe the height, type of mount, and number of antennas for each facility. 
3.  A map showing any existing or planned single family residential development within one-half (1/2) mile of the proposed site. 
4.  A map showing all wireless communication facilities which are existing, approved, or under construction within a mile radius of the site. 
5.  A map showing other potential locations considered. This includes other monopoles, buildings, and alternative structures. 
6.  A photo simulation of the site including all public views and views from residential property. 
7.  A scaled elevation of the facility from each direction. The elevation must be legible when reduced to eight (8) and one-half (1/2) by eleven (11) inch size. 
8.  A narrative which addresses the following: 
a.  Why the facility is needed. 
b.  Efforts to co-locate on existing or planned towers and why co-location is not feasible or desirable. 
c.  Efforts to locate antenna on existing building or another alternative structure. 
d.  Why the proposed site is superior from a community perspective. Factors to address include visual impact on gateways to the community, heavily traveled corridors, and major view sheds, impact on land use character, and proximity to single family neighborhoods. 
e.  Efforts to blend the wireless facility into the surrounding area by minimizing the visibility of the structure. Include the process for selection of color of the proposed monopole. 
f.  Justification for the proposed height. The height should represent the minimum necessary in all instances. 
g.  Efforts to minimize the diameter and mass of the structure provide engineering information related to those efforts. 
h.  Efforts to minimize the size of the antenna array, support equipment and related equipment shelter provide engineering information related to those efforts. 
i.  Function of all equipment ancillary to the panel antennas such as whip and dish antennas. 
j.  Describe where the structure will be visible and from what distance. 
9.  Third party review. 
a.  City staff may require a third party review of any technical data submitted as part of the application. 
b.  The third party may be selected by agreement with the applicant or at the discretion of the City. The cost of the third party review will be paid for by the applicant. 
c.  The third party review is to be a technical site specific review of the wireless communication facility, not a subjective review of the proposed site. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1952, § 6, 7-22-97; Ord. No. 2002, § 2, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2590, § 3, 10-9-07) 
3.903 - Public Hearing. 
    The Planning Commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on the application. Prior to the public hearing, notice shall be provided as described in Section 3.806. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.904 - Findings. 
    The Planning Commission shall make the following findings before granting a conditional use permit: 
A.  General Findings. 
1.  That the proposed use is consistent with the policies, objectives, and land use map of the Glendale General Plan and the purpose of the zone district in which the site is located; 
2.  That the proposed use will not be materially detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or working within the neighborhood of the proposed use, or have an adverse effect on the property, adjacent properties, the surrounding neighborhood or the city when consideration is given to the character and size of the use and hours of operation; 
3.  That the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the intended use and that all requirements for the zone district, including but not limited to: setbacks, walls, landscaping and buffer yards are met; 
4.  That the proposed site has adequate access to public streets and highways to carry the type and quantity of traffic which may be generated by the subject use, and that on-site circulation is adequate to permit driveways, parking, and loading requirements in a manner which is safe and efficient; 
5.  That adequate conditions or stipulations have been incorporated into the approval of the conditional use permit to insure that any anticipated detrimental effects can be mitigated. 
B.  Wireless Communication Facilities Findings. 
1.  The proposed facility is required to provide adequate wireless service, and other alternative locations are either infeasible or less desirable from a community perspective; 
2.  The proposed facility will blend into the context of its setting and not be overly conspicuous within the community; 
3.  The scale and mass of the facility will not adversely affect the land use character of the property or the surrounding area; 
4.  Adequate setbacks have been provided to ensure the facility will not be intrusive on adjacent land uses or the streetscape. 
5.  All applicable development standards and design guidelines have been met. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 2, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2590, § 3, 10-9-07) 
3.905 - Action by the Planning Commission. 
    The Planning Commission may grant, grant with conditions, or deny any application after conducting a public hearing. The Planning Commission may place any conditions which are deemed necessary to mitigate potential impacts and insure compatibility of the use with surrounding development and the city as a whole, and which are required to preserve the public health, safety and general welfare. These conditions may include but are not limited to: 
A.  Requirements for setbacks, open spaces, buffers, fences or walls, and landscaping to mitigate conflicts from visual, noise, lighting and similar impacts associated with the use; 
B.  Dedication of street or other public rights-of-way, and control in location of access points and on-site circulation to mitigate traffic impacts from increased volumes or nature of traffic activity associated with the use; 
C.  Regulations pertaining to hours of operation, methods of operation, and phasing of the development of the site to mitigate impacts to surrounding properties and the neighborhood; 
D.  Time limits on the duration of the permit to determine if the use, after a temporary period of operation, is materially detrimental or to evaluate whether changed conditions in the neighborhood effect the capability of the use to continue to adequately mitigate impacts to the surrounding area or the city as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.906 - Effective Date of the Conditional Use Permit. 
    The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final and effective fifteen (15) days from the date of the decision unless an appeal is filed pursuant to Section 3.907. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
3.907 - Appeal Procedure. 
A.  The action of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council by the applicant, any member of the City Council, the City Manager, or any property owner within three hundred (300) feet of the property subject to the request. Such requests for appeal must be filed on an application form provided by the Planning Director with the appropriate fee, within the fifteen (15) days following the date of the Planning Commission action. 
B.  Consideration of the appeal shall be made at a public hearing only after notice of the hearing has been placed in the newspaper of general circulation of the area, or newspaper designated by the City Council for legal public notice, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall be posted on the property at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. It shall not be the responsibility of the city to maintain the notice once posted on the property. 
C.  The City Council shall act to affirm or reverse, in whole or in part, or modify the Planning Commission's decision. Any action to grant a conditional use permit, either through affirmation, modification, or reversal of the Planning Commission's decision, must include required findings for conditional conditional use permit as provided in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2590, § 3, 10-9-07) 
3.908 - Modification of Conditional Use Permit. 
    A request to modify, expand, or otherwise change an approved conditional use permit, not in substantial conformance with the approved permit, shall be reviewed and processed according to provisions of this ordinance as a new application. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2590, § 3, 10-9-07) 
3.909 - Revocation. 
    Failure to comply with the conditions, stipulations, or terms of the approval of an approved conditional use, is a violation of this ordinance and will be enforced as such. Repeated offenses shall be cause for revocation in the following manner: 
    The Planning Commission shall notify, by certified mail, the holder of the conditional use permit of the intention to conduct a hearing to consider the revocation of the conditional use permit. Notice shall be postmarked at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the scheduled hearing. At the hearing the Planning Commission shall consider evidence from all interested parties and after consideration of all available information may revoke the conditional use permit if it is determined that conditions, stipulations, or terms of the approved conditional use permit have not been met. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2590, § 3, 10-9-07) 
3.910 - Status of the Conditional Use Permit. 
    A conditional use permit granted pursuant to provisions of this article shall run with the land and continue to be valid regardless of ownership of the site or structure subject of the conditional use permit application, so long as it operates within the conditions, stipulations, and terms of the conditional use permit approval. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2590, § 3, 10-9-07) 
3.911 - Re-application. 
    In cases where the conditional use permit has been denied, no application for a conditional use permit for the same or substantially the same use on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of denial or revocation of the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2590, § 3, 10-9-07) 
3.912 - Expiration of Conditional Use Permit for Wireless Communication Facilities-Monopole. 
    All conditional use permits for wireless communication monopoles shall be limited to a maximum time period of ten (10) years from the date of Planning Commission approval. When a conditional use permit is granted for a co-location on a facility with an existing conditional use permit, the action of granting the new conditional use permit shall extend the existing conditional use permit so that they will expire simultaneously. 
    The commission shall be responsible for initiating a review of the approved facility and shall request the applicant to demonstrate that changes in technology, that are economically feasible, have not eliminated the need for the conditional use permit. If a new conditional use permit is not granted, the applicant shall be responsible for the removal of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 2, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2590, § 3, 10-9-07) 
Section 3.920 - Temporary Use Permit. 
3.921 - Purpose. 
    The City of Glendale recognizes that certain uses which may be appropriate in certain zoning districts may be allowed on a temporary basis. The Temporary Use Permit will regulate uses which are semi-permanent in nature. It is the intent to provide for certain temporary uses for limited periods of time. Allowing temporary uses is not intended to permit uses otherwise prohibited by the Zoning Ordinance or to allow permanent uses to be established. The purpose of this section is to establish the procedures and outline the review criteria to be used by the Planning Director when considering an application for a Temporary Use Permit. All Temporary Uses shall be conducted so as not to be detrimental to the surrounding properties and shall be subject to the standards and regulations contained in this Code. Every Temporary Use on private property shall require a Temporary Use Permit. 
A.  Permitted Temporary Uses. The City may grant a Temporary Use Permit for any of the following uses. 
1.  Temporary municipal uses. 
2.  Such other uses as the City may deem to be within the intent and purpose of this section. 
3.  Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes. Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes are allowed on churches, public and private schools, city parks, police and fire stations, other city facilities and on property zoned for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. O17-51, §§ 2, 3, 10-24-17) 
3.922 - Application. 
    A property owner, donation drop box owner/operator, or duly authorized agent may submit an application for a Temporary Use Permit. The applicant shall obtain the official application materials from the City. Submittal requirements shall be as outlined on the official form and any other requirements that the City deems necessary to understand the proposal, including a Site Plan. The applicant shall submit the official application and associated materials, together with the applicable fee, to the City. Temporary Uses which, in the opinion of the City, meet all the following criteria shall not require posting: 
1.  The use and/or structure complies with all applicable codes and Ordinances; 
2.  The use and/or structure does not interfere with pedestrian access ways, fire lanes, driveway entrances, or traffic visibility at driveways or street intersections; 
3.  Parking on the property is adequate to serve any existing permanent use and the temporary use; 
4.  The temporary use shall not be conducted between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m., excluding Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes; and, 
5.  The City Traffic Engineer or functional equivalent, or designee of that official, approves vehicular access for the proposed temporary use. 
(Ord. No. O17-51, §§ 2, 3, 10-24-17) 
3.923 - Review and Approval. 
    Application for a Temporary Use Permit shall be reviewed by the Planning Division who shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application. Approval shall be given only when in the judgment of the City such approval is consistent with the intent and purpose of this section. In considering the application, the City may include, but are not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Regulation of parking, dust control measures, and site lighting. 
b.  Regulation of hours of operation. 
c.  Regulation of site ingress and egress. 
d.  Assurance of compliance with building, fire, electrical, and all other appropriate codes. 
e.  Such other conditions deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this section. 
f.  All signage proposed for the temporary use or event shall be in compliance with Section 7.100. All signage shall obtain a separate sign permit. 
g.  The Division shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the decision to approve or deny the application, and shall state any conditions for approval or reasons for denial. 
h.  Issuance of Permits. To be issued a permit, the applicant shall sign an agreement with the City stating that within 72 hours of cessation of the use or expiration of the permit, whichever occurs first, the site shall be restored to the same condition prior to commencement of the temporary use. 
i.  Time Limits and Renewal of Permits. All Temporary Use Permit approvals shall be subject to a time limit as set forth by the City. 
j.  Temporary Use Permits for Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes may be permitted for a renewable duration not to exceed 3 years, or as determined by the City. Each renewal requires a new Temporary Use Permit application and fee. 
k.  All other Temporary Use Permits shall be limited to a maximum of thirty (30) consecutive days per event, and the cumulative total of all Temporary Uses shall not exceed ninety (90) days per calendar year per lot. A maximum of 12 Temporary Use Permits shall be granted per lot or complex per calendar year. 
l.  Each occurrence of a Temporary Use and each distinct Temporary Use on a property shall require separate submittal and approval of a Temporary Use Permit Application. 
(Ord. No. O17-51, §§ 2, 3, 10-24-17) 
Section 3.930
Establishing a Historic Preservation
(HP) District. 
A.  An application to establish Historic Preservation Districts shall be filed as provided by Section 3.800. 
B.  The Historic Preservation Officer shall compile and transmit to the Historic Preservation Commission a report on the property in the application, including the location, condition, age, historical features, and other relevant features and information, with a recommendation to grant or to deny the application and the reasons for the recommendation. 
C.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall set a date for public hearing on the application. Notice of the hearing shall be sent by first class mail to the property owner(s) and to the applicant at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall clearly state the implications of historic preservation zoning to the property owner(s). Notice of the hearing shall be posted fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, on or near the property in one (1) or more locations so that the notice is visible to persons living or working in the neighborhood and to persons passing through the neighborhood. If the application to establish a Historic Preservation District is filed by someone other than the property owner(s), written notice shall be sent by first class mail to the property owner(s) within ten (10) days of application having been made. 
D.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall evaluate each parcel of property within an area that is included in the application for a demonstrated quality of significance in local, regional, state or national history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture, and integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association according to the following criteria: 
1.  It is associated with events or persons that have made significant contribution to the broad patterns of Glendale's history; and/or 
2.  It embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction or that represent the work of a master or that possess high artistic values; and/or 
3.  It has yielded or may be likely to yield information important in the understanding of the prehistory or history of the City of Glendale; and/or 
4.  It is at least fifty (50) years old, or has achieved significance within the past fifty (50) years if the property is of exceptional importance. 
E.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall, when applying the evaluation criteria in Paragraph D above, draw the boundaries of a Historic Preservation District as carefully as possible to ensure that: 
1.  The district contains documented historic, architectural or archaeological resources; 
2.  The district boundaries coincide with documented historic boundaries such as early roadways, canals, subdivision plats, or property lines; 
3.  The district boundaries coincide with logical physical or manmade features and reflect recognized neighborhood or area boundaries; and 
4.  Other, non-historic resources or vacant land is included where necessary to create appropriate boundaries. Inclusion of these non-historic resources is important to ensure the maintenance of the historic streetscape and avoid insensitive construction and demolitions adjacent to contributing properties. 
F.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall also review proposed exterior design guidelines for the district to ensure that distinctive features will be preserved and enhanced. The design guidelines shall address height, proportions, scale, materials, relationship of building masses and spaces, roof shape, and site improvements, such as landscaping, parking, and signage, as they relate to the identity of the Historic Preservation District. Exterior paint colors will not be included in these guidelines. These guidelines shall be adopted at the time of designation. 
G.  Following the hearing, the Historic Preservation Commission shall transmit to the Planning Commission the HP Commission's decision, report, and recommendations. 
H.  The process for establishing a Historic Preservation District shall then proceed in accordance with Section 3.800. 
I.  The procedure to remove the Historic Preservation District designation from property shall be the same as that required to establish it. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, §§ 2, 3, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, §§ 2, 3, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 3.920, and in so doing renumbered former Sections 3.920 and 3.921 as Sections 3.930 and 3.931, as set out herein. 
3.931 - Temporary Restraint of Demolition. 
    A process is established for the review of proposed demolitions of structures which are located in areas where an application for Historic Preservation District designation is under consideration. 
A.  A demolition permit shall not be issued for any property under application for Historic Preservation District zoning unless first approved by the Historic Preservation Officer, the Historic Preservation Commission, or the City Council on appeal. This shall apply from the time the application is filed or initiated until final action is taken on the application by the City Council. This period shall not exceed one (1) year. Requests for demolition permits shall be referred to the Historic Preservation Officer. 
B.  The Historic Preservation Officer may administratively grant approval if the subject building clearly is of minimal historic or architectural significance because of its location, condition, modifications, or other factors, and its demolition will be inconsequential to the historic preservation needs of the area. 
C.  If the Historic Preservation Officer finds that the subject property does not clearly meet the conditions set forth in Subsection B of this section, the request for demolition shall be scheduled for public hearing before the Historic Preservation Commission to allow the commission to determine if the factors allowing for demolition have been met and for consideration of economic hardship factors. 
D.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall review the decision of the Historic Preservation Officer in light of the evidence presented at the hearing. At the hearing, the HP Commission shall either grant or deny the request. The request shall be granted only if the applicant demonstrates that: 
1.  The building is of minimal historic or architectural significance because of its location, condition, modifications, or other factors, and its demolition will be inconsequential to the historic preservation needs of the area; or 
2.  The denial of the demolition permit will result in an economic hardship to the property owner according to Section 6.405 of this ordinance. 
E.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall conduct a public hearing within sixty (60) days of the date of the formal request for a demolition permit. Notice of the application shall be posted on the property at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing. The request shall be deemed approved if the initial hearing by the HP Commission is not held within the required sixty (60) days or if the HP Commission has not made a final decision within one hundred eighty (180) days of the formal request for a demolition permit. 
F.  The Historic Preservation Commission's decision shall be final unless appealed by either the applicant or any aggrieved person within seven (7) working days of the action. If appealed, the matter shall be set for a public hearing before the City Council at their next available meeting. Notice of the hearing shall be posted on the property fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. The City Council shall limit its review of the case to the record of the HP Commission; as established by the staff report, any exhibits, minutes and/or transcripts, and any audio/visual tape of the proceedings. New testimony will not be accepted for consideration; however, each side may make a limited presentation on the evidence in the record of the HP Commission. Such presentation shall be limited to a maximum of five (5) minutes per side unless greater time is granted by the Mayor. Except as otherwise provided in this article, City Council members who review written communications or engage in verbal communications which are not part of the HP Commission's record shall disclose any such communications during the appeal public hearing. The City Council must make its decision within sixty (60) days of the filing of an appeal or the application is deemed approved. At this public hearing, the City Council may do one (1) of the following: 
1.  Affirm the decision of the Historic Preservation Commission; 
2.  Reverse the decision of the Historic Preservation Commission; or 
3.  Remand the application to the Historic Preservation Commission for reconsideration. 
G.  In the event demolition approval is denied, no permit for demolition shall be issued for one (1) year from the date of the Historic Preservation Commission's initial hearing on the subject property unless a subsequent demolition approval has been requested and granted. If Historic Preservation District zoning has not been placed on the property at the time of expiration of the one (1) year, the Historic Preservation Officer shall grant demolition approval. 
H.  At the time of adoption of Historic Preservation District zoning, the temporary restraint of demolition and any stays of demolition in effect shall expire. Demolition at that time shall be regulated by Section 6.406 of this ordinance. 
I.  Demolition approval may be conditioned on stipulations which provide for rights of access to the property for the purposes of documentation or for agreed upon removal of artifacts. 
J.  A request for a demolition permit shall be exempt from these requirements if the Building Safety Director determines, and the Historic Preservation Officer has been notified in writing, that the building currently is an imminent hazard to the public safety and that necessary repairs would be impractical. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, §§ 2, 3, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, §§ 2, 3, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 3.920, and in so doing renumbered former Sections 3.920 and 3.921 as Sections 3.930 and 3.931, as set out herein. 
ARTICLE 4. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES 

Section 4.100 - Zoning Map. 
A.  Boundaries of the zoning districts established in this Zoning Ordinance shall be shown on a map Titled "The Official Zoning Map of the City of Glendale" which is incorporated and adopted as a part of this Zoning Ordinance of the City of Glendale. 
B.  Amendments to the Official Zoning Map of the City of Glendale shall be by ordinance as prescribed in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 4.200 - District Boundaries. 
    Where there is uncertainty with respect to the boundaries of any zoning district on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following streets or highway rights-of-way, the center line of such street or highway right-of-way shall be construed to be such boundaries; 
B.  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow property lines, such lines shall be construed to be the boundary; 
C.  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to rights-of-way of streets or highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto, and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the Official Zoning Map. 
D.  Such district boundary lines are intended to follow street, alley, lot, or property lines as the same exists at the time of passage of this ordinance, except where such district boundary lines are fixed by specific dimensions shown on the Official Zoning Map in which case such dimensions shall govern. In the event that a vacated street, alley, right-of-way, or easement was a boundary between two districts, the new zoning district boundaries shall be at the new property line, provided, however, that where such vacation does not involve the establishment of new property lines, the zone district boundary shall be fixed at a point along the center line of the vacated street, alley, right-of-way, or easement. 
E.  Where the application of the above rules do not clarify the zoning district boundary location the Planning Director shall make a decision with appeal to the Board of Adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 4.300 - Districts Established. 
    The City shall be divided into zone districts known as: 
1.  A-1-Agricultural; 
2.  SR-30-Suburban Residence; 
3.  SR-17-Suburban Residence; 
4.  SR-12-Suburban Residence; 
5.  R1-10-Single Residence; 
6.  R1-8-Single Residence; 
7.  R1-7-Single Residence; 
8.  R1-6-Single Residence; 
9.  R1-4-Single Residence; 
10.  R-2-Mixed Residence; 
11.  R-3-Multiple Residence; 
12.  R-4-Multiple Residence; 
13.  R-5-Multiple Residence; 
14.  R-O-Residential Office; 
15.  C-O-Commercial Office; 
16.  G-O-General Office; 
17.  PR-Pedestrian Retail; 
18.  SC-Shopping Center; 
19.  C-1-Neighborhood Commercial; 
20.  NSC-Neighborhood Shopping Center; 
21.  C-2-General Commercial; 
22.  CSC-Community Shopping Center; 
23.  C-3-Heavy Commercial; 
24.  B-P-Business Park; 
25.  M-1-Light Industrial; 
26.  M-2-Heavy Industrial; 
27.  Special Use District; 
28.  PAD-Planned Area Development; 
29.  AIO-Airport Impact Overlay; 
30.  PRD-Planned Residential Development; 
31.  MH-Mobile Home; 
32.  HP-Historic Preservation. 
33.  SCO-Senior Citizen Overlay. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1896, 7-23-96; Ord. No. 2177, § 2, 12-19-00) 
ARTICLE 5. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 5.100 - A-1-AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT. 
5.101 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this district is to accommodate semi-rural or vacant lands, which may be suitable for interim agricultural uses and which may not require the full range of urban services. The district provides for agricultural uses, single-residences, public uses and multi-purpose arenas until transition to suburban or urban land uses in accordance with the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2203, § 1, 7-24-01) 
5.102 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  Agriculture, including the production of food and fiber crops, and tree farms. Grazing and animal husbandry of livestock. 
B.  One (1) detached single residence dwelling per lot. 
C.  Public schools, parks, and playgrounds. Publicly-owned and operated buildings or properties. 
D.  Seasonal fruit, vegetable, and hay retail sales structures of less than five hundred (500) square feet when located on the premises where the products are raised. 
E.  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2203, § 1, 7-24-01, Ord. No. 2369, § 1, 2-24-04) 
5.103 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Public utility facilities required for local service, provided that there are no offices, maintenance facilities, outdoor storage, or full-time employees related to the site. 
B.  Adult Care Homes, Juvenile Group Homes and Group Homes for the disabled, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.502. 
C.  Guest House (occupancy limited to less than ninety (90) days total per calendar year), subject to administrative review as described in Section 5.123. 
D.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7. 600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas may locate on buildings used for non-residential uses including churches, schools, public buildings, and other institutional uses. 
2.  Alternative tower structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
E.  Corn maze, subject to Section 7.507. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2166, § 1, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 2386, § 2, 6-22-04) 
5.104 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Living quarters for agricultural employees employed on the premises. 
B.  Commercial feedlot, hog operations, and/or dairies. Farms devoted to raising and marketing of chickens or turkeys. 
C.  Plant nurseries (wholesale only). No retail sales allowed. 
D.  Commercial horse riding, training, and boarding stables. Minimum parcel size ten (10) acres. 
E.  Home occupations (Class II): See Section 7.304. 
F.  Guest House, (occupancy of ninety (90) days or more per calendar year), subject to administrative review as described in Section 5.213. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.105 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. All accessory uses are subject to Section 7.300. 
A.  Fences and walls. See Section 7.201. 
1.  Front yard: Maximum height-three (3) feet, except five (5) feet for woven wire field fence. 
2.  Side or rear yard: Maximum height-six (6) feet, except eight (8) feet when abutting an arterial street. 
B.  Garage, enclosed storage, or barn. 
C.  Satellite earth station. 
D.  Swimming pool. 
E.  Amateur radio tower. 
F.  Game court, unlighted. 
G.  Home occupations (Class I): See Section 7.304. 
H.  Household pets. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.106 - Development Standards. 
A.  See Table 1. 
B.  The requirements of Table 1 (A-1 Development Standards) shall not apply to a multi-purpose arena; rather: 
1.  A multi-purpose arena shall be located a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any existing building occupied for single-family purposes. 
C.  The maximum height of a multi-purpose arena shall be one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2203, § 1, 7-24-01) 
5.107 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review may be required as outlined in Section 3.600. Basic agricultural uses such as crops and grazing of livestock are exempt from the Design Review process. 
B.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.108 - Landscaping and Screening. 
A.  Buffer and screening may be required for conditional use permit type activities as defined in Section 7.200. 
B.  No storage of fertilizer, odor, or dust producing substance or use shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet of any adjacent property zoned for residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.109 - Signs. 
A.  See Section 7.100. 
B.  Notwithstanding Section 7.100, a sign package for a multi-purpose arena shall be approved by the city council at a public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1772, § 5.109, 7-23-93; Ord. No. 2203, § 1, 7-24-01) 
5.110 - Parking. 
    See Section 7.400. A minimum of two (2) covered spaces per residential unit. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 5.120 - RURAL RESIDENTIAL RR-90, RR-45-Rural Residence. 
5.121 - Purpose. 
    These single residence districts seek to encourage and preserve very low density residential uses in unsubdivided areas of the city that may not require the full range of urban services. The intent of these districts is to provide a rural character with liberal livestock and animal provisions. Non-residential land uses within the districts are limited in nature to maintain a rural residential character. 
(Ord. No. 1812, 7-12-94) 
5.122 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  One (1) detached single residence dwelling per lot. 
B.  Public schools, parks, and playgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 1812, 7-12-94) 
5.123 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Public utility facilities required for local service, provided that there are no offices, maintenance facilities, outdoor storage, or full-time employees related to the site. 
B.  Guest House (occupancy limited to less than ninety (90) days total per calendar year), subject to administrative review as described in Section 5.213. 
C.  Adult Care Homes, Juvenile Group Homes and Group Homes for the disabled, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.502. 
D.  Temporary construction trailers, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.505. 
E.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas may locate on buildings used for non-residential uses including churches, schools, public buildings, and other institutional uses. 
2.  Alternative structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1812, 7-12-94; Ord. No 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2386, § 2, 6-22-04) 
5.124 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Churches, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
B.  Home child care center. 
C.  Private schools, excluding dormitories, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
D.  Home Occupations (Class II): See Section 7.304. 
E.  Guest House, (occupancy of ninety (90) days total or more per calendar year), subject to administrative review as described in Section 5.213. 
F.  Game court, lighted. 
G.  Commercial horse riding, training, and boarding stables. Minimum sized parcel, ten (10) acres. 
(Ord. No. 1812, 7-12-94) 
5.125 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. All accessory uses are subject to Section 7.300. 
A.  Livestock, subject to Section 5.132. 
B.  Agriculture, including the production of food and fiber crops, and tree farms. No on-site commercial sales of produce. 
C.  Fences and walls. See Section 7.201. 
1.  Front yard: maximum height-three (3) feet, except five (5) feet for woven wire field fence. 
2.  Side or rear yard: maximum height-six (6) feet, except eight (8) feet when abutting an arterial street. 
D.  Garage, enclosed storage, or barn. 
E.  Swimming pool. 
F.  Satellite earth station. 
G.  Amateur radio tower. 
H.  Game court, unlighted. 
I.  Home Occupations (Class I): See Section 7.304. 
J.  Yard sales, subject to Section 7.320. 
K.  Household pets. 
L.  Livestock corrals. 
(Ord. No. 1812, 7-12-94) 
5.126 - RR-90 Development Standards. 
    See Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 1812, 7-12-94) 
5.127 - RR-45 Development Standards. 
    See Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 1812, 7-12-94) 
5.128 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1812, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.129 - Landscaping and Screening. 
    Nonresidential uses, subject to conditions or subject to conditional use permit, may require buffers from adjacent residences. See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1812, 7-12-94) 
5.130 - Signs. 
    See Section 7.100. 
(Ord. No. 1812, 7-12-94) 
5.131 - Parking. 
A.  A minimum of two (2) spaces per residential unit. One (1) space must be covered. Each space shall be independently accessible. 
B.  The parking of commercial vehicles is limited to one (1) commercial vehicle with a one (1) ton chassis, having a capacity of not more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR). 
(Ord. No. 1812, 7-12-94) 
5.132 - Livestock. 
A.  Raising and grazing of livestock is permitted for a maximum of one (1) livestock animal per five thousand (5,000) square feet of open space. Two (2) swine shall be allowed per lot. The raising of poultry is permitted provided they are contained within a fence or cage. Male fowl shall not be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of any residence or living space, including pool or patio, on an adjacent suburban residential, urban residential, or multiple residential zoned lot. 
B.  All livestock must be contained in a stock type fence and/or corral. No setback shall be required between such fence or corral when adjacent to property zoned agricultural, rural residential, or non-residential zoned lots. However, such fence or corral shall not be closer than one hundred (100) feet from any residence or living space, including pool or patio, on an adjacent suburban residential, urban residential, or multiple residential zoned lot. 
C.  Accessory buildings used specifically for permitted animals, subject to Section 7.300, provide they are located within the area fenced for animals and maintain the same front, side, and rear yard requirement as provided for the principal building. 
(Ord. No. 1812, 7-12-94) 
Section 5.200 - SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL SR-30, SR-17, SR-12-Suburban Residence. 
5.201 - Purpose. 
    These single residence districts seek to encourage and preserve low density residential uses. The intent of these districts is also to reduce land use conflicts between urban and agriculture by providing a transition in intensity between rural and urban residential uses. Nonresidential land uses within the districts are limited in nature to maintain a residential character. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.202 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  One (1) detached single residence dwelling per lot. 
B.  Public schools, parks, and playgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.203 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Public utility facilities required for local service, provided that there are no offices, maintenance facilities, outdoor storage, or full-time employees related to the site. 
B.  Guest House (occupancy limited to less than ninety (90) days total per calendar year), subject to administrative review as described in Section 5.213. 
C.  Adult Care Homes, Juvenile Group Homes and Group Homes for the disabled, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.502. 
D.  Subdivision model home complexes, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.504. 
E.  Temporary office or construction trailers, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.505. 
F.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas may locate on buildings used for non-residential uses including churches, schools, public buildings, and other institutional uses. 
2.  Alternative structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2386, § 2, 6-22-04) 
5.204 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Churches, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
B.  Home child care center. 
C.  Private schools, excluding dormitories, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
D.  Home Occupations (Class II): See Section 7.304. 
E.  Guest House, (occupancy of ninety (90) days total or more per calendar year), subject to administrative review as described in Section 5.213. 
F.  Game court, lighted. 
G.  Subdivision model home complexes with off-site sales: See Section 7.504. 
H.  Commercial boarding of horses-Minimum parcel size three (3) acres. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 9-9-97; Ord. No. 1966, § 1, 10-28-97) 
5.205 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. All accessory uses are subject to Section 7.300. 
A.  Livestock, subject to Section 5.212. No commercial boarding/breeding is permitted. 
B.  Fences and walls. See Section 7.201. 
1.  Front yard: maximum height-three (3) feet. 
2.  Side or rear yard: maximum height-six (6) feet, except eight (8) feet when abutting an arterial street. 
C.  Garage, enclosed storage, or barn. 
D.  Swimming pool. 
E.  Satellite earth station. 
F.  Amateur radio tower. 
G.  Game court, unlighted. 
H.  Home Occupations (Class I): See Section 7.304. 
I.  Yard sales, subject to Section 7.320. 
J.  Household pets. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.206 - SR-30 Development Standards. 
    See Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.207 - SR-17 Development Standards. 
    See Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.208 - SR-12 Development Standards. 
    See Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.209 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  PRD district required to vary lot dimensions, building setbacks, and lot coverage. 
C.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.210 - Landscaping and Screening. 
    Nonresidential uses, subject to conditions or subject to conditional use permit, may require buffers from adjacent residences. See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.211 - Parking. 
A.  A minimum of two (2) spaces per residential unit. One (1) space must be covered. Each space shall be independently accessible. 
B.  The parking of commercial vehicles is limited to one (1) commercial vehicle with a one (1) ton chassis, having a capacity of not more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR). 
C.  Parking and driveways are permitted as follows: (See Figure S-1) 
  
1.  A parking area may not exceed forty (40) feet of contiguous area or fifty (50) percent of the lot width as measured at the front yard setback, whichever is less. 
2.  Within the front yard, a parking/driveway area is only allowed between the garage or carport and the street, except an area contiguous to the allowed parking/driveway which is consistent with the dimensions in #1 above. 
3.  No parking is permitted in the front yard when the parking area: 
a.  Is detached from the allowed parking/driveway area; or 
b.  Would result in an area greater than the allowable width as described in #1 above. 
4.  Circular driveways and similar circulation may be permitted within the front yard so long as: 
a.  No long term resident parking occupies such circular drive; and 
b.  The front yard contains no more than fifty (50) percent of the total square footage in parking/driveway or other circulation. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.212 - Livestock. 
A.  Raising and grazing of livestock, excluding swine, is permitted for a maximum of one (1) animal per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of open space. The raising of poultry with the exception of male fowl, is permitted provided they are contained within a fence or cage. 
B.  All livestock must be contained in a stock type fence and/or corral. Such fence or corral shall not be permitted closer than one hundred (100) feet from any residence or living space on an adjacent lot including pool and patio. For corner lots, no such fence or corral shall be located closer to the side right-of-way line than the principal building. 
C.  Accessory buildings used specifically for permitted animals, subject to Section 7.300, provided they are located within the area fenced for animals and maintain the same front, side, and rear yard requirement as provided for the principal building. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.213 - Guest House. 
    Living quarters for guests or servants on the premises in an accessory building or attached to the principal residence which: 
A.  Is not more than six hundred (600) square feet; 
B.  Is constructed of similar materials, colors, and architectural style to the principal residence; 
C.  Meets all lot coverage and height requirements for accessory buildings; 
D.  Meets setback requirements for a residence; 
E.  Has no separate water or utility meters; 
F.  Has no separate address from the principal residence; 
G.  Has no separate driveway or parking area from that of the principal residence; 
H.  Is used for temporary residence and is not used for rental purposes separate from the principal structure; and 
I.  The Planning Department shall maintain an administrative record, including site and floor plans. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 5.300 - URBAN RESIDENTIAL R1-10, R1-8, R1-7-Single Residence. 
5.301 - Purpose. 
    These districts are to provide for the protection of the established neighborhood and development of a variety of single residence detached dwellings, and for certain neighborhood facilities such as churches and schools which are related, incidental, and not detrimental to the residential environment. The following regulations shall apply in the R1-10, R1-8 and R1-7 districts. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2090, § 1, 7-27-99) 
5.302 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  One (1) detached single residence dwelling per lot. 
B.  Public schools, parks, and playgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.303 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Public utility facilities required for local service, provided that there are no offices, maintenance facilities, outdoor storage, or full-time employees related to the site. 
B.  Adult Care Homes, Juvenile Group Homes and Group Homes for the disabled, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.502. 
C.  Subdivision model home complexes, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.504. 
D.  Temporary office or construction trailers, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.505. 
E.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas may locate on buildings used for non-residential uses including churches, schools, public buildings, and other institutional uses. 
2.  Alternative structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2386, § 2, 6-22-04) 
5.304 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Churches, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
B.  Home child care center. 
C.  Private schools, excluding dormitories, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
D.  Home Occupations (Class II): See Section 7.304. 
E.  Subdivision model home complexes with off-site sales: See Section 7.504. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 9-9-97) 
5.305 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. All accessory uses are subject to Section 7.300. 
A.  Fences and walls. See Section 7.201. 
1.  Front yard: maximum height-three (3) feet. 
2.  Side or rear yard: maximum height-six (6) feet, except eight (8) feet when abutting an arterial street. 
B.  Garage or enclosed storage. 
C.  Swimming pool. 
D.  Satellite earth station. 
E.  Amateur radio tower. 
F.  Home Occupations (Class I): See Section 7.304. 
G.  Yard sales, subject to Section 7.320. 
H.  Household pets. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.306 - R1-10 Development Standards. 
    See Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.307 - R1-8 Development Standards. 
    See Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.308 - R-7 Development Standards. 
    See Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.309 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2090, § 2, adopted July 27, 1999, repealed § 5.309, R1-6 development standards, as derived from Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93. 
5.310 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  PRD district required to vary lot dimensions, building setbacks, and lot coverage. 
C.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.311 - Landscaping and Screening. 
    Nonresidential uses, subject to conditions or subject to conditional use permit, may require buffers from adjacent residences. See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.312 - Parking. 
A.  A minimum of two (2) spaces per residential unit. One (1) space must be covered. Each space shall be independently accessible. 
B.  The parking of commercial vehicles is limited to one (1) commercial vehicle with a one (1) ton chassis, having a capacity of not more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR). 
C.  Parking and driveways are permitted as follows: (See Figures R-1 and R-2) 
  
1.  A parking area may not exceed thirty (30) feet of contiguous area or fifty (50) percent of the lot width as measured at the front yard setback, whichever is less. 
2.  Within the front yard, a parking/driveway area is only allowed between the garage or carport and the street, except an area contiguous to the allowed parking/driveway which is consistent with the dimensions in #1 above. 
3.  No parking is permitted in the front yard when the parking area: 
a.  Is detached from the allowed parking/driveway area; or 
b.  Would result in an area greater than the allowable width as described in #1 above. 
4.  Circular driveways and similar circulation may be permitted within the front yard so long as: 
a.  No long term resident parking occupies such circular drive; and 
b.  The front yard contains no more than fifty (50) percent of the total square footage in parking/driveway or other circulation. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 5.313 - R1-6-Single Residence. 
5.314 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this district is to maintain the character of undeveloped and developed properties with R1-6 zoning, accommodate certain neighborhood facilities such as churches and schools with existing R1-6 zoning, and to allow the application of new R1-6 zoning only in the special circumstances identified in the required findings for the district. 
(Ord. No. 2090, § 1, 7-27-99) 
5.315 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  One (1) detached single residence dwelling per lot. 
B.  Public schools, parks, and playgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 2090, § 3, 7-27-99) 
5.316 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Public utility facilities required for local service, provided that there are no offices, maintenance facilities, outdoor storage, or full-time employees related to the site. 
B.  Adult Care Homes, Juvenile Group Homes and Group Homes for the disabled, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.502. 
C.  Subdivision model home complexes subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.504. 
D.  Temporary office or construction trailers, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.505. 
(Ord. No. 2090, § 1, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 2386, § 2, 6-22-04) 
5.317 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Churches, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
B.  Home child care center. 
C.  Private schools, excluding dormitories, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
D.  Home Occupation (Class II): See Section 7.304. 
E.  Subdivision model home complexes with off-site sales: See Section 7.504. 
(Ord. No. 2090, § 1, 7-27-99) 
5.3180 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. All accessory uses are subject to Section 7.300. 
A.  Fences and walls. See Section 7.201. 
1.  Front yard: Maximum height-Three (3) feet. 
2.  Side or rear yard: Maximum height-Six (6) feet, except eight (8) feet when abutting an arterial street. 
B.  Garage or enclosed storage. 
C.  Swimming pool. 
D.  Satellite earth station. 
E.  Amateur radio tower. 
F.  Home occupations (Class I): See Section 7.304. 
G.  Yard sales subject to Section 7.320. 
H.  Household pets. 
(Ord. No. 2090, § 3, 7-27-99) 
5.3181 - Development Standards. 
    See Table 1-Page 5-18. 
(Ord. No. 2090, § 3, 7-27-99) 
5.3182 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  PRD district required to vary lot dimensions, building setbacks, and lot coverage. 
(Ord. No. 2090, § 3, 7-27-99) 
5.3183 - Landscaping and screening. 
    Nonresidential uses, subject to conditions or subject to conditional use permit, may require buffers from adjacent residences. See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 2090, § 3, 7-27-99) 
5.3184 - Parking. 
    Refer to Section 5.312. 
(Ord. No. 2090, § 3, 7-27-99) 
5.3185 - Required findings. 
    Applications for new R1-6 zoning shall not be approved unless the city council determines that the request meets one or more of the following findings: 
A.  The property is located within a designated redevelopment area. 
B.  The property is a small or irregularly shaped parcel within a developed neighborhood with physical barriers that preclude expansion of the development. 
C.  The property is located within the boundaries of an infill incentive area established by the city council. 
D.  The proposed rezoning will result in a significant reduction in the number of future dwelling units permitted on the property. 
(Ord. No. 2090, § 3, 7-27-99) 
Section 5.320 - R1-4-Single Residence. 
5.321 - Purpose. 
    Preserve and provide for urban detached or attached single residence housing. The primary intent of this district is to encourage the establishment of functional and attractively designed patio home developments. The subdivision and housing product shall be designed for rear yard privacy and useable private open space. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.322 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  One (1) detached or attached single residence dwelling per lot. 
B.  Public schools, parks, and playgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.323 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Public utility facilities required for local service, provided that there are no offices, maintenance facilities, outdoor storage, or full-time employees related to the site. 
B.  Adult Care Homes, Juvenile Group Homes and Group Homes for the disabled, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.502. 
C.  Subdivision model home complexes, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.504. 
D.  Temporary office or construction trailers, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.505. 
E.  Home Occupations (Class I): See Section 7.304. 
F.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas may locate on buildings used for non-residential uses including churches, schools, public buildings, and other institutional uses. 
2.  Alternative structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2386, § 2, 6-22-04) 
5.324 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Home child care center. 
B.  Churches, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
C.  Private schools, excluding dormitories, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
D.  Home Occupations (Class II): See Section 7.304. 
E.  Subdivision model home complexes with off-site sales: See Section 7.504. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 9-9-97) 
5.325 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. All accessory uses are subject to Section 7.300. 
A.  Fences and walls. See Section 7.201. 
B.  Garage or enclosed storage. 
C.  Swimming pool. 
D.  Satellite earth station. 
E.  Amateur radio tower. 
F.  Home Occupations (Class I): See Section 7.304. 
G.  Yard sales, subject to Section 7.320. 
H.  Household pets. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.326 - Development Standards. 
    See Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.327 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  PRD district required to vary lot dimensions, building setbacks, and lot coverage. 
C.  Maintenance and drainage easement is required for any zero (0) lot line. 
D.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.328 - Landscaping and Screening. 
    Nonresidential uses, subject to conditions or subject to conditional use permit, may require buffers from adjacent residences. See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.329 - Parking. 
    A minimum of two (2) spaces per residential unit. One (1) space shall be covered. Each space shall be independently accessible. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Table 1
Single Residence Districts Development Standards District Min. 
Net 
Lot 
Area Min. 
Width Min. 
Depth Min. Setback 1 Max. 
Struc- 
ture 
Ht. 1 Max. 
% Lot 
Cover- 
age Front Rear Side Street 
Side A-1 40 acres N/A N/A 75 50 50 50 30 10 RR-90 90,000 175 275 40 40 25 25 30 20 RR-45 45,000 125 200 40 40 25 25 30 20 SR-30 30,000 125 175 40 40 20 20 30 25 SR-17 17,000 110 130 25 30 15 15 30 30 SR-12 12,000 100 120 25 25 10 10 30 35 R1-10 10,000 90 100 15-20 2 25 10 10 30 40 R1-8 8,000 80 100 15-20 2 20 5 & 10 4 10 30 40 R1-7 7,000 70 100 15-20 2 20 5 & 10 4 10 30 40 R1-6 6,000 60 100 15-20 2 205 5 & 10 4 10 30 40 R1-4 4,000 40 80 15-20 2 15 0 or 10 3 10 30 45  
1-Two story maximum, refer to Section 7.300 for accessory buildings. 
2-15 feet to living area, 20 feet to garages or carport. 
3-Minimum 10 feet separation between buildings on adjacent lots. 
4-Minimum 15 feet separation between buildings on adjacent lots. 
5-Minimum 15 feet for subdivisions approved prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1812, 7-12-94) 
Section 5.400 - MULTIPLE RESIDENCE. 
Section 5.410 - R-2-Mixed Residence. 
5.411 - Purpose. 
    This district provides a transition from urban single residence districts to a mixture of residential land uses which include low-density, multiple-residence dwellings. The intent of the district is to preserve and encourage the development of a variety of attached and detached housing units which include common open space and recreational amenities. The district encourages the clustering of single residence units which can provide a varied residential environment. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.412 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  Single residence dwelling. 
B.  Two (2) attached or detached single residence dwellings per lot. 
C.  Multiple residence dwellings. 
D.  Public schools, parks, and playgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.413 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Public utility facilities required for local service, provided that there are no offices, maintenance facilities, outdoor storage, or full-time employees related to the site. 
B.  Adult Care Homes, Juvenile Group Homes, Group Homes for the Disabled and Supervisory Care Facilities, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.502. 
C.  Subdivision model home complexes, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.504. 
D.  Temporary office or construction trailers, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.505. 
E.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7. 600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas may locate on buildings used for nonresidential uses including churches, schools, public buildings, and other institutional uses. 
2.  Alternative structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for nonresidential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2386, § 2, 6-22-04) 
5.414 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Child care center or home child care center. 
B.  Private schools, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
C.  Churches, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
D.  Home Occupations (Class II): See Section 7.304. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.415 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. All accessory uses are subject to Section 7.300. 
A.  Fences and walls. See Section 7.201. 
B.  Garage or enclosed storage 
C.  Swimming pool. 
D.  Satellite earth station. 
E.  Amateur radio tower. 
F.  Home Occupations (Class I): See Section 7.304. 
G.  Yard sales, subject to Section 7.320. 
H.  Household pets. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.416 - Development Standards. 
    See Table 2. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.417 - Design Review. 
A.  Design review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.418 - Landscaping and Screening. 
A.  Uses subject to conditions-require buffers within zoning district. 
B.  Nonresidential uses, subject to use permit. See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.419 - Parking. 
    Two (2) spaces for single residence dwellings, one (1) covered space required. Multiple residence dwellings, see Section 7.400. Each space shall be independently accessible. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 5.420 - R-3-Multiple-Residence. 
5.421 - Purpose. 
    The district provides for medium density urban residential development. The intent of the district is to allow a variety of building types, including apartments, town houses, and clustered housing. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.422 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  Single residence dwelling. 
B.  Multiple-residence dwellings. 
C.  Boardinghouse. 
D.  Public schools, parks, and playgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.423 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Public utility facilities required for local service, provided that there are no offices, maintenance facilities, outdoor storage, or full-time employees related to the site. 
B.  Adult Care Homes, Juvenile Group Homes, Group Homes for the Disabled and Supervisory Care Facilities, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.502. 
C.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas may locate on buildings used for nonresidential uses including churches, schools, public buildings, and other institutional uses. 
2.  Wall mounted antennas are permitted subject to applicable design guidelines. 
3.  Alternative structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for nonresidential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2386, § 2, 6-22-04) 
5.424 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Child care center or home child care center. 
B.  Churches, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
C.  Private schools, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
D.  Shelter care facilities. 
E.  Nursing homes. 
F.  Home Occupations (Class II): See Section 7.304. 
G.  Congregate care facility. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.425 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. All accessory uses are subject to Section 7.300. 
A.  Fences and walls. See Section 7.201. 
B.  Garage, carports, or enclosed storage. 
C.  Swimming pool, recreational facilities, or laundry facilities. 
D.  Satellite earth station. 
E.  Amateur radio tower. 
F.  Home Occupations (Class I): See Section 7.300. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.426 - Development Standards. 
    See Table 2. 
    Density-Required property area per dwelling unit: 
    The parcel area required per unit decreases with the increase in number of dwelling units: 
1 Residential unit 5,000 sq. ft. per unit 2-4 Residential units 4,000 sq. ft. add./unit 5-8 Residential units 3,500 sq. ft. add./unit 9 or more Residential units 2,700 sq. ft. add./unit  
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.427 - Design Review. 
A.  Design review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  Private open space requirement per dwelling unit, patio or balcony-one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet. 
C.  Common open space requirement-minimum thirty (30) percent of site exclusive of parking areas. 
D.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.428 - Landscaping and Screening. 
A.  Multiple residence structures exceeding one (1) story in height adjacent to any single residence district shall maintain a minimum setback of forty (40) feet. 
B.  Nonresidential uses, subject to use permit. See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.429 - Parking. 
    Two (2) spaces for single residence dwellings, one (1) covered space required. Multiple residence dwellings, see Section 7.400. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 5.430 - R-4-Multiple Residence. 
5.431 - Purpose. 
    This district provides for and encourages development of multiple residence dwellings, which include varied project amenities. The intent of the district is to permit high-density urban development with a mixture of uses of a similar intensity. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.432 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  Single residence dwellings. 
B.  Multiple-residence dwellings. 
C.  Public schools, parks, and playgrounds. 
D.  Boardinghouse. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.433 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Public utility facilities required for local service, provided that there are no offices, maintenance facilities, outdoor storage, or full-time employees related to the site. 
B.  Adult Care Homes, Juvenile Group Homes, Group Homes for the Disabled and Supervisory Care Facilities, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.502. 
C.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Section 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas may locate on buildings used for non-residential uses including churches, schools, public buildings, and other institutional uses. 
2.  Wall mounted antennas are permitted subject to applicable design guidelines. 
3.  Alternative structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2386, § 2, 6-22-04) 
5.434 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Child care center. 
B.  Churches, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
C.  Private schools, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
D.  Shelter care facilities. 
E.  Nursing homes. 
F.  Home Occupations (Class II): See Section 7.304. 
G.  Congregate care facility. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.435 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. All accessory uses are subject to Section 7.300. 
A.  Fences and walls. See Section 7.201. 
B.  Garage or enclosed structure. 
C.  Swimming pool. 
D.  Satellite earth station. 
E.  Amateur radio tower. 
F.  Home Occupations (Class I): See Section 7.304. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.436 - Development Standards. 
    See Table 2. 
    Density-Required parcel area per dwelling unit. 
A.  The parcel area required per unit decreases with the increase in number of dwelling units: 
1 Residential unit 5,000 sq. ft. per unit 2-4 Residential units 4,000 sq. ft. add./unit 5-8 Residential units 3,500 sq. ft. add./unit 9 or more Residential units 2,175 sq. ft. add./unit  
B.  Parcels of five (5) acres or larger shall be at a maximum density of twenty (20) dwelling units per gross acre. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.437 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  Private open space requirement per dwelling unit, patio, or balcony-one hundred (100) square feet. 
C.  Common open space requirement-minimum thirty (30) percent of site exclusive of parking areas. 
D.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.438 - Landscaping and Screening. 
A.  Multiple residence structures exceeding one (1) story in height adjacent to any single residence district shall maintain a minimum setback of forty (40) feet. 
B.  Nonresidential uses, subject to use permit. See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.439 - Parking. 
    Two (2) spaces for single residence dwellings, one (1) of which shall be covered. Multiple residence dwellings, see Section 7.400. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 5.440 - R-5-Multiple Residence. 
5.441 - Purpose. 
    Provide high-density urban residential development in locations consistent with the General Plan. This district's intent is to accommodate multi-story residential within downtown and designated activity centers. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.442 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  Multiple-residence dwellings. 
B.  Boardinghouse. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.443 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Public utility facilities required for local service, provided that there are no offices, maintenance facilities, outdoor storage, or full-time employees related to the site. 
B.  Adult Care Homes, Juvenile Group Homes, Group Homes for the Disabled and Supervisory Care Facilities, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.502. 
C.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas may locate on buildings used for non-residential uses including churches, schools, public buildings, and other institutional uses. 
2.  Wall mounted antennas are permitted subject to applicable design guidelines. 
3.  Alternative structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2386, § 2, 6-22-04) 
5.444 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Child care center. 
B.  Churches, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
C.  Private schools, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
D.  Shelter care facilities. 
E.  Nursing homes. 
F.  Home Occupations (Class II): See Section 7.304. 
G.  Congregate care facility. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.445 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. All accessory uses are subject to Section 7.300. 
A.  Fences and walls. See Section 7.201. 
B.  Garage or enclosed structure. 
C.  Swimming pool. 
D.  Satellite earth station. 
E.  Amateur radio tower. 
F.  Home Occupations (Class I): See Section 7.304. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.446 - Development Standards. 
    See Table 2. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.447 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  Private open space requirement per dwelling unit, balcony, or patio-seventy-five (75) square feet. 
C.  Common open space requirement minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of site exclusive of parking areas. 
D.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.448 - Landscaping and Screening. 
    Multiple residence structures exceeding thirty (30) feet in height adjacent to any single residence district shall maintain a minimum setback of fifty (50) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.449 - Parking. 
    See Section 7.400. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Table 2 
Multiple Residence Districts Development Standards District Min. 
Net 
Lot 
Area Min. 
Width Min. 
Depth Min. 
Perimeter 
Setback Max. 
Density 
Gross 
Acre Min. 
Open 
Space 
% Max. 
Structure 
Ht. 2 Max. 
% 
Lot 
Coverage R-2 10,000 60 94 15 3 12 30 30 1 50 R-3 6,000 60 94 20 3 16 30 30 1 50 R-4 6,000 60 94 20 3 20 30 30 1 50 R-5 43,560 N/A N/A 20 4 30 25 48 2 55  
1-Two story maximum for principal buildings, refer to Section 7.300 for accessory buildings. 
2-Four story maximum for principal buildings, refer to Section 7.300 for accessory buildings. 
3-Setbacks increase 1 foot to 1 foot ratio for buildings over 20 feet. 
4-Setbacks increase 6 inches per one (1) foot in height over 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 5.500 - R-O-Residential Office. 
5.501 - Purpose. 
    Provide for low-intensity professional office uses developed on a residential scale. The district serves as a transition between more intense commercial areas and residential land uses. It allows for residential use and office use of residential structures in areas transitioning to limited office uses. The district is to provide compatible residential conversions or new office construction consistent with adjacent residential uses. Site development standards are directed at screening of parking lots and controlled vehicular access. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.502 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  Single-residence occupied by owner or employee of business on the property. 
B.  Professional offices. 
C.  Administrative and business offices provided that no goods, merchandise, or vehicles are sold, repaired, displayed, or exchanged. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.503 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Public utility facilities required for local service, provided that there are no offices, maintenance facilities, outdoor storage, or full-time employees related to the site. 
B.  Adult Care Homes, Juvenile Group Homes and Group Homes for the disabled, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.502. 
C.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas may locate on buildings used for non-residential uses including churches, schools, public buildings, and other institutional uses. 
2.  Alternative tower structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2386, § 2, 6-22-04) 
5.504 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Home child care center. 
B.  Churches, on property located at the intersection of two (2) collector streets or fronting or siding on an arterial street. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.505 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. 
A.  Fences and walls. See Section 7.201. 
B.  Garage or enclosed storage. 
C.  Swimming pool. 
D.  Satellite earth station. 
E.  Amateur radio tower. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.506 - Development Standards. 
    See Table 3. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.507 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  Building scale and architectural style must be consistent with adjacent or planned residential development. 
C.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.508 - Landscaping and Screening. 
    Landscape buffer and screen walls as defined in Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.509 - Signs. 
    See Section 7.100. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.510 - Parking. 
A.  Access to parking for all nonresidential uses shall be provided from arterial or collector street. 
B.  No parking space shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to a side or rear property line. 
C.  No vehicle maneuvering or parking area shall be in the front yard of the development except for ingress and egress to allowable parking areas. 
D.  See Section 7.400. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 5.520 - C-O-Commercial Office. 
5.521 - Purpose. 
    The commercial office district provides for financial and professional service offices located on arterial streets or adjacent to commercial areas. It may be in proximity to other businesses or provide a transition between commercial uses and adjacent residential development. The intent is to accommodate office development at an intermediate scale with strict performance controls. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.522 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  Professional offices. 
B.  Business offices, provided that no goods or merchandise are sold, repaired, displayed, or exchanged except as directly related to the principal use. 
C.  Financial institutions, real estate, and insurance offices. 
D.  Medical and clinical laboratories, maximum floor area-five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
E.  Libraries and museums. 
F.  Business trade schools, provided that all facilities are within fully-enclosed structures. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.523 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Public utility facilities required for local service, provided that there are no offices, maintenance facilities, outdoor storage, or full-time employees related to the site. 
B.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas and roof top mounted antennas. 
2.  Alternative tower structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.524 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Child care center. 
B.  Single residence dwelling occupied by owner or employee of business on the property. 
C.  Veterinary offices with no boarding of animals. 
D.  Restaurant-full service. 
E.  Churches. 
F.  Wireless communication facilities-new monopole or changes to existing tower subject to development standards in Table 3-A. 
G.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative design tower structure. 
H.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative tower structure, otherwise not permitted under Section 7.506. 
I.  Financial institutions with drive-through service. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2105, § 1, 10-26-99) 
5.525 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. 
A.  Fences and walls. See Section 7.201. 
B.  Garage or enclosed storage. 
C.  Satellite earth station. 
D.  Automatic teller machine. 
E.  Amateur radio tower. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.526 - Development Standards. 
    See Table 3. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.527 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  Refer to Commercial Design Expectations. 
C.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.528 - Landscaping and Screening. 
    Screen wall and landscape buffer required adjacent to single residence districts, or multi-residence districts. See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.529 - Signs. 
    See Section 7.100. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.530 - Parking. 
    See Section 7.400. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 5.540 - G-O-General Office. 
5.541 - Purpose. 
    Provide for large multiple-story office development which includes a building or cluster of buildings that provide professional office uses, support retail, and office support services. The district is to provide for major employment concentrations with projects designed to be compatible with surrounding residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.542 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  Professional, administrative, or business offices. 
B.  Hospitals. 
C.  Business support services. 
D.  Personal service businesses, such as beauty shops and barber shops. 
E.  Financial institutions, real estate and insurance offices. 
F.  Medical and dental offices and clinics. 
G.  Commercial off-street parking not accessory to a permitted use. 
H.  Libraries and museums. 
I.  Business trade schools, provided that all facilities are within fully-enclosed structures. 
J.  Medical and clinical laboratories. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.543 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Retail stores integrated into office building, not to exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
B.  Restaurants integrated into ground level of multi-story office structures, excluding drive-in and drive-thru facilities. 
C.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas and rooftop mounted antennas. 
2.  Alternative tower structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.544 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Child care center. 
B.  Wireless communication facilities-new monopole or changes to existing tower subject to development standards in Table 3-A. 
C.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative design tower. 
D.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative tower structure, otherwise not permitted under Section 7.506. 
E.  Financial institutions with drive-through service. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2105, § 1, 10-26-99) 
5.545 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. 
A.  Parking structures and parking lots. 
B.  Transit facilities. 
C.  Satellite earth station. 
D.  Automatic teller machine. 
E.  Amateur radio tower. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.546 - Development Standards. 
    See Table 3. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.547 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  Refer to Commercial Design Expectations. 
C.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.548 - Landscaping and Screening. 
    See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.549 - Signs. 
    See Section 7.100. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.550 - Parking. 
    Access to parking shall be from arterial or collector street. See Section 7.400. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 5.600 - DOWNTOWN. 
Section 5.610 - PR-Pedestrian Retail. 
5.611 - Purpose. 
    The intent of the Pedestrian-Retail District is to promote and maintain the character of a pedestrian-oriented retail district by encouraging the maintenance and improvement of the pedestrian environment, protecting and improving the economic viability of the district, ensuring new buildings are designed to be compatible with human scale, and reducing conflicts between pedestrians and vehicular traffic. The district encourages pedestrian retail and service activities where shoppers will visit several stores after parking or arriving by public transit. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.612 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  Specialty retail uses including, but not limited to, gift shops, bookstores, and florists; 
B.  Antiques, crafts, and collectibles sales; 
C.  Apparel and accessories; 
D.  Art galleries and art studios, including working production studios; 
E.  Bakeries, retail only; 
F.  Drugstores; 
G.  Hardware stores, not exceeding seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet; 
H.  Professional, business, and administrative offices; 
I.  Personal service businesses, such as beauty shops and barber shops; 
J.  Residential units, when located above the first floor; 
K.  Restaurants, cafeterias, taverns, bars, delicatessens, self-service and take-out restaurants, and outdoor dining allowed when ancillary to restaurant use, and catering services, when ancillary to a primary restaurant use; 
L.  Retail banking and financial services, functions not exceeding seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet; 
M.  Retail grocery, not exceeding seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1874, § 1, 3-12-96) 
5.612A - Uses subject to conditions. 
    Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas and rooftop mounted antennas. 
2.  Alternative tower structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.613 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Automotive service facilities and gasoline sales, when located in a parking structure; 
B.  Indoor commercial recreation facilities; 
C.  Child care center; 
D.  Drive-thru facilities as part of a retail banking operation; 
E.  Entertainment uses, including museums, theaters, cinemas, auditoriums, and places of public assembly, excluding adult theaters and adult live entertainment; 
F.  Hotels; 
G.  Commercial off-street parking, not accessory to a permitted or conditionally permitted use; 
H.  Parking structures; 
I.  Health clubs; 
J.  Laundry, cleaning, and dry cleaning establishments, limited as follows: 
1.  Minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area to be occupied by or devoted to machinery to be used for laundry, cleaning, dyeing, and finishing work. 
2.  Retail service to individual customers only and no wholesaling of any commodity or service shall be permitted. 
K.  Retail copying and printing businesses. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2062, § 1, 2-23-99) 
5.614 - Prohibited Uses. 
    The following uses, which are automobile-oriented, are contrary to the concept of a pedestrian-oriented retail downtown, and they are, therefore, not permitted in the PR district: 
A.  Automotive service uses, except as permitted above; 
B.  Distribution and wholesale facilities; 
C.  Sales of automobiles, motorcycles, motor homes, and boats; 
D.  Convenience uses as defined in Section 2.300. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.615 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. 
A.  Satellite earth station. 
B.  Amateur radio tower. 
C.  Automatic teller machine. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.616 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.617 - Development standards. 
    See Table 3. 
A.  Lot Coverage. The minimum lot coverage shall not be less than sixty-five (65) percent of the net lot area. 
B.  Lot Size. No minimum lot size is required, but each lot must have a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet of frontage on a public street. For the purpose of this section, an alley is not considered a public street. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.618 - Performance Standards. 
    The following standards and restrictions shall apply to all properties within this district: 
A.  Outdoor sales and display are prohibited, except where one (1) or more of the following conditions are present: 
1.  Products and services displayed outdoors are customary, accessory, and incidental to those sold and displayed in a primary business being conducted in a permanent building on the property. 
2.  Outdoor sales and displays do not interfere with pedestrian access-ways, fire lanes, required parking spaces, driveways, landscape areas, or traffic visibility at driveway entries and street intersections. 
B.  All retail and service activities must be within an enclosed building except automotive service stations, parking lots, or drive-thru facilities. 
C.  There shall be no manufacturing, compounding, processing, or treatment of products, except as otherwise permitted and other than that which are clearly incidental to a retail store or business. 
D.  Demolition of Buildings. 
1.  Except in cases of public emergency and designation of an unsafe structure by the Building Safety Director, no permit for the demolition of any building in the PR district shall be issued unless an application for a building permit for work to replace the building to be demolished has been filed with and approved by the Community Development Group. 
2.  Any lot within this district kept vacant for more than one hundred eighty (180) days following the demolition of any buildings thereon shall be landscaped and thereafter maintained in good order. Landscaping shall be in accordance with a plan approved by the Community Development Group. 
E.  Vacant Buildings. The appearance of vacant buildings does not contribute to the creation of a pedestrian environment in a downtown area. Since vacant buildings may inhibit the growth of the retail environment, special provisions are necessary to mitigate the impact of vacant buildings in the Pedestrian Retail District. 
The following regulations shall apply to all vacant retail space and are in addition to other requirements: 
1.  All windows and other openings of a vacant structure shall provide a window display or window covering that is aesthetically compatible with the structure; 
2.  Windows that are "boarded-up" shall not be considered a window covering; 
3.  Upon receipt of a notice of noncompliance with this section, the property owner shall have thirty (30) days in which to provide the window display or covering; 
4.  Failure to provide the window display within the thirty (30) day period shall result in a violation of this section. 
F.  Facade Transparency Requirements. 
1.  Measured from floor level to the finished ceiling, at least seventy (70) percent of the total area of all new or reconstructed first story storefronts that face a public street shall be transparent. Only clear or lightly tinted glass in windows, doors, and display windows shall be considered transparent. Transparent areas shall allow views into the structure or into display windows from the outside. 
2.  Glass block, etched and sand blasted, or stained glass are allowed and are counted as opaque material. 
G.  Blank Facade Limits. 
1.  Any portion of the facade which is not transparent shall be considered to be a portion of the blank facade. 
2.  For each street frontage, the total of all blank facade segments shall not exceed seventy (70) percent of the street level facade of the structure. Blank facade limitations apply to the area of the facade between two (2) feet and eight (8) feet above the sidewalk. 
3.  Blank facades shall be limited to segments of thirty (30) feet in width when enhanced by architectural detailing, art work, landscaping, or similar features that have visual interest. All other blank facades are limited to fifteen (15) feet in width. 
4.  Entrances to buildings shall be separated by not more than fifty (50) feet on average for the linear frontage of the buildings on each block face. Separate pedestrian entrances shall be required for each fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of street level use. Pedestrian entries may open on to either the public right-of-way or an open air passageway leading to the public right-of-way. 
H.  Outdoor Sidewalk Cafes. 
1.  Purpose. In order to animate the downtown environment and complement retail and cultural activities recommended in the Downtown Urban Design Plan, it is the policy of the City to encourage the establishment of outdoor sidewalk cafes on private property and within public rights-of-way. Minimum dimensional and performance standards are established to ensure cafe design is functionally compatible with other needs and provides for the protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
2.  Outdoor sidewalk cafes are permitted on any public right-of-way within the pedestrian retail district, subject to administrative review and compliance with the following performance standards. 
3.  Standards. 
a.  Outdoor sidewalk cafes must not obstruct sidewalk pedestrian traffic or create public health and safety hazards. All sidewalks must maintain a six (6) foot minimum clear dimension between the outside edge of any sidewalk cafe fixture and any fixed element within sidewalk right-of-way. 
b.  Outdoor sidewalk cafes may be open, partially covered, or enclosed by means of umbrellas, awnings, canopies, or similar protective structure. 
(1)  Partially covered or enclosed cafes must be constructed of material that is predominantly transparent. Glass must be clear, not heavily tinted or mirrored. Base walls can not be greater than eighteen (18) inches in height. The outside window height can not be less than eight (8) feet. All permanent structures must meet building code requirements. 
(2)  Roof material covering an outdoor cafe may be temporary, fixed, or retractable and can extend into the public right-of-way from the face of the building a maximum distance of ten (10) feet from face of building. Awnings, canopies, or similar protective shelter must be fire-treated or nonflammable. 
(3)  Permanent enclosed sidewalk cafe structures must be constructed of non-combustible material. 
c.  A decorative barrier element separating outdoor cafe seating area from adjacent pedestrian traffic shall be provided. The design and materials of such barrier element must complement and be compatible to the architectural design of the restaurant building facade. 
d.  Enclosed cafes must be used only as seating areas. Storage, kitchen, or rest room uses are not allowed. The seating must be movable. 
e.  All outdoor and enclosed sidewalks must be level with sidewalk, and handicap accessible. 
f.  Decorative/accent lighting may be incorporated into the outdoor cafe structure, awning, canopy, etc., and must meet all City Code requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.619 - Parking. 
A.  Off-Street Parking. The parking requirements of the pedestrian retail district differ from those in other areas of the city. The parking requirements for new uses shall be determined by the Planning Director in conjunction with the design review process prescribed in Section 3.600. Review and findings shall be based on existing on-street parking, parking for existing uses, and other available parking in the district. The parking requirements shall be determined by the Planning Director in conjunction with the design review process prescribed in Section 3.600. 
B.  Off-Street Parking Facilities. 
1.  All required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot or a contiguous lot or lots under the same ownership as the building or use for which the parking is accessory. Parking spaces shall be located in the rear of structures to avoid visibility from public streets, and should be accessed, when possible, from alleys. 
2.  Except where provided by the City or an improvement district, required parking on a site separate from the use served shall meet one (1) of the following conditions: 
a.  Same ownership. A legal instrument satisfactory to the City Attorney shall be recorded requiring maintenance of the required number of spaces on the site. 
b.  Leasehold. The minimum lease term shall be five (5) years. A legal instrument satisfactory to the City Attorney shall be recorded requiring cessation of a use served if access to the leased parking is terminated without substitution of parking meeting the requirements of this section. 
3.  Except where provided by the City or an improvement district, required parking spaces for customers shall be within two hundred (200) feet and for employees within four hundred (400) feet of the entrance of the served use via the shortest public pedestrian route. 
4.  Bicycle Parking. 
a.  Bicycle parking facilities may be substituted for automobile parking spaces at a ratio of eight (8) bicycle parking spaces for one (1) required vehicle parking space, up to a maximum of two (2) percent of the vehicle spaces required. 
b.  Bicycle parking facilities shall include provision for locking of bicycles, either in lockers or in secure racks in which the bicycle frame and wheels may be locked by the user. Bicycle spaces shall be at least as convenient as the most convenient automobile spaces and shall be protected from damage by automobiles. 
5.  Parking Structures. 
a.  At least seventy-five (75) percent of ground floor parking garage frontage on public streets, exclusive of the entrance driveways, shall consist of retail space. Ground level landscaping is required when it is not in conflict with retail entry and windows. 
b.  Parking garages may be above the ground floor, provided the parking garage is architecturally concealed and enclosed. Upper level parking garages shall apply decorative treatments to upper level facades, panels, and railings. The overall architectural design of parking facilities shall be the same as building with occupied floor space. The following considerations shall be included in the parking garage design: 
(1)  Provide adequate screening of vehicles from the street view. Open metal railings or panels which do not adequately screen the vehicles from view shall be avoided; 
(2)  Incorporate stepped-back design of upper floors if above the street wall level; 
(3)  Provide landscape planters to soften the visual impact. 
c.  The exterior facades of all parking garages fronting on public streets shall be designed as to achieve an architectural unity with adjacent buildings and other buildings in the vicinity of the garage. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 5.620 - SIGNS. 
    See Section 7.100 
Section 5.700 - COMMERCIAL. 
5.701 - NSC-Neighborhood Shopping Center. 
5.702 - Purpose. 
    The Neighborhood Shopping Center district is a commercial district intended to meet the consumer demands of surrounding neighborhoods. Uses focus on satisfying daily commercial and service business needs, but are compatible with adjoining residential neighborhoods. Large, community-scale uses are not permitted. Neighborhood shopping centers are to be planned, developed and operated as single entities, with shared access and parking and common architecture, landscaping, and signage. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 3, 12-19-00) 
5.703 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  General merchandising including food stores, apparel, and accessory stores. 
B.  Home furnishings. 
C.  Repair services for small appliances, bicycles, watches, musical instruments, and similar items. 
D.  Child care centers. 
E.  Restaurants without drive-thrus. 
F.  Financial institutions. 
G.  Professional, administrative, and business offices. 
H.  Medical offices. 
I.  Personal services such as barber and beauty shops, shoe repair, and tailor shops. 
J.  Laundry, cleaning, and dry cleaning establishments, limited as follows: 
1.  Maximum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area to be occupied by or devoted to machinery to be used for laundry, cleaning, dyeing, and finishing work. 
2.  Retail service to individual customers only and no wholesaling of any commodity or service shall be permitted. 
K.  Churches. 
L.  Indoor recreational facilities of less than four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor area. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 3, 12-19-00) 
5.704 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Seasonal sales and special events, subject to standards in Sections 7.501 and 7.503. 
B.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas and rooftop mounted antennas. 
2.  Alternative tower structure mounted antennas that utilize an existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 3, 12-19-00) 
5.705 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Convenience uses, limited as follows: 
B.  No more than three (3) convenience uses shall be allowed in each center. 
1.  All uses that include retail sales of gasoline shall be designed to orient the gasoline service pumps and canopies covering the pumps to the interior of the site; with the building(s) adjacent to the street. 
2.  All drive thru service windows shall be located on the internal side of convenience uses and screened from view from public streets. 
3.  Live entertainment facilities that include music performed by more than one (1) musician, or dancing. Does not include adult live entertainment. 
C.  Wireless communication facilities-new monopole or changes to existing tower subject to development standards in Table 3-A. 
D.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative design tower. 
E.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative tower structure, otherwise not permitted under Section 7.506. 
F.  Donation centers. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 3, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
5.706 - Uses Subject to Temporary Use Permit. 
A.  Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes. 
(Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
5.707 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses that are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. 
A.  Amateur radio tower. 
B.  Satellite earth station. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 3, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.706 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.706-5.7094 as Sections 5.707-5.709.5, as set out herein. 
5.708 - Development Standards. 
    See revised Table 3-Page 2301. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 3, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.706 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.706-5.7094 as Sections 5.707-5.709.5, as set out herein. 
5.709 - Performance Standards. 
A.  No single retail use shall be larger than seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
B.  Design review for the entire site must be approved prior to issuance of building permits for any portion of the site. 
C.  A project may be built in phases, but the first phase must include the major anchor for the center as determined by the Master Development Plan. Pad sites shall not be developed prior to the development of the major anchor. 
D.  The shopping center must include a plaza or plazas containing at least one thousand (1,000) square feet per net acre of the site. The plaza shall include shade trees, seating areas, tables, and trash receptacles. At least fifty percent (50%) of the area of plaza(s) required shall be constructed in the first phase of development. 
E.  Outdoor sales and displays are prohibited, except when the following conditions are present: 
1.  Products and services displayed outdoors are customary, accessory, and incidental to those sold and displayed in a primary business being conducted in the permanent building on the property. 
2.  Outdoor sales and displays do not interfere with pedestrian access ways, fire lanes, required parking spaces, driveways, landscape area, or traffic visibility at driveway entries and street intersections. 
F.  All retail and service activities shall be within an enclosed building. No outside storage of equipment or materials is permitted. 
G.  Loading areas, building service areas and drive-thru service windows must be oriented away from streets and screened from public view with a combination of landscaping and screen walls. 
H.  Prior to certificate of occupancy of any building on the site, the developer shall provide certification that the noise level from mechanical equipment does not exceed fifty-five (55) dBA (normal speaking voice) at the property line. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 3, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.706 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.706-5.7094 as Sections 5.707-5.709.5, as set out herein. 
5.709.1 - Master Development Plan. 
A.  All applications for the Neighborhood Shopping Center district shall include a Master Development Plan for the area of the rezoning request. The plan, at a minimum, will address: 
1.  The location of all proposed buildings, plazas, and pedestrian walkways. 
2.  The locations of all drive aisles, parking, loading and service areas. 
3.  The location of all landscaping, retention areas, entry features and perimeter walls. 
4.  The location of all required public street improvements. 
5.  A design theme for the center showing the architecture, materials and colors that will be used. 
6.  The location of all proposed freestanding identification signs. 
7.  On-site lighting performance measures. 
8.  The location, type and size of individual uses planned for the center. 
B.  The Master Development Plan shall be reviewed in conjunction with the rezoning of the property as set forth in Section 3.800 and shall become part of the approval. The Planning Commission and the City Council shall consider conformance of the proposed plan with the General Plan, the commercial design expectations, and the stated purpose of the Neighborhood Shopping Center district. 
C.  The procedure for amending an approved Master Development Plan shall be the same as prescribed for the original approval. No amendment to an NSC district will be approved without concurrent revision of the Master Development Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 3, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.706 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.706-5.7094 as Sections 5.707-5.709.5, as set out herein. 
5.709.2 - Design Review. 
A.  Design review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  Refer to commercial design expectations. 
C.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to design review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 3, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.706 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.706-5.7094 as Sections 5.707-5.709.5, as set out herein. 
5.709.3 - Landscaping and Screening. 
A.  See Section 7.200. 
B.  The frontages and corner setback area shall include a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet of landscaping, broken only by necessary driveways and screen walls. No parking shall be permitted within this area. 
C.  All perimeter on-site improvements including landscape buffers, sidewalks, perimeter walls and parking lot screen walls must be constructed in the first phase of development. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 3, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.706 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.706-5.7094 as Sections 5.707-5.709.5, as set out herein. 
5.709.4 - Signs. 
    See Section 7.100. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 3, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.706 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.706-5.7094 as Sections 5.707-5.709.5, as set out herein. 
5.709.5 - Parking. 
    See Section 7.400. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 3, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.706 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.706-5.7094 as Sections 5.707-5.709.5, as set out herein. 
Section 5.710 - SC-Shopping Center. 
5.711 - Purpose. 
    The Shopping Center district is intended to meet the consumer demands of the surrounding neighborhoods. The primary functional elements include commercial retail, specialty retail, and service oriented businesses including personal services, professional services, restaurants, and financial services. The district intent is to provide neighborhood destination shopping while incorporating a design which furthers the pedestrian orientation within the center. Each center shares a common architecture, access, parking, signage, and landscape design. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.712 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  General merchandise including food stores, apparel, and accessory stores. 
B.  Home furnishings. 
C.  Repair services for small appliances, bicycles, watches, musical instruments, and similar items. 
D.  Child care center. 
E.  Restaurants-full service. 
F.  Cocktail lounges. 
G.  Financial institutions. 
H.  Professional, administrative, and business offices. 
I.  Personal services, beauty, shoe repair, and tailor shop. 
J.  Laundry, cleaning, and dry cleaning establishments, limited as follows: 
1.  Maximum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area to be occupied by or devoted to machinery to be used for laundry, cleaning, dyeing, and finishing work. 
2.  Retail service to individual customers only and no wholesaling of any commodity or service shall be permitted. 
K.  Churches. 
L.  Indoor motion picture theaters, less than four thousand (4,000) square feet, excluding adult theaters. 
M.  Indoor recreational facilities less than four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor area. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.713 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Seasonal sales and special events, subject to standards in Sections 7.501 and 7.503. 
B.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas and rooftop mounted antennas. 
2.  Alternative tower structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.714 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Automotive service stations with minor auto repair, not to include body repair, motor repair, or painting. All service except the sale of gasoline shall be within an enclosed building. No service bays associated with automotive uses shall be visible from a public street. 
B.  Indoor recreational facilities larger than four thousand (4,000) gross square feet of floor area. 
C.  Thrift stores, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The storage area must be provided for all discarded items. All storage areas for individual items, including collection receptacles, shall be entirely enclosed or screened and not visible from the public right-of-way or from adjacent residential areas. 
2.  All collection receptacles shall be secure from public access during nonbusiness hours. 
3.  No material, goods, or merchandise may be stored outside of an approved collection receptacle unless it is within an approved screened area. 
D.  Convenience uses. 
E.  Live entertainment facilities which include music performed by more than one (1) musician, or dancing. Area devoted to patron dancing shall not exceed seven and one-half (7-1/2) percent of the total gross floor area. Does not include adult live entertainment. 
F.  Community scale retail uses. Any single retail use which is greater than eighty thousand (80,000) square feet of leasable gross floor area shall require a use permit. These types of uses are characteristic of those that provide goods and services which attract consumers from large segments of the community. These uses shall be evaluated by traffic impacts as well as the scale of the structure in relationship to the neighborhood center. 
G.  Indoor motion picture theaters larger than four thousand (4,000) square feet, excluding adult theaters. 
H.  Wireless communication facilities-new monopole or changes to existing tower subject to development standards in Table 3-A. 
I.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative design tower. 
J.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative tower structure, otherwise not permitted under Section 7.506. 
K.  Donation centers. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
5.715 - Uses Subject to Temporary Use Permit. 
A.  Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes. 
(Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
5.716 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. 
A.  Amateur radio tower. 
B.  Satellite earth station. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.715 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.715-5.7720 as Sections 5.716-5.721, as set out herein. 
5.717 - Development Standards. 
    See Table 3. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.715 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.715-5.7720 as Sections 5.716-5.721, as set out herein. 
5.718 - Design Guidelines. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  Refer to Commercial Design Expectations. 
C.  Detailed Shopping Center Design Guidelines. 
1.  Design review for the entire site must be approved prior to issuance of building permits for any portion of the site. A shopping center may be built in phases, but at least fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area must be built in the first phase. 
2.  The frontages and corner setback area shall include a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet of landscaping, broken only by necessary driveways and screen walls. No parking area shall be within this area. 
3.  Only one (1) freestanding building less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet is allowed per arterial frontage. 
4.  The shopping center must include a plaza or plazas containing at least one thousand (1,000) square feet per net acre of the site. The plaza shall include shade trees, seating areas, tables and trash receptacles. 
5.  All accessory commercial sales or displays shall be conducted within an enclosed building unless otherwise permitted. 
6.  Recycling containers are allowed subject to Design Review process. 
7.  Any outside storage area may be completely enclosed. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2121, § 1, 2-22-2000; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.715 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.715-5.7720 as Sections 5.716-5.721, as set out herein. 
5.719 - Landscaping and Screening. 
    See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.715 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.715-5.7720 as Sections 5.716-5.721, as set out herein. 
5.720 - Signs. 
    See Section 7.100. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.715 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.715-5.7720 as Sections 5.716-5.721, as set out herein. 
5.721 - Parking. 
    See Section 7.400. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.715 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.715-5.7720 as Sections 5.716-5.721, as set out herein. 
Section 5.730 - C-1-Neighborhood Commercial. 
5.731 - Purpose. 
    The intent of the Neighborhood Commercial district is to address on a limited basis the needs of the surrounding residential development by providing goods and services generally described as convenience goods and services. The district is intended for smaller scale uses from retail commercial, personal services, business services, and professional and administrative offices. Businesses which might create a nuisance to the immediate residential area are excluded even though the goods and services they sell might be in the convenience classification. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.732 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  Retail stores. General merchandising including food stores, apparel, and accessory stores. 
B.  Personal services. 
1.  Barber shops and beauty salons. 
2.  Laundry, cleaning, and dry cleaning establishments, limited as follows: 
a.  Maximum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area to be occupied by or devoted to machinery to be used for laundry, cleaning, dyeing, and finishing work. 
b.  Retail service to individual customers only and no wholesaling of any commodity or service shall be permitted. 
3.  Medical and dental offices, excluding veterinarians. 
4.  Child care center. 
5.  Music or dance schools. 
C.  Financial institutions, real estate and insurance offices. 
D.  Restaurants-full service. 
E.  Repair services for small appliances, bicycles, watches, musical instruments, and similar items. 
F.  Churches. 
G.  Professional and administrative offices. 
H.  Business support services. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2030, § 1, 10-13-98) 
5.733 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Seasonal sales and special events, subject to standards in Sections 7.501 and 7.503. 
B.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas and rooftop mounted antennas. 
2.  Alternative tower structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.734 - Uses Subject To Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Convenience uses. 
B.  Automotive service stations with minor auto repair, not to include body repair, motor repair, or painting. All service except the sale of gasoline shall be within an enclosed building. No service bays associated with automotive uses shall be visible from the public street. 
C.  Wireless communication facilities-new monopole or changes to existing tower subject to development standards in Table 3-A. 
D.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative design tower. 
E.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative tower structure, otherwise not permitted under Section 7.506. 
F.  Any single retail use that is greater than seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of gross floor area developed after the effective date of this ordinance. 
G.  Any single retail use greater than seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of gross floor area existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance that increases its gross floor area five (5) percent or more. 
H.  Donation centers. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2176, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
5.735 - Uses Subject to Temporary Use Permit. 
A.  Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes. 
(Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
5.736 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. 
A.  Satellite earth station. 
B.  Amateur radio tower. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.735 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.735-5.741 as Sections 5.736-5.742, as set out herein. 
5.737 - Development Standards. 
    See Table 3. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.735 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.735-5.741 as Sections 5.736-5.742, as set out herein. 
5.738 - Performance Standards. 
    The following restrictions shall apply to all properties within the district: 
A.  Outdoor sales and displays are prohibited, except when one (1) or more of the following conditions are present: 
1.  Products and services displayed outdoors are customary, accessory, and incidental to those sold and displayed in a primary business being conducted in the permanent building on the property. 
2.  Outdoor sales and displays do not interfere with pedestrian access ways, fire lanes, required parking spaces, driveways, landscape area, or traffic visibility at driveway entries and street intersections. 
B.  All retail activities must be within an enclosed building. No outside storage of equipment or materials is permitted. No outside mechanical repair or service is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.735 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.735-5.741 as Sections 5.736-5.742, as set out herein. 
5.739 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  Refer to Commercial Design Expectations. 
C.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.735 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.735-5.741 as Sections 5.736-5.742, as set out herein. 
5.740 - Landscaping and Screening. 
    Screen wall and landscape buffer requirements adjacent to any residential district. See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.735 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.735-5.741 as Sections 5.736-5.742, as set out herein. 
5.741 - Signs. 
    See Section 7.100. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.735 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.735-5.741 as Sections 5.736-5.742, as set out herein. 
5.742 - Parking. 
    See Section 7.400. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.735 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.735-5.741 as Sections 5.736-5.742, as set out herein. 
Section 5.750 - C-2-General Commercial. 
5.751 - Purpose. 
    The intent of this district is to accommodate either integrated or freestanding commercial uses and services. Uses serve both neighborhood scale as well as community level needs. The district is characterized by a wide range of retail uses operated within an enclosed building. Orientation is to major streets with individual access points, signage, and parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.752 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  Restaurants. 
B.  Retail stores: 
1.  General merchandising, including variety and specialty stores. 
2.  Food. 
3.  Apparel and accessories. 
4.  Home and office furnishings. 
5.  Hardware stores. 
C.  Professional, administrative, and business offices. 
D.  Services: 
1.  Personal Services. 
a.  Barbershops and beauty salons. 
b.  Small appliance repair shops. 
c.  Laundry, cleaning, and dry-cleaning establishments, limited as follows: 
1)  Maximum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area to be occupied by or devoted to machinery to be used for laundry, cleaning, dyeing, and finishing work. 
2)  Retail service to individual customers only and no wholesaling of any commodity or service shall be permitted. 
d.  Mortuaries. 
2.  Automotive Services. 
a.  Commercial parking lots. Overnight parking is not permitted, unless a use permit is secured and the lot is completely enclosed, locked, and limited to passenger vehicles only. 
E.  Indoor recreational facilities. 
F.  Veterinary clinics, all activities within an enclosed building. 
G.  Appliance, furniture, and household equipment rentals. 
H.  Child care center. 
I.  Medical or dental clinics. 
J.  Churches. 
K.  Business Schools. 
L.  Financial Institutions. 
M.  Bar or cocktail lounge. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2029, § 1, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2030, § 1, 10-13-98) 
5.753 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Live entertainment facilities which include music by more than one (1) musician, or dancing. Such facilities can be approved through administrative review, if the entrances and exits to the building are located more than three hundred (300) feet from any residential use. The dance floor may not exceed one-eighth (1/8) of the total floor area. No adult entertainment uses permitted. The closing time of the dance floor shall be simultaneous with the closing of the bar or cocktail lounge. 
B.  Seasonal sales and special events subject to standards in Sections 7.501 and 7.503. 
C.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas and rooftop mounted antennas. 
2.  Alternative tower structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.754 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Shelter-care facilities. 
B.  New or used automobile, motorcycle, boat, truck, and recreational vehicle sales and repair services. 
C.  Live entertainment facilities including nightclubs which include: music performed by more than one musician, or dancing. Exits and entrances to the structure are less than three hundred (300) feet from any existing or planned residential use. The closing time of the dance floor shall be simultaneous with the closing of the bar or cocktail lounge. No adult entertainment uses permitted. 
D.  Outdoor recreation facilities not to exceed three (3) acres in size. 
E.  Automotive truck/trailer or RV leasing and rental facilities where vehicles are stored on-site. 
F.  Self-storage warehouses. All storage shall be within an enclosed building, except that boats, trailers and motor vehicles may be placed in outdoor storage areas which are separate from the buildings and screened from the view of adjacent streets by walls and landscaping. Outside storage shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the gross site area and shall not count towards meeting parking requirements. All service storage warehouse facilities are to be used for storage purposes only. 
G.  Thrift stores, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  A storage area must be provided for all discarded items. All storage areas for individual items, including collection receptacles, shall be entirely enclosed or screened and not visible from the public right-of-way or from adjacent residential areas. 
2.  All collection receptacles shall be secure from public access during nonbusiness hours. 
3.  No material, goods, or merchandise may be stored outside of an approved collection receptacle unless it is within an approved screened area. 
H.  Hotels and motels. 
I.  Pawn shops. 
J.  Convenience uses. See Section 2.300. 
K.  Lodges or fraternal associations. 
L.  Recreational vehicle storage facility. 
M.  Private recreational clubs, YMCA, YWCA. 
N.  Plant nurseries, limited to retail sales only. 
O.  Commercial parking lots which include overnight parking. 
P.  Emergency medical care facility twenty-four (24) hour operations. 
Q.  Auto body repair. 
R.  Nursing homes. 
S.  Wireless communication facilities-new monopole or changes to existing tower subject to development standards in Table 3-A. 
T.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative design tower. 
U.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative tower structure, otherwise not permitted under Section 7.506. 
V.  Minor auto repair including lubrication, tires, engine tune-up, washing and polishing, brakes, muffler and maintenance of other similar accessories. This use does not include major engine repair, radiator repair, automotive painting and body repair, or transmission repair. All repair areas must be within an enclosed building. Service bays shall not be visible from a public street. 
W.  Any single retail use that is greater than seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of gross floor area developed after the effective date of this ordinance. 
X.  Any single retail use greater than seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of gross floor area existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance that increases its gross floor area five (5) percent or more. 
Y.  Children's residential care facility. 
Z.  Donation centers. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1902, 9-24-96; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2029, § 1, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2089, § 2, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 2176, § 2, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2206, § 2, 7-24-01; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
5.755 - Uses Subject to Temporary Use Permit. 
A.  Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes. 
(Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
5.756 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. 
A.  Amateur radio tower. 
B.  Satellite earth station. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.757 - Development Standards. 
    See Table 3. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.758 - Performance Standards. 
    The following restrictions shall apply to all properties within this district: 
A.  Outdoor sales and display are prohibited, except where one (1) or more of the following conditions are present: 
1.  Products and services displayed outdoors are customary, accessory, and incidental to those sold and displayed in a primary business being conducted in a permanent building on the property. 
2.  Outdoor sales and displays do not interfere with pedestrian access ways, fire lanes, required parking spaces, driveways, landscape areas, or traffic visibility at driveway entries and street intersections. 
B.  All retail and service activities must be within an enclosed building except automotive service stations, parking lots, drive-ins or drive-thru facilities, amusement and recreational uses, and plant material nurseries. 
C.  There shall be no manufacturing, compounding, processing or treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental to a retail store or business, and where all such completed products are sold at retail on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.759 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  Refer to Commercial Design Expectations. 
C.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.760 - Landscaping and Screening. 
    Screen wall and landscape buffer requirements adjacent to any residential district. See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.761 - Signs. 
    See Section 7.100. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.762 - Parking. 
    See Section 7.400. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 5.770 - C-3-Heavy Commercial. 
5.771 - Purpose. 
    This district accommodates wholesale and service uses which serve more intensive, community scale needs. Uses include those with strong orientation to repair services and intensive retail or wholesale functions which may include outside storage of materials or finished products. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.772 - Permitted Uses. 
    All uses listed as permitted in Section 5.752, C-2 district and in addition: 
A.  Wholesale, trade and storage of durable and non-durable goods. 
B.  Building supplies and hardware sales and service; 
C.  Auto repair, services. 
1.  Major engine and transmission repair. 
2.  Automotive body and fender shops. 
D.  Cocktail lounges with live entertainment or patron dancing. Does not include adult live entertainment. 
E.  Religious missions and sheltered workshops. 
F.  Small appliance service and repair. 
G.  Equipment and machinery sales or rental other than industrial. 
H.  Self storage warehouses. 
I.  Automobile and recreational vehicle leasing and rentals. 
J.  New and used car, truck, and recreational vehicle sales. 
K.  Business and trade schools. 
L.  Hotels and Motels. 
M.  Mobile Home sales. 
N.  Heavy Equipment sales and service. 
O.  Nightclub/dance halls. 
P.  Laundry, dry cleaning, and dyeing establishment, retail or wholesale, including bulk storage. 
Q.  Towing Business. 
R.  Recreational vehicle storage facility. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.773 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Thrift stores, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  A storage area must be provided for all discarded items. All storage areas for individual items, including collection receptacles, shall be entirely enclosed or screened and not visible from the public right-of-way or from adjacent residential areas. 
2.  All collection receptacles shall be secure from public access during non-business hours. 
3.  No material, goods, or merchandise may be stored outside of an approved collection receptacle unless it is within an approved screened area. 
B.  Seasonal sales and special events, subject to standards in Sections 7.501 and 7.503. 
C.  Commercial kennels, subject to: 
1.  All animals must be kept indoors, and no outside runs are permitted. 
2.  The kennel structure must not be any closer than one hundred (100) feet to any residential or agricultural zone. 
3.  The kennel structure shall be designed, constructed, and maintained so that sound emitted to exterior walls and roofs shall not exceed forty-five (45) decibels. Building plans submitted for a commercial kennel shall include a certified statement from a registered architect or engineer that the building will meet the forty-five (45) decibel requirement. 
D.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas and rooftop mounted antennas. 
2.  Alternative tower structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
E.  Adult business subject to Section 7.510. 
F.  Deferred presentment companies, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The use shall be a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from any agricultural or residentially- zoned property located in the City of Glendale or in an adjoining city or county, measured from property lines. 
2.  The use shall be a minimum of one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet from any other deferred presentment company located in the City of Glendale or in an adjoining city or county, measured from the property lines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2089, § 2, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 2532, § 2, 10-24-06) 
5.774 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Convenience uses. 
B.  Community Corrections Facilities. 
C.  Wireless communication facilities-new monopole or changes to existing tower subject to development standards in Table 3-A. 
D.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative design tower. 
E.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative tower structure, otherwise not permitted under Section 7.506. 
F.  Any single retail use that is greater than seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of gross floor area developed after the effective date of this ordinance. 
G.  Any single retail use greater than seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of gross floor area existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance that increases its gross floor area five (5) percent or more. 
H.  Donation centers. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2089, § 2, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 2176, § 3, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
5.775 - Uses Subject to Temporary Use Permit. 
A.  Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes. 
(Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
5.776 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. 
A.  Amateur radio tower. 
B.  Satellite earth station. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.775 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.775-5.781 as Sections 5.776-5.781.1, as set out herein. 
5.777 - Development Standards. 
    See Table 3. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.775 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.775-5.781 as Sections 5.776-5.781.1, as set out herein. 
5.778 - Performance Standards. 
A.  There shall be no manufacturing, compounding, processing, or treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental to wholesale store, repair, or service businesses and where all such completed products are sold on the premises. 
B.  No use is permitted which will emit any offensive odor, dust, noxious gas, noise, vibration, smoke, heat, or glare beyond the boundaries of the lot of which such use is conducted. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.775 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.775-5.781 as Sections 5.776-5.781.1, as set out herein. 
5.779 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  Refer to Commercial Design Expectations. 
C.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.775 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.775-5.781 as Sections 5.776-5.781.1, as set out herein. 
5.780 - Landscaping and Screening. 
    See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.775 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.775-5.781 as Sections 5.776-5.781.1, as set out herein. 
5.781 - Signs. 
    See Section 7.100. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.775 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.775-5.781 as Sections 5.776-5.781.1, as set out herein. 
5.781.1 - Parking. 
    See Section 7.400. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.775 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.775-5.781 as Sections 5.776-5.781.1, as set out herein.5.785 
Section 5.782 - CSC-Community Shopping Center. 
5.783 - Purpose. 
    The Community Shopping Center district is a commercial district intended to meet the consumer demands of large segments of the community by accommodating large-scale shopping centers. These centers are designed to serve residents of an entire community and attract regional shoppers as well. Uses include everything from small shops to the biggest of the big box retailers, as well as entertainment and restaurants. Community shopping centers are to be planned, developed and operated as single entities, with shared access and parking and common architecture, landscaping, and signage. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 4, 12-19-00) 
5.784 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  General merchandising including food stores, apparel, and accessory stores. 
B.  Home furnishings. 
C.  Home improvement stores. 
D.  Warehouse stores. 
E.  Repair services for small appliances, bicycles, watches, musical instruments, and similar items. 
F.  Child care centers. 
G.  Restaurants without drive-thrus. 
H.  Cocktail lounges. 
I.  Financial institutions. 
J.  Professional, administrative, and business offices. 
K.  Medical offices. 
L.  Personal services such as barber and beauty shops, shoe repair, and tailor shops. 
M.  Laundry, cleaning, and dry cleaning establishments, limited as follows: 
1.  Maximum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area to be occupied by or devoted to machinery to be used for laundry, cleaning, dyeing, and finishing work. 
2.  Retail service to individual customers only and no wholesaling of any commodity or service shall be permitted. 
N.  Indoor motion picture theaters, excluding adult theaters. 
O.  Indoor recreational facilities. 
P.  Churches. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 4, 12-19-00) 
5.785 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Seasonal sales and special events, subject to standards in Sections 7.501 And 7.503. 
B.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 And 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas and rooftop mounted antennas. 
2.  Alternative tower structure mounted antennas that utilize an existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 4, 12-19-00) 
5.786 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Any single retail use that is greater than seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
B.  Convenience uses, limited as follows: 
1.  No more than five (5) convenience uses shall be allowed in each center. 
2.  All uses that include retail sales of gasoline shall be designed to orient the gasoline service pumps and canopies covering the pumps to the interior of the site; with the building(s) adjacent to the street. 
3.  All drive thru service windows shall be located on the internal side of convenience uses and screened from view from public streets. 
C.  Minor auto repair including lubrication, tires, engine tune-up, washing and polishing, brakes, muffler and maintenance of other similar accessories. This use does not include major engine repair, radiator repair, automotive painting and body repair, or transmission repair. All repair areas must be within an enclosed building. Service bays shall be screened from view from public streets. 
D.  Hotels and motels. 
E.  Live entertainment facilities that include music performed by more than one (1) musician, or dancing. Does not include adult live entertainment. 
F.  Night clubs. 
G.  Wireless communication facilities-new monopole or changes to existing tower subject to development standards in Table 3-A. 
H.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative design tower. 
I.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative tower structure, otherwise not permitted under Section 7.506. 
J.  Donation centers. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 4, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
5.787 - Uses Subject to Temporary Use Permit. 
A.  Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes. 
(Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
5.788 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses that are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. 
A.  Amateur radio tower. 
B.  Satellite earth station. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 4, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.787 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.787-5.794 as Sections 5.788-5.795, as set out herein. 
5.789 - Development Standards. 
    See revised Table 3-Page 2301. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 4, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.787 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.787-5.794 as Sections 5.788-5.795, as set out herein. 
5.790 - Performance Standards. 
A.  Design review for the entire site must be approved prior to issuance of building permits for any portion of the site. 
B.  A project may be built in phases, but the first phase must include at least one of the major anchors for the center and a percentage of the total gross floor area for the center as determined at the time of Master Development Plan approval. Pad sites shall not be developed prior to development of the first major anchor. 
C.  The shopping center must include plazas containing a total of at least one thousand (1,000) square feet per net acre of the site. The plazas shall include shade trees, seating areas, tables, and trash receptacles. At least fifty percent (50%) of the area of plazas required shall be constructed in the first phase of development. 
D.  Outdoor sales and displays are prohibited, except when the following conditions are present: 
1.  Products and services displayed outdoors are customary, accessory, and incidental to those sold and displayed in a primary business being conducted in the permanent building on the property. 
2.  Outdoor sales and displays do not interfere with pedestrian access ways, fire lanes, required parking spaces, driveways, landscape area, or traffic visibility at driveway entries and street intersections. 
E.  All retail and service activities shall be within an enclosed building. No outside storage of equipment or materials is permitted. 
F.  Loading areas, building service areas and drive-thru service windows must be oriented away from streets and screened from public view with a combination of landscaping and screen walls. 
G.  Prior to certificate of occupancy of any building on the site, the developer shall provide certification that the noise level from mechanical equipment does not exceed 55 dBA (normal speaking voice) at the property line. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 4, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.787 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.787-5.794 as Sections 5.788-5.795, as set out herein. 
5.791 - Master Development Plan. 
A.  All applications for the Community Shopping Center district shall include a Master Development Plan for the area of the rezoning request. The plan, at a minimum, will address: 
1.  The location of all proposed buildings, plazas, and pedestrian walkways. 
2.  The location of all drive aisles, parking, loading and service areas. 
3.  The location of all landscaping, retention areas, entry features and perimeter walls. 
4.  The location of all required public street improvements. 
5.  A design theme for the center showing the architecture, materials and colors that will be used. 
6.  The location of all proposed free-standing identification signs. 
7.  On-site lighting performance measures. 
8.  The location, type and size of individual uses planned for the center. 
B.  The Master Development Plan shall be reviewed in conjunction with the rezoning of the property as set forth in Section 3.800 and shall become part of the approval. The Planning Commission and the City Council shall consider conformance of the proposed plan with the General Plan, the commercial design expectations, and the stated purpose of the Community Shopping Center district. 
C.  The procedure for amending an approved Master Development Plan shall be the same as prescribed for the original approval. No amendment to a CSC district will be approved without concurrent revision of the Master Development Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 4, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.787 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.787-5.794 as Sections 5.788-5.795, as set out herein. 
5.792 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  Refer to commercial design expectations. 
C.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to design review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 4, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.787 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.787-5.794 as Sections 5.788-5.795, as set out herein. 
5.793 - Landscaping and Screening. 
A.  See Section 7.200. 
B.  The frontages and corner setback area shall include a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet of landscaping, broken only by necessary driveways and screen walls. No parking shall be permitted within this area. 
C.  Where a CSC district abuts a residential street (that is, where there are residences across a street from the center), a fifty (50) foot landscape buffer is required. 
D.  Where a CSC district is immediately adjacent to a residential district with no intervening street, a twenty (20) foot landscape buffer is required. 
E.  All perimeter on-site improvements including landscape buffers, sidewalks, perimeter walls and parking lot screen walls must be constructed in the first phase of development. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 4, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.787 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.787-5.794 as Sections 5.788-5.795, as set out herein. 
5.794 - Signs. 
    See Section 7.100. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 4, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.787 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.787-5.794 as Sections 5.788-5.795, as set out herein. 
5.795 - Parking. 
    See Section 7.400. 
(Ord. No. 2177, § 4, 12-19-00; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.787 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.787-5.794 as Sections 5.788-5.795, as set out herein. 
Section 5.800 - INDUSTRIAL. 
Section 5.810 - B-P-Business Park. 
5.811 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Business Park district is to accommodate employment uses including administrative and research industries, offices, and limited manufacturing and support services. Business Park is intended to meet the following objectives: 
A.  Encourage large scale campus style development which includes attractive streetscape and functional pedestrian spaces. 
B.  Provide for employment areas which are compatible with adjacent or surrounding residential land uses. 
C.  Promote an efficient circulation system including the separation of pedestrian from vehicular traffic. Encourage reduced trip generation off-site by the development of mixed uses within the project. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.812 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  Offices for professional, administrative, clerical, financial, medical, or other business or professional services. 
B.  Laboratories for research and product development. 
C.  Manufacturing or assembly of finished products, so long as the primary use of the property is not the basic processing and compounding of raw materials. 
D.  Medical and dental laboratories. 
E.  Motion picture production, radio and television broadcast studios, but not including transmitter towers. 
F.  Health clubs. 
G.  Commercial, trade, or business schools. 
H.  Full service restaurants. 
I.  Financial institutions. 
J.  Barber and beauty shops. 
K.  Business support services. 
L.  Laundry, cleaning, and dyeing establishments, limited to: 
1.  Maximum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area to be occupied by or devoted to machinery to be used for laundry, cleaning, dyeing, and finishing work. 
2.  Retail service to individual customers only and no wholesaling of any commodity or service shall be permitted. 
M.  Child care center. 
N.  Fast food restaurants without drive-in or drive-thru facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.813 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
    Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas and rooftop mounted antennas. 
2.  Alternative tower structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.814 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Public and semi-public utility buildings and facilities. 
B.  Motels or hotels including conference or convention facilities. 
C.  Self-storage facilities, for storage purposes only. 
D.  Wholesale sales and distribution of finished goods. 
E.  Incidental commercial retail sales other than those otherwise permitted. 
F.  Automobile, boat, motorcycle, and recreational vehicle dealerships. 
G.  Wireless communication facilities-new monopole or changes to existing tower subject to development standards in Table 3-A. 
H.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative design tower. 
I.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative tower structure, otherwise not permitted under Section 7.506. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.815 - Accessory Uses. 
    Use which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. 
A.  Amateur radio tower. 
B.  Satellite earth station. 
C.  Fences and walls. See Section 7.201. 
D.  Microwave antennas. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.816 - Development Standards. 
    See Table 3. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.817 - Performance Standards. 
A.  No use shall be established, maintained, or conducted within the Business Park district which may cause the dissemination of smoke, gas, dust, odor, or any other atmospheric pollutant outside the building in which the use is conducted. 
B.  No use shall result in noise perceptible beyond the boundaries of the immediate site of the use. 
C.  No use shall result in the discharge of any waste materials to any water course, dry wells, storm sewers, or ditch. 
D.  No use shall result in the dissemination of glare or vibration beyond immediate site of the use. 
E.  No use shall result in the creation of traffic hazards for undue congestion of any public street. 
F.  No use shall create a physical hazard by reason of fire, explosions, or use of radioactive materials or any similar cause of property in the same or adjacent districts. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.818 - Master Development Plan. 
    A supplement to all applications for Business Park district shall include a conceptual Master Development Plan for the area of the rezoning request. The Master Development Plan shall include the following elements: 
A.  General Land Use. 
B.  Circulation, including Transportation Demand Management. 
C.  Open Space, Landscaping. 
D.  Development Phases. 
E.  Drainage. 
F.  Water. 
G.  Sewer. 
H.  Design Standards. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.819 - Design Review. 
A.  See Section 3.600. 
B.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.820 - Landscaping and Screening. 
A.  There shall be a decorative solid masonry wall not less than six (6) feet in height on rear and side property lines that are adjacent to residential districts. 
B.  All parking areas shall be screened from view from all public streets by structures, landscaping, decorative walls, berms, or by depressing the parking area. 
C.  All mechanical structures and appurtenances shall be screened from view. 
D.  Any outside storage must be fully screened from view of public streets and residential districts. 
E.  Any loading spaces or dock areas shall be screened by a minimum eight (8) foot high masonry wall or berm and landscaping which screens said areas. See Section 7.201. 
F.  Every use, or any part thereof, that is not conducted within a building completely enclosed on all sides shall be enclosed with a wall of a height as to completely screen all operations conducted within such wall from observation outside the site, except where approved as part of a conditional use permit. Such use shall not be permitted in any required yard area. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.821 - Signs. 
    See Section 7.100. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.822 - Parking. 
    See Section 7.400. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 5.840 - M-1-Light Industrial. 
5.841 - Purpose. 
    This district is intended to accommodate industries involving light manufacturing, assembling, warehousing, and wholesale activities of medium intensity compatible with adjacent properties. Associated office and support commercial uses are also included within this district. The manufacturing or assembly of finished products so long as the primary use of the property is not the basic processing and compounding of raw materials. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.842 - Permitted Uses. 
A.  Manufacturing and Assembly. 
1.  Food processing and kindred products, except: 
a.  Fish canning and curing. 
b.  Meat products. 
c.  Rendering or refining of fats and oils. 
2.  Textile mill products not including dyeing or finishing. 
3.  Leather and leather products. 
4.  Stone, clay and glass products. 
5.  Fabricated metal products. 
6.  Machinery. 
7.  Electrical machinery, equipment, and supplies. 
8.  Transportation equipment. 
9.  Wood products, finished. 
B.  Non-Manufacturing. 
1.  Wholesalers, except those involving explosives, fowl, fish, or seafood. 
2.  Lumber and building material yards. 
3.  Contract construction. 
4.  Trucking and warehousing. 
5.  Recycling centers or automated collection center. 
6.  Recreational vehicle storage facilities. 
7.  Laundry, dry cleaning, and dyeing establishments, retail or wholesale, including bulk storage. 
8.  Vehicle repair, minor and major. 
C.  Support Office. 
1.  Administrative offices directly related to a permitted use. 
2.  Restaurants. 
3.  Business Support Services-office supply, photocopy, and delivery services. 
4.  Trade or business schools. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1840, § 1, 5-23-95) 
5.843 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Seasonal sales and special events, subject to administrative review standards. See Sections 7.501 and 7.503. 
B.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas and rooftop mounted antennas. 
2.  Alternative tower structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
C.  Adult business subject to Section 7.510. 
D.  Lodges and fraternal associations if the entrances and exits to the building are located more than three hundred (300) feet from any residential use. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2089, § 2, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 2114, § 1, 12-14-99) 
5.844 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permits. 
A.  Commercial aviation businesses such as aircraft repair, aircraft sales and service, and air charter services. 
B.  Drive-in theaters. 
C.  Commercial retail sales and services, other than those otherwise permitted. 
D.  Commercial kennels, animal shelters, and veterinary hospitals with outdoor boarding or exercise facilities. 
E.  Wireless communication facilities-new monopole or changes to existing tower subject to development standards in Table 3-A. 
F.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative design tower. 
G.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative tower structure, otherwise not permitted under Section 7.506. 
H.  Lodges and fraternal associations with entrances and exits to the building located less than three hundred (300) feet from any residential use. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1840, § 2, 5-23-95; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2089, § 2, 7-27-99; Ord. No. 2114, § 1, 12-14-99) 
5.845 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. 
A.  Amateur radio tower. 
B.  Satellite earth station. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.846 - Development Standards. 
    See Table 3. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.847 - Performance Standards. 
A.  Uses or operations of products within this district shall be permitted unless such uses are or may become obnoxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, noise, gas fumes, cinders, vibrations, glare, refuse, or air or water pollution. 
B.  All uses permitted in this district shall be primarily conducted within a fully enclosed building unless otherwise permitted. Outside storage of materials and equipment related to the primary activity is permitted provided that the outside storage area is screened by a wall with the design and height to be approved by the Community Development Group. 
C.  Explosive or hazardous processes require approval by Glendale Fire Department that all manufacturing, storage, and waste processes meet all safety and environmental standards as administered by the department. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.848 - Design Guidelines. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  Refer to Industrial Design Expectations. 
C.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.849 - Landscaping and Screening. 
    Landscape buffer and screen wall requirements adjacent to any residential district. See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.850 - Signs. 
    See Section 7.100. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.851 - Parking. 
    See Section 7.400. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 5.860 - M-2-Heavy Industrial. 
5.861 - Purpose. 
    This district is intended to accommodate intense industries involving manufacturing, warehousing, assembly, and storage. The uses include the production, assembly, and processing of large products as well as those which may generate special impacts on surrounding properties. The district is characterized by open uses and/or storage, industrial processes which involve significant amounts of heat, mechanical and chemical processing, large amounts of materials transfer, and large scale machinery and structures. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.862 - Permitted Uses. 
    All permitted uses within the M-1 (Light Industrial) district, Section 5.842, and additionally the following manufacturing and non-manufacturing uses: 
A.  Manufacturing and Assembly. 
1.  Food and kindred products, except those requiring specific use permit approval. 
2.  Textile mill products not including dyeing and finishing. 
3.  Lumber and wood products. 
4.  Leather and leather products. 
5.  Stone, clay and glass products. 
6.  Primary metal industries. 
7.  Fabricated metal products. 
8.  Machinery and electrical machinery. 
9.  Transportation equipment. 
10.  Plastic and plastic products. 
B.  Non-Manufacturing. 
1.  Transportation, communication and other public utility storage and equipment yards. 
2.  Wholesalers. 
3.  Trucking and warehousing. 
4.  Lumber and building material yards. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.863 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
A.  Seasonal sales and special events. See Sections 7.501 and 7.503. 
B.  Wireless communication facilities, subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600. 
1.  Building mounted antennas and rooftop mounted antennas. 
2.  Alternative tower structure mounted antennas which utilize existing light pole or electric utility pole. The related equipment shelter must be located on property developed for non-residential use or in public right-of-way subject to approval of City Engineer. 
C.  Adult business subject to Section 7.510. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2089, § 2, 7-27-99) 
5.864 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Manufacturing or processing of chemicals and allied products. 
B.  Dyeing and finishing of textile products. 
C.  Manufacturer of rubber products. 
D.  Automobile wrecking and salvage yards. 
E.  Manufacturer of fireworks, matches, or pyrotechnics or other potentially explosive processes. 
F.  Central mixing plants for cement or concrete. 
G.  Processing of fish, poultry, or meat products. 
H.  Rendering or refining of fats and oils. 
I.  Storage and processing of scrap metals. 
J.  Incidental commercial retail sales other than those otherwise permitted. 
K.  Asphalt and asphalt products processing. 
L.  Fiberglass products manufacturing. 
M.  Wireless communication facilities-new monopole or changes to existing tower subject to development standards in Table 3-A. 
N.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative design tower. 
O.  Wireless communication facilities-alternative tower structure, otherwise not permitted under Section 7.506. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2089, § 2, 7-27-99) 
5.865 - Accessory Uses. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. 
A.  Amateur radio tower. 
B.  Satellite earth station. 
C.  Microwave antennas. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.866 - Development Standards. 
    See Table 3. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.867 - Performance Standards. 
A.  Uses or operations of products within this district shall be permitted unless such uses are or may become obnoxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, noise, gas fumes, cinders, vibrations, glare, refuse, or air or water pollution. 
B.  Explosive or hazardous processes require approval by the Glendale Fire Department that all manufacturing, storage, and waste processes meet all safety and environmental standards as administered by the department. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.868 - Design Review. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  Refer to Industrial Design Expectations. 
C.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
5.869 - Landscaping and Screening. 
    Landscape buffers and screen wall requirements adjacent to any residential district. See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.870 - Signs. 
    See Section 7.100. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.871 - Parking. 
    See Section 7.400. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 5.900 - PAD-Planned Area Development. 
5.901 - Purpose. 
    This district accommodates mixed use development which combines residential and nonresidential land uses through common design elements. The district promotes flexibility and encourages variations in building design, lot arrangement, circulation patterns, and land uses. Further, it is the intent of the PAD district to: 
A.  Encourage creative and effective use of land and circulation systems to accommodate changes in land development technologies. 
B.  Encourage residential development to provide a mixture of housing types and designs. 
C.  Encourage innovative development or redevelopment concepts for all land use types to provide a greater variety and intensity of uses. 
D.  Provide a process which relates the urban design and scale of project to the unique characteristics of the site. 
E.  Require the nature and intensity of development to be supported by adequate utilities, transportation, drainage, and common open spaces to serve the development and to minimize impact on existing or future adjacent development. 
F.  Encourage development that is consistent with the policies and the guidelines established in any specific plan and the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.902 - Permitted Uses. 
    Any permitted land use within the ordinance is allowed as defined by the General Plan, Specific Area Plan, and Specific Land Use Designations within the approved Development Plan. Unless a combination of other zoning districts are referenced for the definition of permitted uses, all permitted uses must be specifically defined in the approval of the PAD. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.903 - Uses Subject to Conditions. 
    Specific conditions or requirements for administrative review may be required in conjunction with PAD approval. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.904 - Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. 
    Specific uses subject to a conditional use permit may be deferred in conjunction with the PAD approval. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
5.905 - Uses Subject to Temporary Use Permit. 
    Specific temporary uses subject to a Temporary Use Permit may be allowed per Section 3.920 on non-residential components of the Development Plan. 
(Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
5.906 - Accessory Uses. 
    Accessory uses are defined by the standard of the zoning district reference within the development plan. Any accessory use not included within the referenced zoning district must be detailed specifically within the development plan. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.905 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.905-5.913 as Sections 5.906-5.914, as set out herein. 
5.907 - Density, Area, Building and Setback Requirements. 
    All standards are established within the approval process including residential density, lot sizes, building setbacks, required yards, and building heights. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.905 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.905-5.913 as Sections 5.906-5.914, as set out herein. 
5.908 - Performance Standards. 
    Established by development plan either by referral to zoning districts or specific standards. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.905 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.905-5.913 as Sections 5.906-5.914, as set out herein. 
5.909 - Design Guidelines. 
A.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600. 
B.  The design of the project shall be consistent with any existing guidelines applicable to the land use proposed. This shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Subdivision Design Expectations. 
2.  Commercial Design Expectations. 
3.  Multi-Family Design Expectations. 
4.  Industrial Design Expectations. 
5.  All wireless communication facilities are subject to Design Review and must be consistent with wireless communication facilities design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.905 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.905-5.913 as Sections 5.906-5.914, as set out herein. 
5.910 - Landscaping and Screening. 
    These requirements are defined by Section 7.200 or may be defined in the PAD approval. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.905 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.905-5.913 as Sections 5.906-5.914, as set out herein. 
5.911 - Signs. 
    See Section 7.100. Special signage standards may be established in the approval of the PAD. However, special sign standards may not deviate from the standards set forth in Sections 7.106 and Section 7.110. Billboard Signs and Digital Billboard Signs are prohibited on property located within a Scenic Corridor. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2876, § 2, 2-23-16; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.905 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.905-5.913 as Sections 5.906-5.914, as set out herein. 
5.912 - Parking. 
    Required parking shall be defined by the planned land use categories. See Section 7.400. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.905 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.905-5.913 as Sections 5.906-5.914, as set out herein. 
5.913 - Procedures. 
A.  Application. All requests for PAD zoning shall be submitted and processed pursuant to the procedures established in Section 3.800. 
B.  Development Plan. An applicant shall submit a detailed development plan for the area of the PAD request which shall include the following: 
1.  Proposed name of the development. 
2.  Name, address, and telephone number of the property owner and applicant. 
3.  Legal description. 
4.  Description of the proposed land use areas and the specifications including use standards of each area including: 
a.  Proposed dwelling unit type, total land area, and maximum density of residential use areas. 
b.  Proposed uses other than residential, total land area, and maximum floor area ratios associated with commercial or industrial uses. 
c.  Proposed public streetscape and private open space improvements and their relationship to the overall development. 
d.  Building heights, minimum lot areas, and setbacks. 
e.  A general description of architectural theme colors and type of exterior building materials for each structure or group of structures in the PAD. 
f.  A description of the landscaping treatment, plant materials, fences, walls, and other open space improvements. 
g.  Proposed location of any arterial, collector, or local streets. 
h.  Proposed location and use of all lands proposed to be dedicated for public purpose including parks, storm water retention areas, and school sites. 
i.  Master water, sewer, and drainage plans. 
C.  Project Narrative. 
1.  The applicant shall submit a statement describing the terms and conditions under which the property will be developed and maintained subsequent to development. Such statements shall include any conditions, performance standards, and other reasonable restrictions as may be necessary to ensure the development and maintenance of the property in accordance with the approved development plan. 
2.  The applicant shall submit a description of the objectives to be achieved by the development concept. The statement shall include, but is not limited to: 
a.  The manner in which the proposed development meets or exceeds the intent of the PAD district. 
b.  The proposed architectural and site design concepts including style, colors, and type of materials, placement of structures to maximize views and take advantage of the site's natural characteristics. 
c.  Specific concepts by which the proposed development will make an orderly transition from existing or planned adjacent development including varied setbacks and facade treatment, open space elements, screening of parking areas, and landscaping of public or private open spaces and recreational facilities. 
3.  The purpose of this narrative is to provide a clear and concise statement for the review process to ensure a better understanding of the proposed development concept. 
D.  Time Schedule for Development. The applicant shall include a tentative schedule for the phasing of the development. The statement shall include the type of development, density, floor area ratios for each phase of the development, and shall be accompanied by a map designating the phases and sequence of development. 
E.  Approval of the Development Plan. The review of a development plan shall be in conjunction with the rezoning of the property as set forth in Section 3.800. The Planning Commission shall base its recommendation and the City Council shall base its decision on the conformance of the proposed plan with the stated purpose of the PAD district. No amendment to a Planned Area Development district will be approved without concurrent revision of the development plan. 
F.  Amendments. The procedure for amending an approved Development Plan shall be the same as prescribed for the original approval. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.905 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.905-5.913 as Sections 5.906-5.914, as set out herein. 
5.914 - Findings. 
    The Planning Commission shall find that the PAD application is consistent with the purpose of the district. The Commission evaluation shall include land use mixture, land use categories, land use intensities, and the proposed development standards. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, 10-24-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O17-51, § 5, adopted Oct. 24, 2017, added Section 5.905 and in so doing renumbered former Sections 5.905-5.913 as Sections 5.906-5.914, as set out herein. 
Table 3
Commercial/Employment Districts Development Standards District Min Net 
Lot Area Max. 
Lot Area Min. Setback 5 Max. 
Structure 
Ht. 6 Max. 
F.A.R. 6 Front Rear Side Street 
Side R-O 3 6,000 N/A 20 25 10 25 30 .3 C-O 10,000 N/A 25 1 ft. per 1 ft. ht. of bldg. 20 30 .3 G-O 43,560 N/A Varies With Bldg. Ht. 1 ft. per 1 ft. ht. of bldg. 30 .3 PR N/A N/A 0-10 0 0 0 48 2.0 SC 5 acre 15 acre 25 60 1 60 1 25 30 .3 NSC N/A 20 25 5 60 1 60 1 25 5 30 .3 C-1 N/A N/A 25 60 1 60 1 25 30 .3 CSC >20 acres N/A 257 80 8 80 8 255 40 .3 C-2 N/A N/A 25 60 1 60 1 25 30 .3 C-3 N/A N/A 25 60 1 60 1 25 30 .3 B-P N/A 4 N/A 25-50 2 60 1 60 1 25-50 2 30 .3 M-1 6,000 N/A 25 60 1 60 1 25 30 .3 M-2 6,000 N/A 25 60 1 60 1 25 30 .3  
1-60 feet to residential uses: 15 feet to nonresidential uses. 
2-50 feet for major street, 40 feet collector street, 25 feet local street. 
3-Maximum building size 3,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
4-Minimum district size is 20 acres. 
5-Building setback for arterial streets shall be a minimum of 1 foot for each foot of building height. 
6-Maximum height of accessory structures is 15 feet. Refer to Special Building Heights and Floor Area Ratio Maps, found at the end of this ordinance. 
7-One foot for each foot of building height, not less than 25 feet. 
8-80 feet to residential, 25 feet to non-residential. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2177 § 4, 12-19-00) 
Table 3-A
Commercial/Employment Districts Wireless Communications Standards 
District Subject to 
Conditional 
Use Permit Maximum Height Major Street 
Setback Residential 
Setback Monopoles Single user Co-location R-O NP C-O X 50 feet 65 feet Minimum 150 feet 2 × tower height G-O X 65 feet 80 feet Minimum 150 feet 2 × tower height P-R NP SC X 50 feet 65 feet Minimum 150 feet 2 × tower height C-1 X 50 feet 65 feet Minimum 150 feet 2 × tower height C-2 X 50 feet 65 feet Minimum 150 feet 2 × tower height C-3 X 65 feet 80 feet Minimum 150 feet 2 × tower height B-P X 65 feet 80 feet Minimum 150 feet 2 × tower height M-1 X 65 feet 80 feet Minimum 150 feet 2 × tower height M-2 X 65 feet 80 feet Minimum 150 feet 2 × tower height  
NP = Not permitted 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 3, 4-28-98) 
ARTICLE 6. - OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 6.100 - A.I.O.-Airport Impact Overlay. 
6.101 - Purpose. 
    The Airport Impact Overlay district seeks to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the area surrounding the Glendale Municipal Airport by minimizing exposure to high noise levels and the hazards generated by airport operations. Also, it is to further the development of property surrounding the airport in a manner compatible with the continued operation of the airport. The district shall overlay other zoning districts where it is applied so that any parcel of land lying in the Airport Impact Overlay District shall also lie in one (1) or more of the other zoning districts. Should any conflict arise, the more strict regulation shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.102 - Overlay Districts and Boundaries. 
A.  Airport Noise Overlay Districts and Clear Zones. For purpose of administering these regulations, there shall be three (3) airport noise overlay areas and one (1) clear zone overlay area, identified below, within the Airport Impact Overlay District for the Glendale Municipal Airport. The boundaries for these noise overlays and clear zones shall be defined in the Official Zoning Maps. 
1.  Airport Noise Overlay-1 (ANO-1). The area between the post 2010 65 (ldn) and 70 (ldn) noise contour lines developed by the application of day/night average sound level of methodology of sound measurement (ldn). 
2.  Airport Noise Overlay-2 (ANO-2). The area between the post 2010 70 (ldn) and 75 (ldn) noise contour lines developed by the application of day/night average sound level of methodology of sound measurement (ldn). 
3.  Airport Noise Overlay-3 (ANO-3). The area within the post 2010 greater than 75 (ldn) noise contour line as developed by the application of day/night average sound level of methodology of sound measurement (ldn). 
4.  Clear Zone Overlay (CZO). The area at the end of Runway 19-1 and the future parallel runway which must be maintained clear of any structures or obstructions according to Federal Aviation Administration structures. 
B.  Lots Divided by Airport District Boundaries. Whenever a lot of record is divided by an airport district boundary, the development shall conform to land use and design criteria of the more restrictive district in accordance with all City codes and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.103 - Taxiway Access and Operations. 
    Any development proposing taxiway access shall be approved by the Planning Director and Airport Manager. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.104 - Certification of Noise Attenuation. 
A.  Certification. Prior to issuance of a building permit in any airport noise overlay area, a certification by an acoustical engineer or registered architect shall be required specifying that construction practices and the materials of the structure will achieve the interior noise level required by the noise attenuation standards indicated in Section 6.104-B. The engineer or architect shall submit relevant information to permit the City building officials to verify that the proposed measures will achieve interior noise level standards. 
B.  Noise Attenuation Standards. The noise level reduction measures must be incorporated into the design and construction of the principal buildings where people work or are otherwise received, in order to achieve a maximum interior noise level of forty-five (45) decibels. This requirement includes all offices and areas which serve the public. Any land use within a building with a self-generated noise level in excess of forty-five (45) decibels is not subject to this standard. 
1.  Airport Noise Overlay-1-Noise Level Reduction of twenty (20) decibels. 
2.  Airport Noise Overlay-2-Noise Level Reduction of twenty-five (25) decibels. 
3.  Airport Noise Overlay-3-Noise Level Reduction of thirty (30) decibels. 
C.  Inaccurate Data. False or inaccurate data shall be cause for rendering null and void any building permits and may result in non-issuance of an occupancy permit. 
D.  City Liability. The City of Glendale, its employees and officers shall not be held liable for any permit issued on the basis of false information. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.105 - Avigational Easements and Release. 
    Prior to issuance of any building or development permit for property within the Airport Impact District, the owner of said property shall provide the City of Glendale with an avigational easement over the subject property and release the City of Glendale from all liability for any and all claims for damages originated from dust, noise, vibration, fumes, fuel and lubricant particles, etc. The avigational easement and release forms shall be available from the City of Glendale. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.106 - Additional Height and Safety Regulations. 
A.  Height. Any development or construction of buildings or structures shall submit a Federal Aviation Administration Form 7460-1 to the local Federal Aviation Administration office for review. A positive recommendation from the Federal Aviation Administration stating the development has no negative effect on the airport or navigational airspace must be reviewed prior to commencing construction. 
B.  Construction or establishment of any building, structure, or use shall comply with the height limits as determined by the zoning district identified by the Official Zoning Map of the City of Glendale, or with the height limits specified by the Airport Runway Approach Clearance Map as defined, whichever places the greater restriction. 
C.  Hazard Marking and Lighting. The Federal Aviation Administration shall determine whether the construction in, or existence of any building, structure, or plant material constitutes a hazard to an aircraft operation in the vicinity of the airport. When such determination is made, the owner of the structure, pole, tower, tank, or plant material shall at his own expense, reduce in height or install, operate, and maintain such markers and lights that may be necessary to indicate to aircraft operators the presence of an airport hazard. 
D.  Communication Facilities. Any activity within this district which may create an electrical interference with communications between the airport facility and the aircraft is prohibited unless approved by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.107 - Administration. 
A.  The Planning Director shall review all requests for building and development within the Airport Impact Overlay Zone for compliance with this ordinance prior to issuance of any permit. 
B.  The Airport Manager shall be informed of all requests for development within the Airport Impact Overlay District. The Planning Director shall forward a copy of all applications with attended information to the Airport Manager prior to the issuance of any permits. The Airport Manager shall verify receipt of such information and, within ten (10) working days, forward any comments concerning the requests to the Planning Director. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 6.200 - PRD-Planned Residential Development. 
6.201 - Purpose. 
    This overlay district is intended to promote the development of Single Residence subdivisions according to an overall development plan. The purpose of this district is to: 
A.  Encourage imaginative and innovative planning of residential neighborhoods by providing greater flexibility in design. 
B.  Encourage the provision of useable open space and recreation facilities within subdivisions. 
C.  Encourage variation in lot size, lot width, building setback, building orientation, and house product design within neighborhoods. 
D.  Establish residential neighborhoods which have a distinct character and convey a sense of place. 
E.  Promote the efficient use of land by enabling the development of parcels which would otherwise be difficult to develop. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.202 - Application Procedures and Requirements. 
A.  A PRD may be established as an overlay zoning district in any of the Suburban Residence (SR) or Urban Residence (R-1) zoning districts. All applications for PRD shall be submitted and processed pursuant to the requirements and procedures in Section 3.300 and Section 3.800. The procedures for amending an approved PRD shall be the same as for the original approval. 
B.  The PRD application shall be accompanied by a scaled development plan which shows at a minimum the following information: 
1.  Name of the development. 
2.  Existing and proposed zoning. 
3.  Proposed boundary of the PRD district. 
4.  General topography and areas where major grading is proposed. 
5.  Preliminary drainage concept. 
6.  Accommodations for utilities. 
7.  Location of all interior and perimeter streets. 
8.  Size, location, and use of public or commonly owned open space and facilities. 
9.  Conceptual lot layout. 
10.  The area of any sub-units and the number of dwelling units proposed within each unit. 
11.  A data table which includes the total gross area, total number of units, gross density, area devoted to street rights-of-way, and area proposed for open space use. 
12.  All adjacent lots or parcels and improvements within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the site perimeter. 
C.  The PRD application shall also be accompanied by a clear and concise project narrative which provides specific details about the proposed development concept. The project narrative shall include at a minimum the following information: 
1.  Legal description of the property. 
2.  Complete description of the intended nature and character of the development. 
3.  Details concerning the purpose, ownership, improvement, and maintenance of all public or commonly owned open space and facilities. 
4.  Proposed phasing. 
5.  General landscape concept. 
6.  Outline of proposed conditions, covenants, and restrictions. 
7.  Proposed amended development standards. 
8.  Typical lot layouts showing the proposed setbacks for interior, corner, and cul-de-sac lots. 
9.  Relationship to surrounding property and proposed screening, buffers, and transitions. 
10.  Design concept for perimeter walls, entry features, and common areas; 
11.  Proposed cross sections for all interior and perimeter streets. 
12.  House product design criteria including type, architectural style, color palette, and exterior materials. 
13.  Provisions for on-site and off-site drainage. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1952, § 7, 7-22-97) 
6.203 - Permitted uses. 
    Land use shall conform to the uses permitted in the underlying zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.204 - Development Standards. 
A.  The development standards of the underlying zoning district may be amended as part of the PRD approval. All other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply. 
B.  The density for the PRD shall be stipulated as part of the PRD approval and shall not exceed the density allowed by the underlying zoning district. For the purpose of this ordinance, the maximum gross density for each underlying zoning district shall be as follows: 
District Units Per 
Gross Acre R1-4 8.0 R1-6 5.0 R1-7 4.0 R1-8 3.5 R1-10 3.0 SR-12 2.5 SR-17 2.0 SR-30 1.0  
C.  The amount and location of public and commonly owned open space and facilities shall be determined at the time of PRD approval. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.205 - Required Findings. 
    All PRD applications shall be reviewed for conformance with the stated purpose of this overlay district. Prior to approval, the Planning Commission and City Council shall make the following findings: 
A.  The proposal is consistent in substance and location with the development objectives of the General Plan and any adopted specific area plans. 
B.  The proposal will be compatible with other existing and planned development in the area. 
C.  The proposal meets or exceeds the City's Subdivision Design Expectations regarding site planning, architecture, landscaping, building materials and colors, and screening of mechanical equipment. 
D.  The proposal will result in a quality living environment and accommodate desired lifestyles. 
E.  The proposed project amenities including equestrian and pedestrian trails, bike paths, landscaped areas, entry features, decorative theme walls, parks, playgrounds, and other public or commonly owned open space and recreation facilities are adequate and appropriate for this development. 
F.  The type and quality of house products will be consistent with the intended character of the development. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.206 - Conformance. 
    All development within the PRD shall conform to the Development Plan, project narrative, and any stipulations as approved by the City Council. Any substantive modification shall require an amendment to the PRD. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 6.300 - MH-Mobile Home. 
6.301 - Purpose. 
    This district is intended to provide for and preserve mobile home subdivisions and mobile home park developments which are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. These developments shall provide adequate recreational, storage, and service facilities within the development. The district shall be in addition to and overlay any residential zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.302 - Required Approvals. 
    All uses are subject to either an approved subdivision plat in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance or Site Development Plan, and Design Review in accordance with Section 3.600 shall be required prior to development. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.303 - Occupancy of Mobile Homes and Vehicles Prohibited Except in Authorized Areas. 
    No person shall occupy any mobile home or recreational vehicle in the city except in a mobile home park or a mobile home subdivision, except as authorized otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.304 - Limitation on Parking or Storage of Mobile Homes or Recreational Vehicles. 
A.  No person shall park or store any mobile home on any lot or parcel of land which is situated outside of an improved mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. 
B.  Any recreational vehicle which is parked or stored shall not be used as permanent living quarters or for the operation of any business. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.305 - Development Standards. 
A.  Mobile Home Parks. 
1.  Minimum size of such mobile home park shall be ten (10) net acres. 
2.  The current setback requirements and spacing standards of this district shall be met prior to replacing mobile homes or travel trailers in an existing nonconforming park. No permits shall be issued without a scaled development plan on file showing existing improvements and locations of all units. 
3.  The minimum space size for a mobile home shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet; for a travel trailer or motor home, one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
4.  There shall be a distance of not less than twenty (20) feet between the front or rear of a mobile home or travel trailer and not less than five (5) feet between fixed canopies. 
5.  Travel trailers and motor homes shall constitute no more than fifteen (15) percent of total spaces. These spaces must be delineated on the approved development plan for each mobile home park. These spaces should be located together and not spread throughout the park. These spaces shall not be continuously occupied for more than six (6) months. 
6.  No mobile home, travel trailer, or accessory building shall be placed or built within fourteen (14) feet of the side of another mobile home, travel trailer, or accessory building. 
7.  There shall be a seven (7) foot setback from all interior drives, roadways, and exterior perimeters to the nearest edge of any mobile home or travel trailer. 
8.  No more than one (1) mobile home, travel trailer, or motor home shall be placed on each space. 
9.  Off-street parking for at least two (2) automobiles shall be provided in each space or on each lot or on a separate designated parking area within the mobile home park. 
10.  Interior private streets shall not be less than thirty (30) feet in width. 
11.  Screening shall be provided around the exterior of the mobile home park by a minimum six (6) foot masonry wall. 
12.  All mobile homes shall be skirted in a uniform manner. 
13.  No mobile home space shall be located within twenty (20) feet of a property line. Such area shall be maintained as a landscape buffer area which can be used for recreation or as part of a retention area. 
14.  A common area of five hundred (500) square feet for each rental space shall be provided and approved for recreation, laundry, and service purposes. 
15.  No boat, motor home, or travel trailer shall be permitted to be stored on any rental space. Such storage area shall be provided by the park at a ratio of fifty (50) square feet for each rental space. 
16.  Mobile home parks may include accessory storage buildings, office buildings, recreational facilities, laundry facilities, and other common facilities use provided for park residents. 
B.  Mobile Home Subdivision Development Standards. 
1.  Minimum size for mobile home subdivisions shall be ten (10) net acres. 
2.  Mobile home subdivision density, yard, area, and sign requirements shall be determined by the underlying residential district. 
3.  No more than one (1) mobile home shall be placed on any lot and no mobile home shall be used for anything other than a single residence dwelling. 
4.  All mobile homes shall be mounted and anchored to a continuous masonry foundation in accordance with approved standards. 
5.  No mobile home containing less than six hundred (600) square feet shall be used as a dwelling. 
6.  Approval of all mobile home subdivisions shall be subject to the provisions of the subdivision ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.309 - Landscaping and Screening. 
    See Section 7.200. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.310 - Signs. 
    See Section 7.100. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 6.400 - HP-Historic Preservation. 
6.401 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this ordinance is to support the identification, preservation, and enhancement of the city's significant historical, architectural, cultural, and archaeological resources in the interest of the welfare of the citizens of Glendale by: 
A.  Protecting, preserving, and enhancing the significant elements of the city's historical, architectural, cultural, and archaeological heritage; 
B.  Encouraging the identification and recognition of significant historic resources; 
C.  Encouraging the sensitive adaptation of historic properties to modern uses; 
D.  Assuring that new construction, additions, alterations, and demolitions to both historic and non-historic properties within Historic Preservation Districts are carried out in a manner which is not detrimental to the historic integrity of these districts; 
E.  Encouraging the identification and protection of prehistoric and historic archaeological resources; 
F.  Protecting and preserving those properties within the city which may not have popular appeal, but are valuable to the community in terms of tourism, education, neighborhood character and identity, and economic development; 
G.  Preserving and enhancing the city's attractiveness to potential home buyers, tourists, businesses wanting to relocate, and other visitors, thereby supporting and promoting commercial development and economic benefit to the city's economy; and 
H.  Encouraging the stabilization, rehabilitation, and conservation of the existing housing stock, including the prevention of needless demolition of structurally sound buildings in order to strengthen the city's neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.402 - Effect of Historic Preservation (HP) Zoning Designation. 
A.  The Historic Preservation District is an overlay zone. Permitted uses and development standards shall be regulated by the underlying zoning district. 
B.  The development standards for the underlying zoning district may be superseded by the design guidelines adopted at the time of the district designation. This includes, but is not limited to, the size, height, locations and number of signs, the location of off-street parking, required screening and landscaping, the height of fences and walls, and the number of required off-street parking and loading spaces. 
C.  When a building permit is sought from the City to demolish, alter, remodel, move, build, or otherwise develop or landscape property in a Historic Preservation District, issuance of the permit shall be deferred until after a Certificate of No Effect is issued by the Historic Preservation Officer or a Certificate of Appropriateness is obtained from the Historic Preservation Commission. 
D.  Plans showing the scope of the proposed work shall be submitted at the time of application for a Certificate of No Effect or a Certificate of Appropriateness. An approved plan shall be binding upon the applicant and their successors and assignees. No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure not in accordance with the plan, except that temporary facilities shall be permitted in conjunction with construction. No structure or other element specified on the plan shall be eliminated, altered, or provided in another manner, unless an amendment is approved in conjunction with the procedures for original approval. 
E.  Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair, including painting, of any structure in the Historic Preservation District, which does not alter or modify the historic character of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.403 - Certificate of No Effect. 
A.  All requests for building permits located within a Historic Preservation District shall be referred to the Historic Preservation Officer. 
B.  The Historic Preservation Officer shall issue a Certificate of No Effect if it is determined that: 
1.  The proposed work is minor and clearly within design guidelines adopted at the time of Historic Preservation District designation; and 
2.  The proposed work will not diminish, eliminate, or adversely impact the historic character of the subject property or its affect on the district. 
C.  Approval of a Certificate of No Effect authorizes the issuance of permits required by the City Building Codes. 
D.  If a Certificate of No Effect is not issued, a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.404 - Certificate of Appropriateness. 
A.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall review the application and shall conduct a public hearing within sixty (60) days of the filing of an application for a building permit. Notice of the application shall be posted on the property at least fifteen (15) days before the date set for the public hearing. The HP Commission shall either grant or deny the application, or grant it with stipulations. This application shall be deemed approved if the initial hearing is not held within sixty (60) days of the date of application. 
B.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall evaluate all proposals in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and the adopted design guidelines for the district. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be granted if the HP Commission determines that the proposed work: 
1.  Is compatible with the relevant historic, cultural, educational, or architectural qualities characteristic of the property; and 
2.  Does not diminish or adversely impact the integrity of the district; or 
3.  Qualifies for a Certificate of Economic Hardship. 
C.  Any person aggrieved by the Historic Preservation Commission's decision may, within seven (7) working days of this action appeal to the City Council. If appealed, the matter shall be set for a public hearing before the City Council. Notice of the hearing shall be sent to the applicant at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing and shall be posted on the property fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. 
D.  The City Council shall limit its review of the case to the record of the Historic Preservation Commission, as established by the staff report, any exhibits, minutes and/or transcripts, and any audio/visual tape of the proceedings. New testimony will not be accepted for consideration, however, each side may make a limited presentation on the evidence in the record of the HP Commission. Such presentation shall be limited to a maximum of five (5) minutes per side unless greater time is granted by the Mayor. The City Council will conduct its review in accordance with the evaluation criteria established by Subsection B of this section. Except as otherwise provided herein, City Council members who review written communications or engage in verbal communications which are not part of the HP Commission's record shall disclose any such communications during the appeal public hearing. City Council must make its decision within sixty (60) days of the filing of an appeal or the application is deemed approved. At this public hearing, the City Council may do one (1) of the following: 
1.  Affirm the decision of the Historic Preservation Commission. 
2.  Reverse the decision of the Historic Preservation Commission; or 
3.  Remand the application to the Historic Preservation Commission for reconsideration. 
E.  Approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness authorizes the issuance of permits required by the City's Building Code. A Certificate of Appropriateness expires one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.405 - Certificate of Economic Hardship. 
A.  A Certificate of Economic Hardship may be granted by the Historic Preservation Commission or by the City Council on appeal. Separate standards for obtaining a Certificate of Economic Hardship are established for investment or income producing and non-income producing properties. Non-income producing properties shall consist of owner occupied single-family dwellings and non-income producing institutional properties. 
B.  The basis to establish economic hardship for an income producing property shall be the inability of a property taken as a whole to obtain a reasonable rate of return in its present condition or if rehabilitated. 
C.  Economic hardship in regard to a non-income producing property shall be found when the property owner demonstrates that the property has no beneficial use as a single-family dwelling or for an institutional use in its present condition or if rehabilitated. 
D.  Demonstration of an economic hardship shall not be based on or include any of the following circumstances: 
1.  Willful or negligent acts by the owner; 
2.  Purchase of the property for substantially more than market value; 
3.  Failure to perform normal maintenance and repairs; 
4.  Failure to diligently solicit and retain tenants; 
5.  Failure to provide normal tenant improvements. 
E.  Demonstration of an economic hardship may be viewed in light of or include the ability and diligence of the property owner at the time of acquisition, to determine the potential historic significance or existing Historic Preservation District designation of the subject property. 
F.  In order to properly assess a request for Certificate of Economic Hardship, the Commission shall request and receive from the applicant all information it deems necessary. This may include, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of the building(s) on the property, their suitability for rehabilitation, and possible new uses for the property; 
2.  The assessed value of the land and improvements according to the two (2) most recent assessments; 
3.  The real estate taxes paid during the previous two (2) years; 
4.  All appraisals obtained by the owner or applicant in connection with his purchase, financing, or ownership of the property; 
5.  Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any; 
6.  All building and fire code violations which have been listed on the property for the last two (2) years. 
7.  Any federal, state, or local citation(s) which have determined the building to be a nuisance under applicable law; and 
8.  If the property is income-producing: 
a.  Annual gross income from the property for the previous two (2) years; 
b.  Itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two (2) years; and 
c.  Annual cash flow, if any, for the previous two (2) years. 
G.  The procedures for obtaining a Certificate of Economic Hardship shall be the same for obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
H.  If a Certificate of Economic Hardship is issued, a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be granted. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.406 - Demolition and Moving of Buildings and Structures. 
    It is the intent of this ordinance to preserve the historic and architectural resources within Historic Preservation Districts. However, it is recognized that there can be circumstances beyond the control of a property owner which may result in the necessary demolition of a structure within an Historic Preservation District. These circumstances include a building which constitutes an imminent safety hazard, which involves a resource whose loss does not diminish or adversely effect the integrity of the district, or which imposes an economic hardship on its owners. 
A.  No permit shall be issued to move or demolish all or any part of a house, building, or other structure in a Historic Preservation District without approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness as established in Section 6.404 of this ordinance. 
B.  A request for a demolition permit shall be exempt from these requirements if the Building Safety Director determines, according to the criteria set forth in the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, that the building is an imminent safety hazard to the public and that necessary repairs would be impractical. The Building Safety Director shall first notify the Historic Preservation Officer in writing before issuing the demolition permit. 
C.  If demolition approval is not granted, then no demolition permit shall be issued for a period of one (1) year, unless a subsequent demolition approval has been requested and granted. A subsequent demolition application may be made and granted for a property which has previously been the subject of a one (1) year demolition permit denial if new facts or circumstances can be presented in support of the application. 
D.  Upon denial of a demolition approval, the Historic Preservation Officer shall contact the property owner to determine what assistance might be available to place the property into productive use. If a feasible rehabilitation or use is not found for the property, the Historic Preservation Officer shall investigate methods of private or public acquisition of the property. 
E.  If demolition approval is granted on any basis other than that of an imminent hazard, economic hardship, or upon expiration of a restraint of demolition, a demolition permit shall not be issued until a redevelopment or reuse plan for the property has received a Certificate of Appropriateness. Vacant land or non-use shall not be considered responsive to this requirement. A redevelopment or reuse plan shall consist of a site plan illustrating building locations, parking, walls, and landscaping, as well as elevations showing roof lines, doors, windows, and other architectural details. A redevelopment or reuse plan shall also meet the requirements of Design Plan Review as required by the underlying zoning district. 
F.  A demolition approval may be conditioned on stipulations which provide for rights of access to the property for the purposes of documentation or for agreed upon removal of artifacts. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 6.500 - Special Use District. 
6.501 - Purpose. 
    This overlay district is intended to accommodate certain land uses which are necessary in urban development, but do not conform to traditional zoning district permitted use classifications. The district allows for the location of these special uses through a district which imposes regulations and specific uses over a defined geographic area. The special use district allows permitted uses to be evaluated and properly located or prohibited to provide appropriate locations for such uses so that surrounding properties will not be adversely impacted by such uses. Specific performance requirements will be considered in the evaluation and establishment of any special use. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.502 - Permitted Uses. 
    All uses permitted within the special use district are subject to the approval of a development plan for the area of the special use. All requirements and standards must be specifically defined and included in the approval of the special use. Any uses or requirements of the previous zoning district are superseded in the approval of the special use. The following uses are permitted in the special use district: 
A.  Cemeteries which may include related uses, such as mausoleums, columbariums, crematoriums, mortuaries, and customary accessory uses. 
B.  Public utility treatment and generating plants, including nuclear, electrical, wastewater, major electrical substations, and related ancillary offices. 
C.  Helistops or heliports. 
D.  Golf courses, including customary accessory uses. 
E.  Outdoor commercial recreational facilities, including, but not limited to, baseball and batting cages, softball complexes, outdoor arenas, sports stadiums, and amphitheaters. 
F.  Sand and gravel extraction, crushing, and/or processing. 
G.  Resort hotels. 
H.  Radio and television broadcasting towers. 
I.  Recreational vehicle storage facilities and related uses including on-site manager living quarters. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2002, § 4, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 2545, § 1, 2-13-07) 
6.503 - Minimum Area Requirements. 
    Minimum requirements for special uses included in this district are: 
A.  Cemeteries, ten (10) acres. 
B.  Outdoor recreational facilities, three (3) acres or more. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.504 - Application Procedures. 
A.  Applications for establishing a special use shall be processed in the same manner as that for other zoning amendments and shall be subject to the same notice and public hearing procedures, application and fee requirements, conditions of approval, and other provisions applicable to zoning amendments. An application for a special use shall be accompanied by a development plan including the following information: 
1.  Legal description of the parcel. 
2.  Legal description of the limits of the proposed special use. 
3.  An area map showing adjacent property owners and location of all buildings and existing uses within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the parcel. 
4.  The proposed circulation system for the site and its relationship to existing or planned streets in the adjacent area. 
5.  Description of any environmental impacts of the proposed use, including air pollution, noise, or impacts on the public infrastructure system of the surrounding area. 
6.  Hours of operation. 
7.  The preliminary development plan shall include, at a minimum, the following site characteristics: 
a.  Heights of all structures. 
b.  Building setbacks to any street and to other buildings on the site. 
c.  Proposed parking areas, location and number of spaces. 
d.  Storm water retention, location, size, and depth. 
e.  Preliminary landscape concepts. 
f.  Lot coverage. 
g.  Pedestrian circulation system. 
h.  Location, type, and height of all lighting. 
i.  Location, height, and materials for all screen walls. 
j.  Location, height, and size of any proposed signage. 
k.  Phases of development. 
l.  Elevations of all proposed structures. 
8.  Narrative report which describes the nature and operation of the proposed use. 
B.  The special use development plan shall be reviewed by the Community Development Group for consistency with the intent of this district. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review the preliminary development plan and the City Council may approve it if they find the proposed use is not detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood nor has negative impacts on the public health, safety and general welfare of the neighborhood. The approval will include all necessary safeguards for provision and protection of adjacent property in relationship to the permitted uses. 
C.  Amendments to the special use shall be processed in the same manner as the initial application. 
D.  Design Review is required as outlined in Section 3.600 and shall be completed concurrent with the application process. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.505 - Required Findings. 
    No special use shall be granted unless the following conditions exist: 
A.  The use shall be compatible with existing and planned land uses and shall not be detrimental due to: 
1.  Increased automobile traffic or impact on the circulation system of the adjacent neighborhood; 
2.  Excessive noise or light generated from within the site; 
3.  Excessive scale or height in relationship to surrounding properties; 
4.  Hours of operation; 
5.  Inadequate parcel size to provide appropriate buffers or mitigation measures to surrounding properties; 
6.  Disruption of the development character of the adjacent properties. 
B.  The use is consistent with the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
6.506 - Violation of Conditions. 
    Violation of the conditions of approval shall serve as basis for revocation of the special use district. In such event, the special use zoning approval shall be revocable by the City Council on recommendation by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 6.600 - SCO-Senior Citizen Overlay 
6.601 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Senior Citizen Overlay District ("SCO") is to provide for a residential community conducive to the lifestyle and sensitive to the particular needs of senior citizens, retirees and persons of advanced age. This District is intended to be utilized for existing and proposed planned residential developments that were/will be developed, advertised and sold and rented under age specific restrictions for persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older in compliance with the provisions of the Arizona Fair Housing Act, the Federal Fair Housing Act, and the Housing for Older Persons Act of 1995 as they may hereafter be amended ("Fair Housing Acts"). 
(Ord. No. 1896, § 2) 
6.602 - Application Procedures and Requirements. 
(a)  SCO may be established as an overlay zoning district in any of the Rural Residential (RR), Suburban Residential (SR), Urban Residential (R-I), Multiple Residence (R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5) or Planned Area Development (PAD) zoning districts. 
(b)  All applications to establish SCO shall be submitted and processed pursuant to the requirements and procedures in Section 3.800; except that applicants are limited to the property owner(s) or Homeowners' Association. The procedures for amending an approved SCO shall be the same as for the original approval. Applications to remove the SCO for any particular development may be initiated by the City Council or Planning Commission or any other applicant as authorized by Section 3.800. 
(c)  An application for SCO will be considered only after the submission of the following materials: 
(1)  Submission of either of the following: 
(A)  A petition signed by one hundred percent (100%) of the owners of property within the proposed district agreeing to the SCO District; or 
(B)  Documentation for existing developments that all of the property within the proposed district has been, since the beginning of the project, and will continue to be developed, advertised and sold or rented under age specific restrictions as required by the Fair Housing Acts. Documentation for new developments that all of the property within the proposed District is and will continue to be developed, advertised and sold or rented under age specific restrictions as required by the Fair Housing Acts and the SCO District requirements. This documentation may include items such as advertisements, sales agreements, lease agreements and a subdivision's deed restrictions (CC&R's Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions). 
(2)  Submission of all of the following: 
(A)  Documentation that at the time of application, at least eighty (80) percent of the dwelling units are occupied by at least one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit, regardless of any legal, nonconforming rights that may exist, as required by the Fair Housing Acts. Newly constructed housing developments or facilities need not comply with this requirement until twenty-five (25) percent of the units in the development or facility are occupied. This documentation of occupancy shall be by reliable surveys and affidavits which shall be admissible in administrative and judicial proceedings for the purposes of such verification; and 
(B)  Documentation for existing developments that a Homeowners' Association or management agency or association publishes and adheres to policies that demonstrate the intent of the Fair Housing Acts. Documentation for new developments that a Homeowners' Association or management agency or association has prepared published documents which will be adhered to that demonstrate the intent of the Fair Housing Acts; and 
(C)  Documentation for existing developments that a Homeowners' Association or management agency or association is actively enforcing age restrictive deed restrictions or lease agreements on other types of residential developments within the proposed district that are in conformance with the Fair Housing Acts and SCO District requirements. Documentation for new developments that a Homeowners' Association or management agency or association will be actively enforcing age restrictive deed restrictions or lease agreements on other types of residential developments within the proposed district that are in conformance with the Fair Housing Acts and SCO District requirements; and 
(D)  A certification by the applicant(s) or authorized representative of the applicant(s) that SCO is not being applied for an underlying reason that would violate or circumvent the Fair Housing Acts or the Federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and that, to the best of the signer's information and belief, the development meets or at completion will meet the requirements for exemption for housing for older persons under the Fair Housing Acts. 
(d)  On residential communities which meet the intent of the SCO as outlined in 6.601, the SCO may be established as follows: 
(1)  For existing developments the SCO may be applied only to entire subdivisions, mobile home parks, or multiple residence communities with defined boundaries. No minimum acreage is required. The SCO District precludes exception parcels. 
(2)  For new developments SCO may be established only on parcels of twenty (20) or more contiguous acres in the Rural Residential (RR), Suburban Residential (SR), Urban Residential (R-1) and Planned Area Development (PAD) Zoning Districts. New SCO developments in the Multiple Residence (R-5, R-4, R-3, R-2) Zoning Districts may only be established on parcels of ten (10) or more contiguous acres. SCO Zoning may only be applied to entire subdivisions, mobile home parks, or multiple residence communities with defined boundaries. The SCO District precludes exception parcels. 
(Ord. No. 1896, § 2; Ord. No. 2115, § 1, 1-11-2000) 
6.603 - Permitted Uses. 
(a)  Land use shall conform to the uses permitted in the underlying zoning district. 
(b)  Any persons residing in any dwelling unit for a period of time exceeding one hundred twenty (120) days in any twelve (12) month period shall be considered a resident of the SCO District. 
(c)  (1)  Each dwelling unit, if occupied, shall be occupied by at least one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
(2)  No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall reside in any dwelling unit for a period of time exceeding one hundred twenty (120) days in aggregate in a twelve (12) month period which starts the first day of the documented occupancy by such person. 
(Ord. No. 1896, § 2) 
6.604 - Supplementary Provisions. 
(a)  Except as to the matters specifically identified in this Section, the development standards and all other provisions and regulations of the underlying zoning district shall apply to property within the SCO District. 
(b)  Developments within the SCO District must comply with the mandates of the Fair Housing Acts as they pertain to housing for persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older and other applicable provisions. 
(c)  A General Plan Amendment or Specific Plan is required prior to approval of SCO on developments of more than 160 contiguous acres to address issues of provision of adequate and appropriate City services, any special or different infrastructure and public facility needs, and impacts of the development. 
(Ord. No. 1896, § 2) 
6.605 - Required Findings. 
    All SCO applications shall be reviewed for conformance with the stated purpose of this overlay district. Prior to approval, the Planning Commission and City Council shall make the following findings: 
(a)  The proposal is in compliance with the intent of SCO District to create a community for persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 
(b)  The proposal will not adversely impact other existing and/or planned land uses, infrastructure or public facilities, or the planning or development of school sites in the vicinity. 
(c)  The proposal will provide the same infrastructure standards (such as street widths, sidewalks, and utilities) and land use amenities (such as parks, employment and retailing) as normally planned for in non-SCO developments. 
(Ord. No. 1896, § 2) 
6.606 - Administration. 
(a)  Enforcement. 
Enforcement of the SCO District shall occur only when reasonable efforts have been undertaken by a Homeowners' Association or management agency or association to enforce a subdivision's deed restrictions (CC&R's-Conditions, Covenants, and Restrictions) or lease agreements on other types of residential developments and certification has been submitted to the City by a Homeowners' Association or management agency or association that the development still complies with the Fair Housing Acts. Reasonable efforts by a Homeowners' Association or management agency or association to enforce a subdivision's deed restrictions or lease agreements shall be documented as follows: 
(1)  Registered letter of written notification to the resident(s) and owner(s), if different, of the unit(s) not in compliance stating the reasons for non-compliance with the subdivision's deed restrictions or lease agreements on other types of residential developments and a copy of the deed restrictions or lease agreements. 
(2)  Records showing repeated efforts to enforce a subdivision's deed restrictions or lease agreement on other types of residential developments against a non-complying resident or owner. 
(b)  The burden of proof and the provision of evidence supporting claims of exemption from familial status requirements of the Fair Housing Acts shall be the responsibility of the qualifying residential development. The City of Glendale, in granting SCO, does not assume responsibility for gathering initial qualifying data, nor for maintaining data that may be required to prove that the qualifying residential development meets requirements of the Fair Housing Acts on any date that an allegation of discrimination in housing is brought forth. It shall be the responsibility of the qualifying residential development to prove that the requirements of the Fair Housing Acts were met on any given date. Information provided to the City by the Homeowners' Association or management agency or associations shall include: 
(1)  Verification of occupancy by reliable surveys and affidavits which shall be admissible in administrative and judicial proceedings for the purposes of such verification including the name and birth date of each occupant and the corresponding address of each unit within the SCO development. 
(2)  From the list of occupants required in 6.606 b.1., provide a list of non-conforming uses in the SCO development from the effective date of SCO approval including the date the nonconforming use was established. 
(3)  Information necessary to prove that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the Fair Housing Acts including documentation that policies are published and adhered to that demonstrate the intent of the Fair Housing Acts. 
(c)  At all times, at least eighty (80) percent of the dwelling units shall be occupied by at least one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit, regardless of any legal, nonconforming rights that may exist, as required by the Fair Housing Acts. 
(d)  Revocation. 
Failure to comply with the conditions, stipulations or terms of the approval of an existing SCOT District, is a violation of this Ordinance and will be enforced in accordance with Section 3.800. 
(Ord. No. 1896, § 2) 
Section 6.700 - CSO-Comprehensive Sign Overlay 
6.701 - Purpose. 
    This overlay district is intended to provide flexibility for signage in existing centers by allowing alternative sign standards through innovative design. The alternative sign program should improve identification of both the shopping center and its tenants, while encouraging superior design. The district provisions apply to all types of permanent signs. 
(Ord. No. 1935, § 2, 4-22-97) 
6.702 - Application Procedures And Requirements. 
A.  This overlay district may be applied to multi-tenant buildings and shopping centers in the SC, C-1, C-2, and C-3 zoning districts. 
B.  All applications shall be submitted and processed pursuant to the requirements and procedures in section 3.800. The procedures for amending an approved CSO shall be the same as the original approval. 
C.  An application shall be accompanied by a scaled site plan which includes the following information: 
1.  Legal description of the parcel. 
2.  Legal description of the boundaries of the proposed comprehensive sign overlay. 
3.  Circulation system for the site including driveways. 
4.  Height of all structures. 
5.  Building setbacks to any street and to other buildings on the site. 
6.  Existing and proposed landscape concepts that would impact sign location and visibility. 
7.  Location, height, area, materials, and colors for existing and proposed signage. 
8.  Elevations of all proposed signs. 
9.  Elevations of all buildings on the site. 
D.  An application shall also include a narrative report which addresses the design approach, site factors, proposed signage enhancements, list of how nonconforming existing signs would be reduced, and how the application meets the required findings. 
(Ord. No. 1935, § 2, 4-22-97) 
6.703 - Required Findings. 
    The planning commission and city council shall make the following findings before approving a CSO district: 
A.  The proposal will enhance the shopping center's signage and result in improved identification of tenants within the center. 
B.  The proposal reduces the non-conformity of existing signs while improving the design quality of the signage for the project. 
C.  The proposal is consistent with the applicable sections of the city's multi-tenant freestanding identification sign design guidelines. 
D.  The height, location, materials, color, texture, area, setbacks, and mass of the signs will enhance the character of the development. 
E.  The design and scale of the comprehensive sign package will not have any adverse effect on adjacent properties or the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 1935, § 2, 4-22-97) 
Section 6.800 - Glendale Centerline Overlay District. 
6.801 - Purpose. 
    The Overlay District provides an alternate set of development requirements to encourage development and redevelopment within the Glendale Centerline. 
    The intent is to facilitate private business investment, job creation, and the development of shopping and recreational opportunities in the Glendale Centerline. The Overlay District will facilitate a development review process that supports economic development initiatives, creates flexible development standards to support development or redevelopment of small and irregular parcels of land; will employ strategies to balance the protection of existing neighborhoods with new development; recognizes that distinct districts may be identified in the Glendale Centerline and provides the flexibility to implement unique development standards in each district; allows certain land uses to support investment and opportunity; and, prohibits certain land uses which may otherwise inhibit investment and improvement of individual properties. 
    Because it is the intent of the Overlay District to provide an alternative set of land uses and development standards in addition to the land uses and development standards within the existing zoning districts, the land uses and development standards shall serve only as an alternative to the existing land uses and development standards and shall not be combined with any land uses or development standards in the existing zoning district. 
    At the pre-application meeting with the City's Development Review Team, the property owner can decide to meet all conditions of the property's existing zoning, or choose to meet all conditions of the property's Overlay District. Should development of property occur under the Overlay District any and all requirement of the underlying zoning district are superseded in the approval of development according to the Overlay District. No combination of existing zoning and Overlay District land uses and/or development standards shall be permitted. It is important to remember that the property owner may continue to utilize the existing zoning within the Glendale Centerline boundaries unless the Overlay District is selected. 
    The Overlay District is intended to be applied only in the Glendale Centerline, and as such is not appropriate to be approved outside of the geographic area bounded by Myrtle Avenue on the north, 43rd Avenue on the east, Ocotillo Road on the south, and 67th Avenue on the west. 
(Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 6-14-11) 
6.802 - Distinct character areas within the Glendale Centerline Overlay District. 
    Within the Glendale Centerline Overlay District there are four character areas, each with their own unique development standards: 
Midtown (43rd to 51st Avenues) Beet Sugar (51st to 55th Avenues) Historic Downtown (55th to 59th Avenues) Market (59th to 67th Avenues)  
6.803 - Permitted uses. 
Land Use Distinct Character Areas within the 
Glendale Centerline Overlay Districts Midtown 
43rd-51st 
Avenues Beet Sugar 
51st-55th 
Avenues Historic 
Downtown 
55th-59th 
Avenues Market 
59th-67th 
Avenues RESIDENTIAL AND LODGING Bed and Breakfast Establishments X P P P Residential Care Facilities (includes congregate care, nursing homes and assisted living facilities by geographic area) P P X P Hotels including conference and convention facilities. A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for the use within 500 feet of residentially zoned property P P P P Residential above the first floor in conjunction with non-residential uses on the ground floor P P P P Residential on the ground floor P P P P GENERAL RETAIL New merchandise sold in department stores, drugstores, pharmacies, and retail establishments selling toys, flowers, gifts, stationary, jewelry, leather, apparel, shoes (including repair), china, glassware, pottery, crafts, cigars, yard goods, hardware/paint/glass/tools/home improvement, pets, hobbies, art supplies, video sales and rental, music (including incidental recording, instruction, and instrument repair), books/magazines/newspapers, sporting goods, bicycles, medical equipment sales/rentals and health supplies, cameras, electronics, office and business supplies and equipment repair, household appliance sales and service, and other similar retail goods and services P P P P Previously owned merchandise and goods including antiques, collectibles, coins, stamps, and consignment stores, excluding pawn shops, second hand, and thrift stores P P P P Automotive - retail sales of previously owned automobiles, including boats, motorcycles, and recreational vehicle dealerships X X X X Automotive - retail sales of new automobiles, including boats, motorcycles, and recreational vehicle dealerships X X X X Automotive - minor repair. All repairs shall be within a fully enclosed permanent building S S X S Automotive supply stores, without incidental installation of parts P P X P Adult Businesses X X X X EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS All types of eating establishments providing meal service from an on-site operating commercial-grade kitchen, and/or dessert service from an on-site commercial-grade freezer/refrigerator facility including beer and wine tasting, with or without incidental sales of alcohol including micro-breweries, outdoor dining, but with no drive-thru including incidental reception room space and off-site catering. Live entertainment, including outdoor amplification, and/or dancing is permitted as an accessory use, subject to Conditional Use Permit (CUP) approval if the site is located within 500 feet of a residentially zoned property. During the CUP process, the city will work with the applicant on mitigation measures and enforcement protocol S S S S FOOD AND LIQUOR SALES Specialty foods, including imported and/or unique food products, produce, candy, baked goods, meat, etc., specialty liquor sales involving off-sale unique brands of beer, wine, and distilled spirits (establishments exceeding 10,000 square feet of sales area require a Conditional Use Permit) P P P P GENERAL OFFICE, FINANCIAL AND HEALTH OR PERSONAL SERVICES Administrative, business and professional offices, secretarial services, realtors/real estate offices, consulting services, travel and ticket agencies P P P P Financial institutions, banks, savings and loans, credit unions (excluding deferred presentment companies), travel bureaus, visitor and information center, government offices and services, police and fire stations P P P P Medical/dental/optical offices, clinics and laboratories, licensed holistic health care establishments (excluding massage establishments as primary uses), veterinary services (excluding animal boarding or outdoor pens, runs or cages) P P P P Personal Services P P P P Tattoo Parlors X X X X Halfway Houses X X X X Hookah Lounges X X X X Hospitals U U U U Emergency Medical Care - 24 Hour Operations P P P P SPECIALTY SERVICES Photographic, developing and photocopy services, watch, clock, and small appliance repair, locksmiths P P P P Music Recording/Practice Studios P P P P Custom Furniture/Upholstery and Repair P P P P Picture Framing Shops P P P P Postal services including parcel delivery (public or private) P P P P Dry cleaning and laundering services without on-site cleaning P P P P Home Occupations (Class I) P P P P ENTERTAINMENT, RECREATIONAL AND CULTURAL Dance and Martial Arts Studios P P P P Athletic Clubs, Health Studios, Yoga P P P P Galleries and studios pertaining to artists, craft workers, and photographers (including incidental developing and printing), libraries, museums, etc. including incidental retail sale of merchandise pertaining to the primary use P P P P Entertainment establishments (including internet cafes) with incidental sale of food or alcohol. Live entertainment, including outdoor amplification, and/or dancing is permitted as an accessory use, subject to Conditional Use Permit (CUP) approval if the site is located within 500 feet of a residentially zoned property. During the CUP process, the city will work with the applicant on mitigation measures and enforcement protocol S S S S Parks and General Recreation P P P P Public assembly, including amphitheaters, auditoriums, and exhibition halls. A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for the use within 500 feet of residentially zoned property P P P P Indoor recreation and sports facilities. A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for the use within 500 feet of residentially zoned property P P P P Theater, live and motion picture. A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for the use within 500 feet of residentially zoned property P P P P SOCIAL, PROFESSIONAL, AND RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS Churches, synagogues, temples, missions, religious reading rooms, and other religious activities P P P P Social, professional and youth organizations that conduct group and/or membership meetings on the premises, including political, veterans, civic, labor, charitable, and similar organizations P P P P EDUCATION Arts and Crafts Schools and Colleges S S S S Business Colleges and Professional Schools (excluding Vocational Schools) S S S S Vocational Schools S S S S Daycare Facilities, In Home S S S S Day Care Facilities, Commercial P P P P Public or private schools for primary and/or secondary education X X X X COMMUNICATION FACILITIES Broadcasting Studios, Radio, Television, Internet P P P P Communication Towers U U U U Alternative tower structures. Also subject to Sections 7.506 and 7.600 P P P P TRANSPORTATION AND MISCELLANEOUS SERVICES Car rental services, excluding maintenance or repair P P P P Parking lots and structures (municipal) P P P P Parking lots and structures (commercial with fees) P P P P Taxicab stands (incidental feature integrated into primary use) P P P P Public transit stations and stops P P P P Other uses that meet the intent of the Zoning Ordinance as approved by the Planning Director P P P P  
Key: P = Permitted, S = Subject to Conditions, U = Conditional Use Permit, A = Accessory Use, X = Prohibited 
6.804 - Development standards. 
Character 
Areas Minimum 
Lot Area 1 Maximum 
Lot Area Minimum Setbacks 2 Building Height 3 DU/AC FAR Front Rear Side Street Midtown 
43rd to 51st 
Avenues N/A N/A 0 0 0 0 70 50 2 4 Beet Sugar 
51st to 55th 
Avenues N/A N/A 0 0 0 0 50 25 2 5 Historic 
Downtown 
55th to 59th 
Avenues N/A N/A 0 0 0 0 60 40 2 6 Market 
59th to 67th 
Avenues N/A N/A 0 0 0 0 50 25 2 7  
1 No minimum lot size is required, but each lot must have a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet of frontage on a public street. For the purpose of this section, an alley is not considered a public street. 
2 30 feet to property within a residential zoning district, which includes Agricultural, Single Residence, Mixed Residence, or Multiple Residence, or a detached single-family dwelling unit. 
3 Maximum height of accessory structures is 15 feet. 
4 A maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of 4.0 can be achieved through performance incentives given for the following amenities: public art, open space, LEED certified buildings, and shared parking at the rate of .50 additional FAR for each amenity provided. 
5 A maximum FAR of 4.0 can be achieved through performance incentives given for the following amenities: public art, open space, LEED certified buildings, and shared parking at the rate of .50 additional FAR for each amenity provided. 
6 A maximum FAR of 4.0 can be achieved through performance incentives given for the following amenities: public art, open space, LEED certified buildings, adaptive reuse, and compatible architecture at the rate of .50 additional FAR for each amenity provided. 
7 A maximum FAR of 4.0 can be achieved through performance incentives given for the following amenities: public art, open space, LEED certified buildings, and shared parking at the rate of .50 additional FAR for each amenity provided. 
(Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 6-14-11) 
6.805 - Performance Standards. 
    The following standards and restrictions shall apply to all properties within this district: 
A.  Unless otherwise prohibited or regulated by any other ordinance, provision, agreement, or conditional use permit, outdoor displays are permitted subject to the following restrictions and may be required to be screened from public view: 
1.  All products displayed outdoors shall be customary, accessory, and incidental to those sold and displayed in a primary business being conducted in a permanent building on the property. 
2.  Outdoor displays shall not interfere with pedestrian access-ways, fire lanes, parking spaces, driveways, landscape areas, or traffic visibility at driveway entries and street intersections. 
3.  All pedestrian access-ways must maintain the minimum dimensions required by the International Building Code (IBC). 
4.  Items shall not obstruct the normal ingress and egress, including handicapped access, from the business or any other property. 
5.  Hours of daily operations shall be limited to the normal business hours of the primary business. 
B.  All sales transactions and service activities shall be within an enclosed permanent building on the property, except parking lots. 
C.  There shall be no manufacturing, compounding, processing, or treatment of products, except as otherwise permitted, and other than that which are clearly incidental to a retail store or business. 
D.  Outdoor Sidewalk Cafes. 
1.  Purpose. It is the policy of the City to encourage the establishment of outdoor sidewalk cafes on private property and within public rights-of-way. 
2.  Outdoor sidewalk cafes are permitted on any public right-of-way within the Overlay District upon application and issuance of any required permits. 
3.  Standards. 
a.  Outdoor sidewalk cafes must not obstruct sidewalk pedestrian traffic or create public health and safety hazards. All sidewalks must maintain the minimum dimensions required by the International Building Code (IBC). 
b.  Outdoor sidewalk cafes may be open, partially covered, or enclosed by means of umbrellas, awnings, canopies, or similar protective structure subject to the requirements found in the IBC. 
d.  Outdoor sidewalk cafes must be used only as seating areas. Storage, kitchen, or restroom uses are not allowed. The seating must be movable. 
e.  All outdoor sidewalk cafes must be level with the sidewalk, and handicap accessible. 
f.  Decorative/accent lighting may be incorporated into the outdoor cafe structure, awning, canopy, etc., and must meet all Glendale City Code requirements. 
E.  Any change to the exterior color of the building shall be subject to Design Review approval. 
(Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 6-14-11) 
6.806 - Parking. 
A.  Due to the pedestrian nature of the Glendale Centerline Overlay District, there are no off-street parking requirements in the Beet Sugar and Historic Downtown character areas for businesses located within this zoning district when development is in conformance with the Glendale Centerline Overlay District rather than the underlying zoning district. 
B.  Parking Space Dimension. 
All parking spaces shall be striped with a 10 foot by 20 foot dimension. Handicapped parking spaces shall meet all Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards, as may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 6-14-11) 
6.807 - Signs. 
    Refer to Section 7.100. 
(Ord. No. 2773, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Section 6.900 - Scenic Corridor. 
6.901 - Purpose. 
    The Scenic Corridor seeks to protect view corridors, preserve existing natural areas, washes, rivers, creeks, desert, hills and mountains. The Scenic Corridor prohibits Billboard Signs and Digital Billboard Signs. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 3, 2-23-16) 
6.902 - Loop 101 Scenic Corridor. 
A.  Boundaries: 
1.  Both sides of that portion of the Loop 101 (Agua Fria Freeway) located between 51st Avenue and Bell Road. The Scenic Corridor extends 1/4 -mile on both sides of the freeway. This distance is measured from the freeway right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 3, 2-23-16) 
6.903 - Permitted Land Uses. 
A.  Land use shall conform to the uses permitted in the underlying zoning district, except that Billboard Signs and Digital Billboard Signs are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2976, § 3, 2-23-16) 
Section 6.950 - Sonorita Community Overlay District. 
6.951 - Intent and Applicability. 
A.  Intent. It is the intent of the Sonorita Community Overlay District to acknowledge the historical residential use in the area, promote the continuance and limited expansion of single-family residential uses by encouraging the maintenance and improvement of the residential environment, protecting and improving the vitality of the community. The Overlay District encourages continued residential uses in the community. 
It is also the intent to facilitate single-family residential redevelopment in the Sonorita community. The Sonorita Community Overlay District will facilitate a development review process which encourages redevelopment and residential additions; will employ strategies to balance the protection of the existing community with new development; provides flexibility to implement unique development standards in the community; allows certain land uses to support investment and opportunity. 
It is the intent of the Sonorita Community Overlay District to permit residential uses and establish residential development standards in addition to the existing permitted uses and development standards within the existing zoning district. 
The Sonorita Community Overlay District does not hinder a property owner's ability to utilize existing zoning. 
B.  Applicability. The Sonorita Community Overlay District will apply only to the geographic area bounded by Grand Avenue on the north and east, Maryland Avenue on the south, and 59 th Avenue on the west. 
(Ord. No. O18-85, § 1, 12-11-18) 
6.952 - Boundaries. 
    The Sonorita Community Overlay District is bounded by Grand Avenue on the north and east, Maryland Avenue on the south, and 59 th Avenue on the west which is zoned M-1 (Light Industrial). 
(Ord. No. O18-85, § 1, 12-11-18) 
6.953 - Existing Zoning. 
    The existing zoning in the Sonorita Community Overlay District is M-1 (Light Industrial, Sec. 5.840). The Sonorita Community Overlay District affirms that existing zoning and in no way limits a property owner from utilizing the uses and standards associated with the M-1 District. 
(Ord. No. O18-85, § 1, 12-11-18) 
6.954 - Permitted uses. 
A.  An existing detached single-family home which is the only dwelling unit on the lot, parcel, or parcels it is constructed on. 
(Ord. No. O18-85, § 1, 12-11-18) 
6.955 - Uses Subject to Conditions for Single-Family Homes. 
A.  Adult Care Homes, Juvenile Group Care Homes and Group Homes for the disabled, subject to administrative review as described in Sections 7.501 and 7.502. 
B.  Home Occupations (Class I): See Section 7.304. 
(Ord. No. O18-85, § 1, 12-11-18) 
6.956 - Accessory Uses for Single-Family Homes. 
    Uses which are customary and incidental to the principal use of the property. All accessory uses are subject to Section 7.300. 
A.  Fences and walls. 
1.  Front yard: Maximum height - three (3) feet 
2.  Side or rear yard: Maximum height - six (6) feet, except eight (8) feet when abutting an arterial street. 
B.  Garage or enclosed storage. 
C.  Swimming pool. 
D.  Satellite earth station. 
E.  Amateur radio tower. 
F.  Home Occupation (Class I); see Section 7.304. 
G.  Yard sales, subject to Section 7.305. 
H.  Household pets. 
(Ord. No. O18-85, § 1, 12-11-18) 
6.957 - Development Standards for Single-Family Homes. 
A.  Minimum Net Lot Area - 6,000 square feet 
B.  Minimum Lot Width - 50 feet 
C.  Minimum Lot Depth - 80 feet 
D.  Minimum Setback 
a.  Front - 15 feet to livable, 20 feet to garage or carport 
b.  Rear - 10 feet 
c.  Side - 3 feet and 3 feet 
d.  Street Side - 3 feet 
E.  Maximum Structure Height - 30 feet 
F.  Maximum Percentage Lot Coverage - 80 percent 
(Ord. No. O18-85, § 1, 12-11-18) 
6.958 - Parking for Single-Family Homes. 
A.  Due to the pedestrian nature of the Sonorita Community Overlay District, there are no off-street parking requirements for single-family homes in the Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. O18-85, § 1, 12-11-18) 
6.959 - Prohibited uses. 
A.  No new single-family homes will be permitted to be built in the Sonorita Community Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. O18-85, § 1, 12-11-18) 
ARTICLE 7. - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Section 7.100 - Signs. 
7.101 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to regulate the number, type, location, physical dimensions, and design of signs within the City of Glendale in order to protect the public interest and achieve community objectives as follows: 
A.  To balance public and private objectives by allowing adequate signage for business identification. 
B.  To promote the free flow of traffic and protect pedestrians and motorists from injury and property damage which may be caused by cluttered, distracting, and illegible signage. 
C.  To prevent property damage and personal injury resulting from signs which are improperly constructed or poorly maintained. 
D.  To promote the use of signs which are well designed, of appropriate scale, and integrated with surrounding buildings and landscape in order to meet the community's desire for quality development. 
E.  To protect property values, the local economy, and the quality of life by preserving and enhancing the appearance of the streetscape which affects the image of the City of Glendale. 
F.  Billboard Signs and Digital Billboard Signs are prohibited on property located within the Scenic Corridor. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2976, § 4, 2-23-16) 
7.102 - General Provisions. 
    The regulations, requirements, and provisions set forth in this section shall apply to all signs erected, placed, or constructed within the city. 
A.  All signs shall comply with the unobstructed view easement requirements of the City of Glendale, Design Guidelines for Site Development and Infrastructure Construction. 
B.  All signs shall be structurally designed, constructed, erected, and maintained in accordance with all applicable provisions and requirements of the City of Glendale Building Codes. 
C.  Signs shall not be located in a manner which interferes with pedestrian travel or poses a hazard to pedestrians. 
D.  All signs and sign structures, conforming and nonconforming, shall be maintained in good order, repair, and appearance at all times so as not to constitute a danger or hazard to the public safety or create a visual blight. If the Building Safety Director determines any sign or sign structure to be in an unsafe or unsightly condition, he shall immediately notify, in writing, the owner of such sign who shall correct such condition within forty-eight (48) hours. If the correction has not been made within forty-eight (48) hours, the Building Safety Director may have the sign removed if it creates a danger to the public safety or welfare, or have any necessary repairs or maintenance performed at the expense of the sign owner, or owner or lessee of the property upon which the sign is located. 
E.  Signs may be illuminated or non-illuminated, unless otherwise restricted in this ordinance. The source of the sign's illumination shall not be visible from any street, sidewalk, or adjacent property. This shall not preclude the use of neon sign elements. 
F.  Sign area shall be measured as follows (See Figure SA-1): 
  
1.  Sign copy mounted or painted on a background panel or area distinctively painted, textured, or constructed as a background for the sign copy shall be measured as that area contained within the sum of the smallest rectangles that will enclose both the sign copy and the background. 
2.  Sign copy mounted as individual letters or graphics against a wall, fascia, mansard, or parapet of a building or other structure that has not been painted, textured, or otherwise altered to provide a distinctive background for the sign copy shall be measured as a sum of the smallest rectangles that will enclose each word and each graphic in the total sign. 
3.  Multi-face signs shall be measured as follows: 
a.  Two (2) face signs: If the interior angle between the two (2) sign faces is sixty (60) degrees or less, the area shall be of one (1) face only. If the angle between the two (2) sign faces is greater than sixty (60) degrees, the sign area will be the sum of the areas of the two (2) faces. 
b.  Three (3) or more face signs: The sign area will be fifty (50) percent of the sum of the areas of all faces. 
4.  Spherical, free-form, sculptural, or other non-planar sign area shall be fifty (50) percent of the sum of the sides of the smallest four (4) sided polyhedron that will encompass the sign structure. 
G.  Sign heights shall be measured as follows (See Figure SA-2): 
  
1.  Freestanding sign: Height shall be the vertical distance from the top of the highest element of the sign or sign structure to the top of the curb or crown of the roadway where no curb exists. The height of any monument base or other structure erected to support or ornament the sign shall be measured as part of the sign height. 
2.  Wall fascia, mansard, and parapet mounted signs: Height shall be the vertical distance to the top of the sign or sign structure from the base of the wall on which the sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
7.103 - Prohibited signs. 
    Any sign not specifically listed as permitted by this ordinance is prohibited, including, but not limited to the following: 
A.  Signs located within, on, or projecting over any public street, right-of-way, or other public property, except shingle signs and projecting signs as provided in Sections 7.104 C and D. The City may install signs on its own property to identify public buildings and uses, to provide necessary traffic control, and to provide pedestrian directional signs and map directional signs in the PR Zoning District as outlined in Section 7.104 D. 
B.  Roof signs. 
C.  Projecting signs, except in the Pedestrian Retail (PR) and Glendale Centerline Overlay District (Overlay District) Zoning Districts as provided for in Section 7.104 D. 
D.  Any sign which interferes with or confuses traffic, or presents a traffic hazard. 
E.  Signs emitting sound. This shall not apply to drive-up menu boards provided for in Section 7.104 C.5. 
F.  Signs with intermittent or flashing illumination, except Digital Billboard Signs, and animated or moving signs. 
G.  Awning mounted signs, unless painted directly on the face of the awning. 
H.  Signs mounted, attached, or painted on trailers, boats, or motor vehicles when parked, stored, or displayed in a manner intended to attract the attention of the public for advertising purposes. 
I.  Pennants, banners, balloons, flags, and similar displays except as provided in Section 7.105. 
J.  Temporary signs which advertise a business, commodity, service, entertainment, product, or attraction, except as permitted in Section 7.105. 
K.  Reader panel signs except as specifically authorized herein. Any sign which permits the change of electronic or manual copy and is changed more frequently than on a daily basis which is not a Digital Billboard Sign shall be considered a reader panel sign. 
L.  Portable signs except as provided in Section 7.105. 
M.  Signs which extend below the bottom edge of a fascia board or mansard roof. 
N.  Billboard Signs and Digital Billboard Signs are prohibited on property located within the Scenic Corridor. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1874, § 1, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 2773, § 2, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2805, § 2, 6-26-12; Ord. No. 2976, § 4, 2-23-16) 
7.104 - Permitted Permanent Signs. 
    Permitted signs shall conform to the definitions in Section 2.300 and the specific provisions for each zoning district. The following signs are permitted: 
A.  Agricultural and Residence Districts. 
1.  General: 
a.  This applies to all signs in the A-1, SR-30, SR-17, SR-12, R1-10, R1-8, R1-7, R1-6, R1-4, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5 zoning districts. 
b.  Freestanding signs shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet. 
c.  Wall signs shall not exceed a height of fifteen (15) feet. 
d.  The base of any freestanding sign shall have an aggregate width of at least fifty (50) percent of the width of the sign. 
2.  Identification Signs: 
a.  Residence signs: one (1) or more wall signs not to exceed a total aggregate area of three (3) square feet shall be permitted. The sign may include only the name of the residence, the name of the occupant, and the street address. 
b.  Commercial farm or ranch signs: One (1) or more wall signs not to exceed a total aggregate area of eight (8) square feet shall be permitted. The sign may include only the name of the farm or ranch and a street address. 
c.  Multiple residence development, mobile home park, and subdivision entrance signs: a maximum of two (2) freestanding signs with an aggregate area of twenty-four (24) square feet shall be permitted at each main entrance. The sign may include only the name of the development and the street address. 
d.  Nonresidential uses: 
(1)  The maximum aggregate area of all identification signs shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet. 
(2)  One (1) freestanding sign shall be permitted with a maximum area of twenty-four (24) square feet. 
(3)  Wall, fascia, mansard, and parapet signs may identify the facility, building, or organization by name or by name and principal activity when the name alone does not identify the general nature of the use. The street address may also be included. 
(4)  A freestanding sign may include only the name of the facility, building, or organization it is intended to identify. Such sign shall not include any advertising copy. The sign must include the number of the street address, but the area of these numerals shall not be included in calculating the allowed sign area. 
3.  Reader Panel Signs: 
a.  Churches may use up to one-half (1/2) of the allowed freestanding sign area for a reader panel. 
b.  Public and private, elementary and secondary schools, and community colleges may have one (1) freestanding reader panel sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and fourteen (14) feet in height. 
4.  Directional signs when required to assist the flow of traffic not to exceed six (6) square feet in area or a height of three (3) feet. Such signs may include identification wording or symbols on up to twenty-five (25) percent of the sign area. 
5.  Directory signs when required for multiple residence developments or other permitted facilities containing multiple tenants or building groups as follows: 
a.  Each directory shall be illuminated with a maximum area of eighteen (18) square feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet. 
b.  The number and location of the signs must comply with fire department requirements. 
6.  Temporary signs in accordance with Section 7.105. 
B.  Office Districts. 
1.  General. This applies to all signs in the R-O, C-O, and G-O zoning districts. 
2.  Wall, fascia, mansard, and parapet identification signs. 
a.  These signs shall not exceed a height of fifteen (15) feet. 
b.  The maximum sign area permitted per building shall be twenty-four (24) square feet in the R-O and C-O districts and forty-eight (48) square feet in the G-O district. 
c.  Such sign may identify the individual businesses, building complex, or center, by name. The sign may show the name of the business and up to three (3) principal services when the name alone does not identify the general nature of the business. It may include the street address. Such sign shall not include advertising copy. 
d.  The maximum sign area permitted per building shall be one-hundred (100) square feet in the C-O and G-O districts for any office building which exceeds ten-thousand (10,000) square feet or more and is located on a site with three-hundred thirty (330) lineal feet or more of continuous frontage on an arterial street, and the sign face cannot be seen from residential districts. The maximum sign area per tenant shall not exceed forty (40) square feet on any building elevation. 
e.  Major medical center: 
(1)  Wall, fascia, mansard, parapet, and awning signs are allowed only on the exterior elevation of the space occupied by the business or service. 
(2)  The sign area shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each linear foot of the business wall elevation along the street frontage on which the sign is displayed. 
(3)  The maximum aggregate sign area is six hundred (600) square feet per major medical center. 
(4)  No more than two (2) of these signs shall be permitted per building or structure. 
(5)  These signs may identify the name of the major medical center and up to three (3) principal departments, businesses, offices, or services in the major medical center. Such sign shall not include any advertising copy. 
3.  Freestanding Identification Signs. 
a.  One (1) freestanding sign shall be permitted per project. 
b.  The sign shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet. 
c.  The sign shall not exceed a height of eight (8) feet in the C-O and G-O districts when the project includes a building of ten-thousand (10,000) square feet or more and the site has a minimum of three-hundred thirty (330) lineal feet of continuous frontage on an arterial street. 
d.  The base shall have an aggregate width at least fifty percent (50%) of the width of the sign. 
e.  The maximum sign area in the C-O and G-O districts is forty-eight (48) square feet when the project includes a building of ten-thousand (10,000) square feet or more and the site has a minimum of three-hundred thirty (330) lineal feet of continuous frontage on an arterial street. 
f.  The maximum sign area in the R-O district is twelve (12) square feet. The maximum sign area in the C-O and G-O districts is twenty-four (24) square feet on parcels up to two (2) acres and thirty-six (36) square feet for parcels over two (2) acres. 
g.  Single tenant buildings: The sign may include only the name of the business or building it is intended to identify. Such sign shall not include any advertising copy. 
h.  Multi-tenant buildings and complexes: The sign may identify the name of the building or complex and the name of up to three (3) businesses within the building or complex. However, when a business name is included in the name of the complex, only two (2) additional businesses may be identified. Such sign shall not include any advertising copy. 
i.  The sign must include the number of the street address, but the area of these numerals shall not be included in calculating the allowed sign area. 
j.  Major medical center: 
(1)  One (1) freestanding sign shall be permitted per project, with the following exception for multiple street frontages: 
(a)  One (1) sign may be permitted for each street if the frontage adjacent to the site is at least three-hundred thirty (330) feet. 
(b)  Two (2) signs may be permitted for each street if the frontage adjacent to the site is at least eight hundred (800) feet. The minimum distance between two (2) signs on the same street frontage shall be three-hundred thirty (330) feet. 
(2)  The sign shall not exceed a height of twelve (12) feet. A maximum of two (2) additional feet may be devoted to architectural embellishments. The architectural embellishment cannot include any signage. 
(3)  The base shall have an aggregate width of at least fifty percent (50%) of the width of the sign. 
(4)  The maximum sign area for each sign is seventy-two (72) square feet. 
(5)  These signs may identify the name of the major medical center and up to three (3) principal departments, businesses, offices, or services in the major medical center. Such sign shall not include any advertising copy. 
4.  Reader Panel Signs: Churches may use up to one-half (1/2) of the allowed freestanding sign area for a reader panel. 
5.  Directional signs when required to assist the flow of traffic not to exceed six (6) square feet in area or a height of three (3) feet. Such signs may include business identification by word or symbol on up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the sign area. 
6.  Directory signs when required to identify the location of the various buildings or offices located within the complex as follows: 
a.  Each directory shall be illuminated with a maximum area of eighteen (18) square feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet. 
b.  The number and location of the signs must comply with Fire Department requirements. 
c.  Major medical center: 
(1)  The sign shall not exceed a height of eight (8) feet. 
(2)  The maximum sign area for each sign is thirty (30) square feet. 
(3)  Each sign shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from a perimeter property line of the major medical center. 
7.  Temporary signs in accordance with Section 7.105. 
8.  Hospital Emergency Signs. 
a.  Freestanding identification signs: 
(1)  Copy that identifies a hospital emergency facility is permitted on any of the freestanding identification signs permitted in Section 7.104 B.3.j above. This copy shall be in addition to any other departments, businesses, offices, or services identified on the sign. 
(2)  A maximum of two (2) freestanding signs shall be permitted for identification of a hospital emergency facility only. These signs are in addition to signs permitted in Section 7.104 B.3.j above. 
(3)  The sign shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet. 
(4)  The maximum sign area shall be ten (10) square feet. 
b.  Wall signs: 
(1)  Two (2) signs shall be permitted per hospital emergency facility. 
(2)  The maximum sign area for each wall sign is thirty (30) square feet. 
(3)  The signs may be located on a separate feature or structure. 
C.  Commercial and Industrial Districts except Pedestrian Retail District (PR) and Glendale Centerline Overlay District (Overlay District). 
1.  General. This applies to all signs in the SC, C-1, NSC, C-2, CSC, C-3, B-P, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts unless otherwise restricted. 
1.5.  For buildings with single retail use with a gross floor area less than one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet. 
2.  Wall, fascia, mansard, parapet, awning, and shingle identification signs. 
a.  Wall, fascia, mansard, parapet, and awning signs are allowed only on the exterior elevation of the space occupied by the business. A shingle sign must be located immediately adjacent to the business it identifies. 
b.  The sign area for each business shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each linear foot of the business wall elevation along the street frontage on which the sign is displayed. 
c.  Businesses on a separate parcel or lot, or on a pad site within a project of three (3) or more businesses, shall be permitted sign area as described in 2b above for any one (1) elevation, with sign area on all other elevations not to exceed one-half (1/2) square foot for each linear foot of elevation where the sign is displayed (see Figure SA-2). 
d.  The maximum aggregate sign area is two hundred (200) square feet per business. 
e.  Such sign may identify the individual businesses, building complex, or center by name. The sign may show the name of the business and up to three (3) principal services when the name alone does not identify the general nature of the business. It may also include the street address. 
Such sign shall not include advertising copy. 
f.  Awning Signs: 
(1)  A maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the front face area of an awning may be used for signage. 
(2)  The sign area shall be measured according to Section 7.102 F.2. of this ordinance unless a distinctive background is provided. 
(3)  If letters or graphics are placed on the valance, they shall not be placed elsewhere on the awning. 
(4)  Only the face area of the letters or graphics may be illuminated. Any illumination must be internal, behind the face of the awning. 
g.  Shingle Signs: 
(1)  One (1) shingle sign which is designed and oriented primarily for the aid of pedestrians may be allowed per business. 
(2)  The minimum clearance between the bottom of the sign and the nearest grade or sidewalk shall be seven (7) feet, six (6) inches. 
2.5.  For buildings with single retail uses with a gross floor area greater than one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet: 
a.  Wall, fascia, mansard, parapet, and awning signs are allowed only on the exterior elevations of the space occupied by the business on street frontages that access the property. 
b.  The sign area for each single retail use shall not exceed a maximum of four hundred fifty (450) square feet. The sign area shall include all wall parapet and awning signage. 
c.  The maximum size of any single wall sign shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet. 
d.  When the wall on which a sign is to be placed is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential zoning district, only non-illuminated signs shall be permitted. 
e.  Such signs may identify the individual businesses, building complex, or center by name. The sign may show the name of the business and up to five (5) principal services when the name alone does not identify the general nature of the business. It may also include the street address. Such signage shall not include advertising copy. 
3.  Freestanding Identification Signs. 
a.  General. 
(1)  The sign must include the number of the street address. The minimum height of the numerals shall be six (6) inches and the maximum height shall be twelve (12) inches. The area of these numerals shall not be included in calculating the allowed sign area. 
b.  Single Tenant Buildings. 
(1)  One (1) freestanding sign shall be permitted per project, with the following exception for multiple street frontages: 
a.  One (1) sign may be permitted for each street if the frontage adjacent to the site is at least three hundred and thirty (330) feet. 
b.  Two (2) signs may be permitted for each street if the frontage adjacent to the site is at least eight hundred (800) feet. The minimum distance between two signs on the same street frontage shall be three hundred and thirty (330) feet. 
(2)  The sign shall not exceed a height of ten (10) feet. 
(3)  The base shall have an aggregate width of at least fifty (50) percent of the width of the sign. 
(4)  The maximum sign area for each sign is forty-eight (48) square feet on parcels up to twenty (20) acres and sixty (60) square feet for parcels over twenty (20) acres. 
(5)  The sign may identify only the name of the business or building it is intended to identify. Such sign shall not include any advertising copy. 
c.  Dual Tenant Buildings. 
(1)  Dual tenant buildings on an independent site that is not part of a shopping center project shall be permitted one (1) freestanding sign, with the following exception for multiple street frontages: 
a.  One (1) sign may be permitted for each street if the frontage adjacent to the site is at least three hundred and thirty (330) feet. 
b.  Two (2) signs may be permitted for each street if the frontage adjacent to the site is at least eight hundred (800) feet. The minimum distance between two signs on the same street frontage shall be three hundred and thirty (330) feet. 
(2)  The sign shall not exceed a height of ten (10) feet. 
(3)  The base shall have an aggregate width of at least fifty (50) percent of the width of the sign. 
(4)  The maximum sign area for each sign is forty-eight (48) square feet on parcels up to twenty (20) acres and sixty (60) square feet for parcels over twenty (20) acres. 
(5)  The sign may identify only the name of the business or building it is intended to identify. Such sign shall not include any advertising copy. 
(6)  A fast food establishment within a convenience store must meet the following criteria to be considered a business for identification purposes: 
a.  The fast food establishment must have an outdoor service window, a drive-thru window, or inside service counter which is dedicated exclusively to that franchise. 
b.  The fast food establishment must have at least one (1) full-time employee. 
c.  The building floor area devoted exclusively to the fast food establishment shall not be less than one hundred (100) square feet. 
d.  Multi-tenant buildings in the B-P, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts. 
(1)  One (1) freestanding sign shall be permitted per project, with the following exception for multiple street frontages: 
a.  One (1) sign may be permitted for each street if the frontage adjacent to the site is at least three hundred and thirty (330) feet. 
b.  Two (2) signs may be permitted for each street if the frontage adjacent to the site is at least eight hundred (800) feet. The minimum distance between two signs on the same street frontage shall be three hundred and thirty (330) feet. 
(2)  The sign shall not exceed a height of ten (10) feet. 
(3)  The base shall have an aggregate width of at least fifty (50) percent of the width of the sign. 
(4)  The maximum sign area for each sign is forty-eight (48) square feet on parcels up to twenty (20) acres and sixty (60) square feet for parcels over twenty (20) acres. 
(5)  The sign may identify the name of the building, complex, or center and the name of up to three (3) businesses within the building or complex. However, when a business name is included in the name of the complex, only two (2) additional businesses may be identified. Such sign shall not include any advertising copy. 
e.  Multi-tenant buildings and shopping centers in SC, C-1, NSC, C-2, CSC and C-3 zoning districts. 
(1)  One (1) freestanding sign shall be permitted per project with the following exception for multiple street frontages: 
a.  One (1) sign may be permitted for each street if the frontage adjacent to the site is at least three hundred thirty (330) feet, 
b.  Two (2) signs may be permitted for each street if the frontage adjacent to the site is at least eight hundred (800) feet. The minimum distance between two signs on the same street frontage shall be three hundred thirty (330) feet. 
(2)  The sign shall not exceed a height of twelve (12) feet. A maximum of two additional feet may be devoted to architectural embellishments. The architectural embellishment cannot include any signage. 
(3)  The base shall have an aggregate width of at least fifty (50) percent of the width of the sign. 
(4)  The maximum sign area for multi-tenant shopping centers on parcels up to twenty (20) acres is eighty (80) square feet and one hundred ten (110) square feet for parcels over twenty (20) acres. 
(5)  The sign may identify the name of the building complex, or center and the names of a maximum of ten (10) tenants within the complex. Such signs shall not include any advertising copy. 
a.  A fast food establishment within a convenience store must meet the following standards to be considered a business for identification purposes. 
(1)  The fast food establishment must have an outdoor service window, a drive-thru window, or inside service counter dedicated exclusively to that franchise. 
(2)  The fast food establishment must have at least one (1) full-time employee. 
(3)  The building floor area devoted exclusively to the fast food franchise shall not be less than one hundred (100) square feet. 
b.  The height of letters used in identification of individual tenants shall be a minimum of four (4) inches. 
(6)  All multi-tenant signs shall be reviewed for compliance with the multi-tenant freestanding identification sign design guidelines. 
4.  Reader Panel Signs. 
a.  Churches may use up to one-half (1/2) of the allowed freestanding sign area for a reader panel. 
b.  Gasoline service stations may use up to one-half (1/2) of the allowed freestanding sign area for a reader panel only to identify the current price of fuel being sold. The maximum sign area used for the reader panel shall be twenty-four (24) square feet. 
c.  An automobile fueling station located in a shopping center project shall be permitted one (1) freestanding fuel reader panel sign, with the following exception for multiple street frontages. One (1) sign may be permitted for each street if the frontage adjacent to the site is at least three hundred and thirty (330) feet. 
(1)  Each fuel price reader panel sign shall have a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet of sign area. 
(2)  The reader panel sign area shall include a maximum of one-third ( 1/3 ) devoted to fuel grade or type and two-thirds ( 2/3 ) to fuel prices. This shall not include brand or business identification. 
(3)  The sign shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet. 
(4)  The base shall have an aggregate width of at least fifty (50) percent of the width of the sign. 
d.  Theaters. 
(1)  One (1) wall, fascia, mansard, or parapet sign may contain a reader panel. 
(2)  The area of the reader panel shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet or the maximum wall sign area otherwise allowed, whichever is less. 
(3)  The reader panel shall be used exclusively for the purpose of identifying entertainment, motion pictures, or special events which occur on the premises. 
5.  Menu Boards for Drive-Thru Restaurants. 
a.  One (1) preview menu board and one (1) ordering menu board is allowed per business. Such signs may be freestanding or wall mounted. 
b.  The maximum aggregate area for a preview menu board and an ordering board per business, shall not exceed forty-five (45) square feet. 
c.  The maximum sign height shall not exceed six (6) feet for freestanding signs. 
6.  Directional signs when required to assist the flow of traffic not to exceed six (6) square feet in area or a height of three (3) feet. Such sign may include business identification by word or symbol on up to twenty-five (25) percent of the sign area. 
7.  Directory signs when required to identify the location of the various buildings or businesses located within the center or complex as follows: 
a.  Each directory shall be illuminated with a maximum area of eighteen (18) square feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet. 
b.  The number and location of the signs must comply with Fire Department requirements. 
8.  Temporary signs in accordance with Section 7.105. 
D.  Pedestrian Retail and Glendale Centerline Overlay Districts. 
1.  General: 
a.  This applies to all signs in the PR and Overlay District Zoning Districts. 
b.  All permanent signs in the PR and Overlay District Zoning Districts are subject to design review as outlined in Section 3.600. 
c.  A wall, fascia, mansard, parapet, projecting, or window identification sign may identify the name of the business and up to three (3) principal services when the name alone does not identify the general nature of the business. It may also include the street address. Such signs shall not include advertising copy. 
d.  Awning and shingle signs may only identify the name of the business. 
2.  Wall, Fascia, Mansard, and Parapet, Identification Signs: 
a.  A wall, fascia, mansard, or parapet sign is not permitted if a projecting sign is used to identify the business. 
b.  A wall, fascia, mansard, or parapet sign is allowed only on the exterior elevation of the space occupied by the business. 
c.  No more than one (1) wall, fascia, mansard, or parapet sign per business is permitted on each street or alley frontage. 
d.  The sign area for each business shall be as follows: 
(1)  The sign area for each ground floor business on a street shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each linear foot of the business wall elevation along the street frontage on which the sign is displayed. If the business occupies the ground floor and an upper floor, the sign area shall be the same as for a ground floor only business. 
(2)  The sign area for each ground floor business on an alley shall not exceed one-half (1/2) square foot for each linear foot of the business wall elevation along the alley frontage on which the sign is displayed. If the business occupies the ground floor and an upper floor, the sign area shall be the same as for a ground floor only business. 
(3)  The sign area for a business located only on an upper floor shall not exceed one-half (1/2) square foot for each linear foot of the business wall elevation along the street or alley frontage on which the sign is displayed. 
3.  Projecting Identification Signs: 
a.  A projecting sign is not permitted if any wall, fascia, mansard, or parapet sign is used to identify the business. 
b.  A projecting sign is allowed only for a ground floor business. 
c.  A projecting sign is allowed only on the exterior elevation of the space occupied by the business. 
d.  No more than one (1) projecting sign per business is permitted on each street or alley frontage. 
e.  The sign area for each business shall be as follows: 
(1)  The sign area for each ground floor business on a street shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each linear foot of the business wall elevation along the street frontage on which the sign is displayed, up to a maximum of fifteen (15) square feet. If the business occupies the ground floor and an upper floor, the sign area shall be the same as for a ground floor only business. 
(2)  The sign area for each business on an alley shall not exceed one-half (1/2) square foot for each linear foot of the business wall elevation along the alley frontage on which the sign is displayed, up to a maximum of six (6) square feet. If the business occupies the ground floor and an upper floor, the sign area shall be the same as for a ground floor only business. 
f.  The minimum separation between the sign and the face of the building shall be three (3) inches. 
g.  The maximum sign projection from the face of the building shall be five (5) feet. No sign shall project beyond the bracket on which it is hung. 
h.  On a one-story building, the top of the projecting sign and its supporting framework shall not be higher than the top of the cornice line. On a multiple story building, the top of the projecting sign and its supporting framework shall not be higher than the top of the second-story window sills of the building from which the sign projects. 
i.  The sign shall be perpendicular to the building and attached to the bracket on which it is hung so that it will not swing. 
j.  The minimum clearance between the bottom of the sign and the nearest grade or sidewalk shall be seven (7) feet six (6) inches. 
4.  Window Identification Signs: 
a.  The area covered by window signs shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the exterior window area. 
b.  Window signs on required exit doors shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the glass area of the door. 
5.  Awning Identification Signs: 
a.  A maximum of fifty (50) percent of the valance area of the awning may be used for signage. 
b.  The sign area shall be measured according to Section 7.102-F-2 of this ordinance unless a distinctive background is provided. 
6.  Shingle Identification Signs: 
a.  One (1) shingle sign which is designed and oriented for the aid of pedestrians is allowed per business. A shingle sign must be located immediately adjacent to the business it identifies. 
b.  The maximum area of a shingle sign shall be three (3) square feet. 
c.  The minimum clearance between the bottom of the sign and the nearest grade or sidewalk shall be seven (7) feet six (6) inches. 
7.  Directory Signs: 
a.  A directory sign is permitted when used to: 
(1)  Direct pedestrians to businesses within a building or complex which do not have an exterior wall elevation along a street or alley frontage; or 
(2)  To direct pedestrians to multiple businesses that use a single entrance. 
b.  The directory sign shall have a maximum area of four (4) square feet. 
c.  The directory sign shall be located at the entrance to the building or complex. 
8.  Pedestrian Directional Signs: 
a.  Directional signs for pedestrians indicating the type of businesses available in the immediate area are allowed subject to approval of a master directory sign plan by the city council. The master plan will address items such as the general design, location, and size of signs. Such signs shall not include advertising copy. 
b.  These signs shall be located on street corners in the public right-of-way and be designed at a pedestrian scale. 
c.  The specific design, location, and size of each sign will be determined through the design review process outlined in Section 3.600 based on the approved master directory sign plan. 
9.  Map Directory Signs: 
a.  Map directory signs intended to show pedestrians the overall location of businesses, public buildings, recreational facilities, and other features in the PR and Overlay Districts are allowed, subject to approval of a master directory sign plan by the city council. The master plan will address items such as the general design, location, and size of signs. Such signs shall not include advertising copy. 
b.  These signs shall show a map of the area and the location of individual businesses and be designed at a pedestrian scale. 
c.  The maximum sign area shall be twenty-four (24) square feet. 
d.  The specific design, location, and size of each sign will be determined through the design review process outlined in Section 3.600 based on the approved master directory sign plan. 
10.  A-Frame Signs: 
A-frame or sandwich board signs are permitted subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Signs shall be located adjacent to the individual business for which they advertise. 
b.  Shall provide a minimum five-foot clearance on the sidewalk. 
c.  Are allowed to be a maximum of two (2) feet by three (3) feet. 
d.  Cannot be placed in or on vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1874, § 1, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 1901, 12-24-96; Ord. No. 1932, § 1, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 1935, § 1, 4-22-97; Ord. No. 1988, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 1999, § 1, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 2177, § 5, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2254, § 1, 5-14-02; Ord. 2280, § 2, 10-22-02; Ord. No. 2372, § 1, 3-23-04; Ord. No. 2773, § 2, 6-14-11) 
7.105 - Permitted Temporary Signs. 
    The following temporary signs are permitted in all zoning districts subject to the definitions in Section 2.300, the regulations in Section 7.102, and the following regulations: 
A.  Sale, Lease, or Rent Signs. 
1.  General. 
a.  One (1) non-illuminated sign pertaining only to the property on which it is located shall be permitted for each street frontage. 
b.  A maximum of two (2) signs shall be permitted per parcel. 
2.  Agricultural and Residence Districts. 
a.  Vacant land. 
(1)  Less than five (5) acres: Each sign shall have a maximum area of six (6) square feet and a maximum height of five (5) feet. 
(2)  Five (5) acres or more: Each sign shall have a maximum area of thirty-two (32) square feet and a maximum height of eight (8) feet. 
b.  Buildings: Each sign shall have a maximum area of twelve (12) square feet and a maximum height of six (6) square feet. 
3.  Office, Commercial, and Industrial Districts. 
a.  Vacant land: Each sign shall have a maximum area of thirty-two (32) square feet and a maximum height of eight (8) feet. 
b.  Buildings: Each sign shall have a maximum area of twelve (12) square feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet. 
B.  Subdivision Advertising and Directional Signs. 
1.  General. A master sign package for each development including the type, number, size, location, materials, and colors of the various signs shall be approved by the Planning Department prior to the issuance of a permit for any sign authorized under this subsection. 
2.  On-Site Advertising Signs. 
a.  One (1) sign shall be permitted at each major entry with a maximum of four (4) signs per subdivision. 
b.  The maximum aggregate area of all signs shall be one hundred sixty (160) square feet. 
c.  The maximum height shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
d.  The edges of the sign shall be boxed. 
e.  No sign permits shall be issued until a preliminary plat has been approved by the City. 
f.  Upon expiration of a preliminary plat, if no final plat is approved, all signs must be removed within ten (10) days. 
g.  Such signs may be maintained until ninety-five (95) percent of the lots in the subdivision are sold or the sales office closes, whichever occurs first. 
h.  Such signs shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of any property line of an existing residence. 
3.  Subdivision Identification Flags. 
a.  A maximum of fifteen (15) flags per subdivision are allowed. 
b.  The area of each flag shall not exceed six (6) square feet. 
c.  The maximum height of any flag shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
d.  There shall be a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet between flags. 
e.  All flags shall be placed within the boundaries of the subdivision with the permission of the property owner, if this is other than the developer. 
f.  The flags may be maintained until ninety-five (95) percent of the lots in the subdivision are sold or the sales office closes, whichever occurs first. 
g.  Lettering and logos are not allowed on the flags. 
4.  Off-Site Identification signs for subdivisions within the City of Glendale. 
a.  Such sign must be located within one (1) mile of the subdivision, on vacant property, with the written permission of the property owner. 
b.  A maximum of two (2) signs are permitted for each subdivision located on an arterial street. Each sign shall have a maximum area of thirty-two (32) square feet and a maximum height of eight (8) feet. 
c.  Such signs may be maintained until ninety-five (95) percent of the lots in the subdivision are sold or the sales office closes, whichever occurs first. 
5.  Off-Site weekend directional signs for subdivisions within the City of Glendale. 
a.  Sign permits are established for each subdivision on an annual basis. The applicant must submit a site plan showing all locations of proposed signs. Any changes to the location of the signs must be approved by the City. 
b.  A maximum of eight (8) signs per subdivision. 
c.  Signs shall not exceed a maximum sign area of four (4) square feet. 
d.  The copy content of each sign shall be directional instructions and must show subdivision name, directional arrows, and may also include the builders name. 
e.  Signs may not be installed before 4:00 p.m. on Friday, and must be removed before 8:00 a.m. on the following Monday, except when a legal holiday occurs on a Monday, signs must be removed by 8:00 a.m. on the following Tuesday. 
f.  Signs will have the name and telephone number of the sign company, or if no sign company is designated by the builder/developer to distribute the signs, the builder/ developer's, name shall be placed on the back side of the sign with a contact and telephone number. 
g.  No sign shall be allowed in any public right-of-way. 
h.  No sign shall be located within fifty (50) feet of another sign. 
i.  No sign shall be attached to any roadway or natural feature including light, signal poles, street or regulatory signs, bridges, trees, or other existing facilities. 
j.  Signs shall not exceed a vertical height of three (3) feet. 
k.  Signs must be limited to not more than one (1) mile from the subdivision identified. 
l.  Signs shall not be installed on private property unless written authorization of such installation is provided to the city at the time of permit application. 
C.  Promotional Displays. 
1.  These displays may be used to advertise grand openings, a change of business ownership, special sales, new products or services, and other promotions. 
2.  This includes pennants, banners, balloons, streamers, flags, inflatable structures, search lights, character or product likenesses, attention attracting media and devices, and other non-merchandise displays. 
3.  Such displays shall be allowed for a maximum of ten (10) consecutive days, no more than three (3) times per year. One (1) grand opening promotional display is allowed per year for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. The grand opening display requires a new business or change in business name. 
4.  There shall be a minimum of thirty (30) days between each display. 
D.  Special Events, Seasonal Sales. One (1) non-illuminated sign is allowed for the duration of the event. 
1.  In Agricultural, residence, and office districts, such signs shall have a maximum area of six (6) square feet and a maximum height of five (5) feet. 
2.  In commercial and industrial districts, such signs shall have a maximum area of thirty-two (32) square feet and a maximum height of eight (8) feet. 
E.  Non-Commercial Signs. 
1.  General. These signs may be placed for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days. After the one hundred eighty (180) day period, the sign must be removed and may not be replaced within or on the same parcel or lot for a period of ninety (90) days. 
a.  In agricultural, residence, and office districts, such signs shall have a maximum area of six (6) square feet and a maximum height of five (5) feet. 
b.  In commercial and industrial districts, such signs shall have a maximum area of thirty-two (32) square feet and a maximum height of eight (8) feet. 
2.  Political Signs. 
a.  One (1) sign for each candidate or measure shall be permitted for each street frontage with no more than two (2) signs on any lot or parcel of land. 
b.  Within the agricultural and residence districts, the maximum sign area shall be six (6) square feet, and the maximum height shall be five (5) feet. 
c.  Within the office, commercial, and industrial districts, the maximum sign area shall be thirty-two (32) square feet, and the maximum height shall be eight (8) feet. 
d.  The person, party, or organization responsible for the erection or distribution of such signs shall remove them within ten (10) days after the specific election to which they refer. 
e.  Such signs shall be placed only with the property owner's permission. 
F.  Construction and Development Signs. 
1.  One (1) non-illuminated sign is allowed on the construction site with a maximum area of thirty-two (32) square feet and a maximum height of eight (8) feet. 
2.  If building permits have not been issued within six (6) months after issuance of the sign permit, the sign shall be removed and any new construction and development sign for substantially the same project at the same location will be approved only after a building permit for the project has been issued by the City. 
3.  Such sign shall be removed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the site. 
4.  The sign may identify the name of the project, the names of the developer, contractor, architect, subcontractor, and financier for the project, and the projected completion date. 
G.  Open House Directional Signs: 
1.  There shall be a maximum of four (4) such signs for each home for sale, including any such sign at the property for sale. 
2.  Each sign shall have a maximum area of three (3) square feet and a maximum height of three (3) feet. 
3.  Such signs may be posted only when a salesperson is on duty at the home and shall not be allowed for more than nine (9) hours per day. 
4.  Such signs shall not be placed in the public rights-of-way. 
H.  Window Signs. 
1.  These signs may be used for business identification and advertising of any service, product, person, business, place, or activity on the premises. 
2.  Such signs may include, but are not limited to, the business name, street address, phone number, business hours, meeting times, individual or specific products, services, or merchandise and related price information, slogans, and sale announcements. 
3.  There are no limitations on sign area or window coverage except in the PR District where the total area of all permanent and temporary window signs shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the exterior window area. 
I.  Menu Signs. 
1.  A menu sign may be used to display the published menu and corresponding prices of a restaurant. The sign may indicate hours of operation and information regarding entertainment the restaurant provides. 
2.  Only one (1) menu sign per restaurant is allowed. 
3.  The area of a menu sign cannot exceed four (4) square feet. 
4.  The sign shall be enclosed in a casing attached to the building and extending from the wall not more than five (5) inches. 
J.  Downtown Promotional Banners. 
1.  These banners may be used only to identify city-authorized special events within the downtown. They shall not be used to identify or advertise individual businesses, sales, products, or services. 
2.  The special event shall be represented on the banner by decorative graphic. Only one graphic shall be used for each special event. 
3.  There shall be one banner permitted for each business. The banner shall be mounted on the building or within a display window. 
4.  The banner may be displayed from a pole located perpendicular to the building. The minimum clearance between the bottom of the pole and the nearest grade or sidewalk shall be seven (7) feet, six (6) inches. 
5.  The banners shall be made of cloth, nylon, or similar material. 
6.  The banner shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size. 
7.  The banners shall be allowed for a maximum of forty-five (45) consecutive days, no more than four (4) times per year. 
8.  There shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) days between each special event. 
9.  Downtown promotional banners shall be limited to the area described as follows: starting at the southeast corner of Myrtle Avenue extending south along 59th Avenue to Grand Avenue, then southeast along Grand Avenue to Lamar Road, then east along Lamar Road to 56th Avenue, then north along 56th Avenue to Palmaire Avenue, then west to the alley between 56th Avenue and 55th Avenue, then north to Myrtle Avenue, and then west to the southeast corner of 59th Avenue and Myrtle Avenue. (See Map #9, Downtown Promotional Banners.) 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1874, § 1, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 1947, §§ 2, 3, 6-24-97) 
7.106 - Billboards. 
A.  Billboards are permitted only in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. 
B.  No billboard shall be erected within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the planned or existing freeway, expressway, parkway, right-of-way, or planned corridor, as officially designated by the Arizona Department of Transportation or the City of Glendale. 
C.  No new billboards may be constructed within the city unless the person desiring to construct such a billboard submits evidence to the City that the person has removed an existing billboard. If evidence is submitted that a billboard has been removed after the effective date of this ordinance, the City shall issue building and sign permits for one (1) new billboard not to exceed the area of the sign which was removed or three hundred (300) square feet, whichever is less. However, if a person submits evidence that in excess of three hundred (300) square feet of billboard area has been removed, by the removal of four (4) or more billboards with an area of seventy-five (75) square feet or less, the City shall issue building permits for one (1) new billboard with a maximum area of three hundred (300) square feet. Any new billboard shall be erected, constructed, or placed within six (6) months after removal of the billboard(s) it is replacing. 
D.  All billboards erected, placed, or altered within the city shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  The space between the newly erected, placed, constructed, or altered billboard and any existing billboard shall not be less than six hundred (600) feet. 
2.  All billboards shall have landscaping around the base at a rate of fifteen (15) square feet per linear foot of sign. 
3.  Off-site improvements or appropriate financial assurance as approved by the City shall be required along any abutting street for the full frontage of the property where the billboard is to be located. 
4.  No part of such sign structures shall be erected closer to a street than the front line of the nearest building which is within one hundred (100) feet of the sign and which fronts on that street; provided, however, that when a sign is erected between two (2) buildings which both front on the same street and which are both within one hundred (100) feet of the sign, then the sign shall not be erected closer to that street than a line drawn from the nearest front corner of each building. 
If no building is located within one hundred (100) feet of the off-premise sign, the sign structure shall be set back in accordance with the setback requirements of the zoning district in which located, but shall not be less than ten (10) feet behind a front property line. 
5.  Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, no billboards shall be erected, placed, constructed, or altered within the city which have an area exceeding three hundred (300) square feet or a height exceeding twenty-five (25) feet. 
6.  The billboard's structure, not including the sign copy, shall be compatible with the color, reflectivity, and other qualities of its surrounding environment. 
7.  No billboard shall have more than one (1) support column. 
8.  Access ladders to maintenance platforms shall be constructed or maintained in such a position as not to project beyond a visual envelope established by structural elements or projections of the sign face and trim to the ground as viewed from a place parallel to the face of the sign. 
9.  Other than support columns, maintenance walkways, embellishments, ends, cross bracings, tops or bottoms, parallel or v-shaped signs, no back braces, torque arms, stringers, panel attachments, or similar structural elements or accessories shall be exposed. If such elements or accessories are not covered by a sign face, screening of such elements or accessories shall be colored similarly to the remaining portions of the sign back. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2805, § 2, 6-26-12) 
7.107 - Nonconforming Signs. 
A.  Maintenance. Nonconforming signs shall be maintained in good condition pursuant to Section 7.102. Maintenance means replacing or repairing a worn or damaged part or portion of a sign in order to return it to its original state. 
B.  Alterations. A nonconforming sign or sign structure shall not be altered, reconstructed, replaced, or relocated other than to comply with this article, except: 
1.  Reasonable repair and maintenance limited to a maximum total of fifty (50) percent of the sign's or structure's reproduction cost as determined from an appraisal by a competent appraiser. 
2.  Change of reader panel(s), face panel(s) or copy. 
3.  See Subsection D. Improvements to Freestanding Signs. 
C.  Removal. Nonconforming signs shall be removed or brought into conformance with this Ordinance when: 
1.  More than fifty (50) percent of the reproduction cost of the sign or sign structure has been damaged or destroyed or by any means or taken down as determined from an appraisal by a competent appraiser; 
2.  The condition of the sign has deteriorated to such an extent that the cost of repairs exceeds fifty (50) percent of the reproduction cost of the sign or sign structure as determined from an appraisal by a competent appraiser; 
3.  The property undergoes development or redevelopment in accordance with the design review section of this ordinance; 
4.  The use of this sign or the property on which it is located has ceased, become vacant or been unoccupied for a period of six (6) months or more. In the event any of these should occur, the sign shall be presumed to be abandoned and shall be removed by the owner of the property, his agent, or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which said sign or sign structure is erected within thirty (30) days after written notification from the Planning Director or a designee. 
D.  Improvements to Freestanding Signs. 
1.  A legal non-conforming freestanding sign may be improved in the SC, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts subject to the approval of a conditional freestanding sign use permit by the planning commission. The conditional use permit procedures and appeal rights are defined in Section 3.900. For the purposes of this section, improvement of an existing non-conforming sign does not include routine repairs or maintenance. 
2.  The purpose of improving a legal non-conforming freestanding single tenant or multi-tenant sign is to significantly reduce the sign non-conformity while enhancing both the property and the community. Improvements may include refurbishing signs which are structurally sound or installation of a new sign. 
3.  Application Requirements. In addition to the application requirements outlined in Section 3.902 the following information shall be submitted: 
a.  Elevations and a description of the existing sign; 
b.  Elevations and a detailed description of improvements to the existing sign or new sign; 
c.  A written summary of reduction of nonconformity for the proposed sign; and 
d.  A statement of how the application will meet the required findings. 
4.  The planning commission or city council shall make the following findings before granting a freestanding sign use permit: 
a.  The freestanding sign is designed in a manner that improves the appearance of the property and enhances the surrounding area. 
b.  The new sign significantly reduces the nonconformity of the existing sign. 
c.  The sign improves the identification of both the site and the tenants. 
d.  The sign is consistent with the applicable sections of the city's multi-tenant freestanding identification sign design guidelines, including sign location and orientation, sign structure, and sign design. 
E.  Improvements-Comprehensive Sign Overlay District (SOC). Legal nonconforming signs can be improved or enhanced as part of the comprehensive sign overlay district. See Section 6.700. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1935, § 1, 4-22-97) 
7.108 - Exempt Signs. 
A.  Traffic signs or barricades erected or maintained by a governmental entity shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
B.  Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the property upon which they are located shall be exempt from the provisions of this article, except those public safety provisions contained in Section 7.102. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
7.109 - Required Permits and Fees. 
A.  Building and sign permits shall be obtained prior to erecting, placing, constructing, altering, or changing the copy on any sign within the city except: 
1.  The following temporary signs: 
a.  Open house direction signs; 
b.  Non-commercial signs; 
c.  Sale, lease, or rent signs; 
d.  Window signs; 
e.  Menu signs; and 
f.  Political signs. 
2.  Residence and commercial, farm or ranch identification signs. 
3.  Change of copy on reader panel signs or copy on any billboard. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place, construct, alter, or maintain any sign, except those exempt signs listed in Subsection A herein, when all required permits have not been issued for that sign or billboard. Each day such a sign is allowed to exist without having obtained the required permits, shall constitute a new offense. 
C.  The permit fees shall be in the amount established by City Council resolution or pursuant to Glendale City Code Section 2-3. 
D.  An application for a sign permit must be made in writing on forms provided by the Development Services Center. The following information will be required on all sign permit applications: 
1.  Address of the property. 
2.  Business name. 
3.  Business owner's name, address and telephone number. 
4.  Sign contractor's name, address, and telephone number. 
5.  Glendale sales tax number and contractor's license number. 
6.  Valuation of the sign(s). 
7.  Inventory of all existing signs on the property showing the type, dimensions, and location of each sign. 
8.  Fully dimensioned plans and elevations showing the dimensions, design copy, and location of each proposed sign. 
9.  Plans indicating the scope and structural detail of the work to be done; including details of all connections, supports, footings, and materials to be used. 
10.  Required information for an electrical permit for all electric signs. 
11.  Color, material, and letter samples when the sign is subject to design review. 
Applications which do not include the required information shall not be accepted. 
E.  Permits for copy changes only, shall be processed within one (1) business day of submittal of application. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1874, § 1, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 2260, § 7, 6-11-02) 
7.110. - Digital Billboard Signs. 
    Digital Billboard Signs are permitted subject to the regulations noted below. 
A.  Placing a Digital Billboard Sign requires that the zoning of the lot on which the Digital Billboard Sign is located must be Planned Area Development (PAD). 
B.  Placing a Digital Billboard Sign requires the approved Planned Area Development (PAD) to be located in Township 2 North, Range 1 East, Gila and Salt River Base and Meridian, and to have a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet of lineal frontage adjacent to SR 101 (Agua Fria Freeway). 
C.  The Digital Billboard Sign must be located within three hundred (300) feet of the freeway right-of-way. 
D.  There shall be a minimum distance of one thousand seven hundred sixty (1,760) feet between all Digital Billboard Signs on any single Planned Area Development. 
E.  All Digital Billboard Signs must be set back a minimum of three hundred thirty (330) feet from the property line of any adjacent property not a part of the same approved Planned Area Development having frontage on SR 101 (Agua Fria Freeway). 
F.  Maximum sign height, including any supporting structures, for a Digital Billboard Sign must be no more than sixty (60) feet. 
G.  Maximum Digital Billboard Sign width must be no more than fifty (50) feet. 
H.  Maximum Digital Billboard Sign area must not exceed six hundred seventy-five (675) square feet. 
I.  The message or image of the Digital Billboard Sign may be static or change at specific or programmed time intervals. The change in message or images shall occur no more frequently than once every eight (8) seconds and shall not have fade or dissolve transitions, or full animation or video, or similar subtle transitions or frame effects that have the appearance of moving text or images. A default black display shall be required in the event of malfunction. 
J.  Message sequencing, the use of multiple Digital Billboards in a row to convey a message, shall be prohibited. 
K.  Advertisements shall be limited to single frames. 
L.  Provisions in this section supplement and do not supersede provisions of any PAD in existence before the effective date of this ordinance. 
M.  Design Review approval is required to allow any Digital Billboard Sign. 
N.  No Digital Billboard shall be located within one thousand (1000) feet of any single residence zoning district including RR-90, RR-45, SR-30, SR-17, SR-12, R1-10, R1-8, R1-7, R1-6, R1-4, R-2, R-3, or property within unincorporated Maricopa County for which a plat was filed and recorded prior to January 1, 2000. 
O.  One Digital Billboard is permitted as a prelude to other development on a PAD. All additional Digital Billboard Signs shall be integrated into the PAD and have a relationship to the development, including common design elements such as styles and materials, and a functional relationship to the structures, parking, and open spaces in the development. The height, location, materials, color, texture, setbacks, and mass of the additional Digital Billboard Signs must be appropriate to the development, the neighborhood, and the community. The architectural character of the proposed additional Digital Billboard Sign shall be in harmony with, and compatible to, structures in the neighboring environment and the architectural character desired for the city, avoiding excessive variety or monotonous repetition. All additional Digital Billboard Signs shall be reviewed only as part of the review of the Master Development Plan of the property and integrated with surrounding buildings and landscaping. Additional Digital Billboard Signs will be permitted only as part of a comprehensive sign package for the entire PAD which includes common design elements. Digital Billboards must be fully integrated into this comprehensive sign package. 
P.  Digital Billboard Sign illumination must be extinguished between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise. The only exception to this will be for amber alerts and other governmental emergencies. 
Q.  All illuminated Digital Billboard Signs shall be limited to a surface luminosity limit of 5,000 nits during daytime hours and a surface luminosity limit of 150 nits during nighttime hours. 
R.  All Digital Billboard Signs shall provide for automatic dimming based upon ambient lighting conditions, including evening and overcast weather. 
S.  It shall be unlawful for any Digital Billboard Sign to have an illuminance greater than 1.0 foot candle at the property line of any adjacent property. 
T.  Any approved Digital Billboard Sign shall adhere to new safety requirements if conclusive research findings develop. 
U.  Only one Digital Billboard Sign shall be erected prior to the first phase of development on a PAD. 
V.  All Digital Billboard Signs shall receive all required licenses prior to approval. 
(Ord. No. 2805, § 2, 6-26-12) 
Section 7.200 - Landscaping, Buffering, Walls. 
7.201 - Walls. 
A.  The developer of property in SC, C-1, NSC, C-2, CSC, C-3, B-P, M-1, or M-2 districts which abuts any residential district must provide a wall with a minimum height of eight (8) feet along the abutting property line. The wall must be at least eight (8) inches thick and constructed of decorative block or other finish approved by the Planning Director, consistent with the project and the adjoining residential area. 
1.  Any loading docks within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district must have a separate eight (8) foot high wall of similar materials to screen the dock area. 
2.  Any wall or fence exceeding six (6) feet in height requires approval of fence construction plans to ensure structural stability. 
B.  The developer of properties in R-O, C-O, or G-O districts, or of any nonresidential use in any residential district which abuts any residential district, must provide a wall with a minimum height of six (6) feet along the abutting property line. The wall must be constructed of decorative block or other finish approved by the Planning Director, consistent with the project and the adjoining residential district. 
C.  The developer of properties in the R-2, R-3, R-4, or R-5 districts which abut any A-1, SR, or R-1 districts must provide a wall with a minimum height of six (6) feet along the abutting property line. The wall must be constructed of decorative block or other finish approved by the Planning Director, consistent with the project and the adjoining residential district. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2177, § 6, 12-19-00) 
7.202 - Landscaping and Buffering. 
A.  Minimum on-site landscaping as a percentage of total site area. 
1.  Thirty (30) percent in R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-O districts and for any nonresidential use in SR or R-1 districts. 
2.  Twenty (20) percent in C-O, G-O, C-1, NSC, SC, CSC, C-2, C-3, and B-P districts. 
3.  Five (5) percent in M-1 and M-2 districts. 
B.  Landscape Buffers. 
1.  Fifteen (15) feet where any multi-family or nonresidential use abuts a single-family district. 
2.  Fifteen (15) feet where any nonresidential use abuts a multifamily district. 
3.  Twenty-five (25) feet where any loading docks and service drives abut residential districts. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2177, § 6, 12-19-00) 
7.203 - Other Requirements. 
    More detailed requirements for on-site and off-site landscaping are included in the City of Glendale Landscape Ordinance (Chapter 19 of the City Code). 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
7.204 - General Building Setbacks. 
    Principal buildings must be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from arterial and major arterial streets rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 7.300 - Accessory Buildings and Uses. 
7.301 - Accessory Buildings. 
A.  All detached buildings, structures, or satellite earth stations must be located behind the front wall plane of the residence with the following additional setbacks: 
1.  Buildings, structures, or satellite earth stations less than seven (7) feet high, unless otherwise permitted, shall maintain a minimum of three (3) feet to a side or rear property line. 
2.  R-1 Districts and single-family homes in the Sonorita Community Overlay District - For each foot over seven (7) feet in height, the setback for that portion of the building height over seven (7) feet in height increases by two (2) feet. 
3.  SR Districts-For each foot over seven (7) feet in height, the setback for that portion of the building height over seven (7) feet in height shall be increased by one (1) foot. 
4.  Maximum height of residential accessory buildings is fifteen (15) feet except in A-1 and SR districts which have a maximum building height of twenty (20) feet. 
5.  Any accessory building or structure, unless otherwise permitted, must maintain a minimum of ten (10) feet set back from the principal building or any other accessory structure. 
6.  Maximum height of an amateur radio tower is seventy-five (75) feet. 
7.  Fireplaces may encroach into the front, side, and rear setbacks a maximum of two-and-one-half (21/2) feet. 
8.  Bay windows may encroach into front, side, and rear setbacks a maximum of two-and-one-half (21/2) feet for a distance not to exceed ten (10) feet on any building elevation. The bay window must maintain a minimum of five (5) feet separation between it and any property line. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. O18-85, § 1, 12-11-18) 
7.302 - Storage Sheds. 
A.  Storage sheds shall be limited to one (1) per lot; provided, however, that such shed shall be located in the side or rear yard of the property, can not be served by any utility, and all drainage therefrom must flow back onto the owner's property. 
B.  Storage sheds shall not be subject to rear and side yard setback requirements and must not exceed six (6) feet in height or be visible from either the public street or adjacent property. (See Example A). 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
  
7.303 - Reserved. 
7.304 - Home Occupations. 
A.  Home Occupations (Class I) are accessory uses in all residential districts. An occupation or profession is considered a home occupation when it: 
1.  Is conducted entirely from within the principal residence with no activity or storage in the garage or other accessory buildings, or in other outdoor areas; 
2.  Is conducted only by a resident or residents of the dwelling unit (no employees other than the family), no outside employees visit the site; 
3.  Does not have any customer traffic or more than one (1) commercial delivery vehicle a day coming to the residence related to the home occupation; 
4.  Produces no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, or glare beyond the boundaries of the property; 
5.  Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes with storage for the use limited to a maximum of five (5) percent of the total floor area; 
6.  Has no signs or other exterior evidence of its existence; 
7.  A valid City sales tax and business license is maintained for business purposes; 
8.  Activity shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; and 
9.  Any parking incidental to the home occupation shall be provided on site. 
B.  Home Occupations (Class II) are subject to conditional use permit in all residential districts. It is required when any of the following standards can not be met by the proposed home occupation: 
1.  Is conducted entirely from within the principal residence with no activity or storage in the garage or other accessory buildings, or in other outdoor areas; 
2.  Is conducted only by a resident or residents of the dwelling unit (no employees other than the family), no outside employees visit the site; 
3.  Does not have any customer traffic or more than one (1) commercial delivery vehicle a day coming to the residence related to the home occupation. 
C.  Except as may be provided by conditional use permit approval in conjunction with a Home Occupation (Class II), no accessory use shall include outdoor display or storage of any of the following listed items, when such items are visible or emit odor, dust, gas, noise, vibration, smoke, heat, or glare, beyond any boundary of the lot on which such items are displayed or stored: 
1.  Any building or landscaping materials. 
2.  Any machinery, construction trailers, parts, or appliances. 
3.  Vehicles which are unlicensed, inoperable, or registered to or owned by persons not residing on, or the guests of persons residing on the premises. 
4.  Any other chattel used for or intended for a commercial purpose or ultimate use other than to subject premises. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
7.305 - Yard Sales. 
    Yard sales are permitted for no more than three (3) events of forty-eight (48) hours or less within a twelve (12) month period at the same residence or street address. No signage related to such events shall be placed in the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
Section 7.400 - Off-Street Parking. 
7.401 - Purpose. 
A.  To provide adequate parking to meet the needs of residents, employees, and business patrons. 
B.  To prevent excess unused parking areas which encourage reliance on the automobile and discourage pedestrian use. 
C.  To reduce the scale of parking areas through landscaping and by breaking them into smaller areas. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
7.402 - General Requirements. 
A.  Each parking space shall be at least ten (10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet deep, except that parking spaces at an angle of sixty (60) degrees or less may be nine (9) feet wide. 
B.  Other requirements of aisle widths are contained in the City of Glendale Engineering Design Guidelines. 
C.  All parking spaces and driveway areas serving such parking spaces shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt, or paving blocks. 
D.  Required parking shall be provided on-site or on contiguous lots. 
E.  Square feet shall mean the gross floor area of the building. 
F.  No part of any vehicle may overhang into a public sidewalk or within five (5) feet of a street curb where no sidewalk exists. 
G.  All parked vehicles must comply with unobstructed view easement and sight distance requirements as identified in the City of Glendale Engineering Design Guidelines. 
H.  Parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts is limited to one (1) commercial vehicle with a one (1) ton chassis, having a capacity of not more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR). 
I.  Landscaping and screening of parking lots shad be in accordance with the City of Glendale Landscape Ordinance (Chapter 19 of the City Code). 
J.  Parking lots shall be designed in groupings no larger than 200 spaces. Larger lots shall be divided by buildings, plazas, or significant landscaped area oriented for pedestrian use. 
K.  The parking or storage of construction related equipment, such as dump trucks, utility trailers, flatbed hauling trailers, cement mixers, ditch diggers, etc., shall be permitted for forty-eight (48) hours in a thirty (30) day period in a residential district, unless prohibited by other City ordinances. It is prohibited to have more than two (2) pieces of equipment on the property at one (1) time or to bring such equipment in for repairs or preventative maintenance. The only exception to this regulation would be when on-site construction is being performed by such equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
7.403 - Parking Requirements by Use. 
USE MINIMUM # OF SPACES MAXIMUM # OF SPACES Auditorium, Stadium, Public Assembly, Private Clubs, Health Clubs, Theaters 1:100 sq. ft. or 1:5 seats no maximum Auto Repair 2 spaces per service bay; plus 1 space per every 250 sq. ft. of retail or office area. no maximum Banks, Financial Institutions 1:250 sq. ft. 1:200 sq. ft. Barber Shop or Beauty Shop 1:100 sq. ft. no maximum Churches 1:5 seats or 90 lineal inches of pew space no maximum Cocktail Lounge 1:100 sq. ft. no maximum Home Furnishings, Major Appliances 1:500 sq. ft. 1:400 sq. ft. Hospitals 1:bed no maximum Manufacturing/Assembly Wholesale/ Warehouse 1:600 sq. ft. 1:300 sq. ft. Mixed Uses To be determined by Planning Director. Motels/Hotels 
Restaurant/Bar 
Banquet/Meeting Rooms 1:room 
1:200 sq. ft. 
1:200 sq. ft. no maximum 
no maximum 
no maximum Office, General, Professional Medical/Dental 1:300 sq. ft. 
1:150 sq. ft. no maximum 
no maximum Indoor Recreation Facility 
 Amusement Center, Arcades 
 Batting Cages 
 Bowling Alley   
1:100 sq. ft. 
1:cage 
4:lane plus accessory uses if separate outside entrances are provided.   
no maximum 
no maximum 
no maximum Outdoor Recreation Golf 
Driving Ranges 
Miniature Golf Courses 
Skating Rinks 1:tee space (10 lineal feet) 
1:hole 
1:200 sq. ft. 
1:200 sq. ft. no maximum 
no maximum 
no maximum 
no maximum Regional Malls 1:225 sq. ft. 1:180 sq. ft. Residential 
 Single-family 
 Multi-family 
  Studio or 1 Bedroom 
  2 or more Bedrooms 
  1 Designated guest space for every 3 units.   
2:unit-1 covered 
  
1 space 
2 spaces   
no maximum 
  
no maximum 
no maximum 
no maximum Restaurant-freestanding 1:100 sq. ft. no maximum Retail/Shopping Center (including up to 10% restaurant, health club, beauty shops...additional percentages calculated at rate for each use) 1:250 sq. ft. 1:200 sq. ft. Retirement/Senior Housing/ 
Convalescent/Nursing/Congregate 
Care Home .4:unit no maximum Schools 
 Elementary 
  
Jr. High 
  
High School 
  
College 
  
Vocational/Technical   
2:classroom or largest single public assembly area, whichever is greater. 
3:classroom or largest single public assembly area, whichever is greater. 
7:classroom or largest single public assembly area, whichever is greater. 
10:classroom or largest single public assembly area, whichever is greater. 
1:2 students   
no maximum 
  
no maximum 
  
no maximum 
  
no maximum 
  
no maximum  
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2028, § 1, 10-13-98) 
7.404 - Drive-Thru Requirements. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, additional vehicle storage spaces shall be provided for all uses having vehicle pick-up windows as follows: 
A.  A drive-thru lane with a minimum storage for six (6) vehicles shall be provided at twenty (20) feet per vehicle for all convenience uses except pharmacy related drive-thru lanes. 
B.  A pharmacy related drive-thru lane shall have a minimum storage for three (3) vehicles within twenty (20) feet per vehicle. 
C.  The drive-thru lane shall not encroach upon or block driveways or parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1959, § 1, 9-30-97) 
Section 7.500 - Standards for Uses Subject to Conditions. 
7.501 - Generally. 
    Pursuant to Section 3.403, applications for administrative reviews as authorized in this Zoning Ordinance or Amendments thereto, shall be filed on an application form with the required documentation specified on guidelines provided by the Planning Department with appropriate fees. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
7.502 - Group Homes. 
    Adult Care Homes, Juvenile Group Homes, Group Homes for the Disabled, and Supervisory Care Facilities (for purposes of this Section 7.502, such uses are collectively referred to as "Group Homes") shall be permitted, provided that: 
A.  No Group Home is located on a lot within one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet, measured by a straight line in any direction, from the lot line of another Group Home; 
B.  Where legally required, the Group Home is licensed by, certified by, approved by, registered with, or under contract with a Federal, State, or local government and evidence of such is provided to the Planning Department within sixty (60) days of approval of the Planning Department; 
C.  No exterior change which would alter its residential character shall be made to the exterior of the building(s) and the grounds; 
D.  The location of the Group Home has been approved by the Planning Department; and 
E.  An administrative record of each Group Home shall be maintained with the Planning Department. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 2386, § 3, 6-22-04) 
7.503 - Seasonal Sales and Special Events. 
    Temporary sales or display of goods or special events are allowed only if they are related to a particular seasonal, cultural, traditional, or community activity or event for a period not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days, as determined by the Planning Director. In making a determination, the Planning Director shall consider the following criteria: 
A.  The nature, scope, location, and manner of operation of the activity or event does not constitute a health or safety hazard to the public. 
B.  The goods or services displayed are customarily and traditionally related to a widely celebrated or observed seasonal or other activity, event, or holiday. 
C.  The goods and services are displayed in connection with fund raising or other activities by a school, church, social agency, or other community or nonprofit organization. 
D.  The activity or event is consistent with other uses permitted in the zone district. 
E.  The use does not interfere with pedestrian access-ways, fire lanes, driveways, landscape areas, or traffic visibility at driveway entries and street intersections. 
F.  Parking on the property is adequate to serve any existing permanent uses and the seasonal sale or special event use. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
7.504 - Subdivision Model Home Complexes. 
    A model home complex may be provided in conjunction with residential subdivisions subject to the following: 
A.  The complex is used only to market homes being built in the subdivision in which it is located. Off-site home sales may be permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit. 
B.  A model home complex plan is required which contains information as required by the Planning Director. The Planning Director shall review and approve the plan prior to the issuance of building permits for models. 
C.  Prior to occupancy as a single-family residence, all model homes must conform to all provisions of this ordinance and any temporary parking, office, lighting, fencing, or other similar improvements shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93; Ord. No. 1954, § 2, 9-9-97) 
7.505 - Temporary Office or Construction Trailers. 
A.  Temporary office trailers are allowed only after building permits have been issued for the permanent building(s) to occupy the site. 
B.  May be authorized for use exclusively as a temporary office or construction shed incidental to a construction project for a period of twelve (12) months. The Planning Director may authorize extensions of additional six (6) month increments where construction within the project site is proceeding in a timely fashion. 
C.  May be authorized for use as a home sales office when building permits have been issued for a subdivision model home complex. The permit is not to exceed six (6) months. A development plan is required to be approved by the Planning Director. 
(Ord. No. 1772, 6-23-93) 
7.506 - Wireless Communication Facilities. 
A.  Rooftop Mounted Antennas. 
1.  Roof mounted antennas may exceed the maximum height of the zoning district but shall not extend more than ten (10) feet above the existing building height. 
2.  The antenna array scale and visibility shall be minimized. 
3.  Equipment shelters may locate on the building roof if screened from view of surrounding properties. 
B.  Building Mounted Antennas. 
1.  Antennas shall not extend above the height of the wall on which they are located or integrated. 
2.  Antennas shall not project more than twelve (12) inches from the existing building wall. 
3.  Equipment shelters may locate on the building roof if screened from view of surrounding properties. 
C.  Alternative Tower Structure. 
1.  The maximum additional height permitted by extension of an existing pole or by replacement pole is fifteen (15) feet. 
2.  The maximum increase in pole diameter from the existing pole by the replacement pole is fifty (50) percent. 
3.  The maximum width of the antenna array shall be four (4) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 5, 4-28-98) 
7.507 - Corn Maze. 
    A temporary corn maze may be established subject to the following: 
A.  The activity is based on corn growing on the subject property. 
B.  A site plan to define access, parking dust control, temporary structures, signs and related improvements is approved by the planning department. 
C.  Authorization by property owner and identification of responsible parties. 
D.  Definition of the days and hours of operation. 
E.  The facility shall not operate more than forty (40) business days within any eight (8) week calendar period. 
F.  Any goods or services proposed for display or sales on the site shall be accessory to the special agricultural entertainment event. 
G.  The facility meets all fire and public safety requirements for a temporary event. 
H.  The area of the corn maze shall be a minimum of five (5) acres but not exceed twelve (12) acres. 
I.  Any temporary structures must be removed at the end of the operations. 
(Ord. No. 2166, § 2, 10-24-00) 
7.510 - Adult Businesses. 
A.  Findings, Purpose and Intent. The council makes the following findings and provides the following guidelines for the construction, interpretation and administration of this section: 
1.  Based on the "Adult Business Factual Record and Studies" for zoning ordinance test Amendment Z-99-07 which the council had before it and which is on file with the planning department, the council finds: 
(a)  Sexually oriented (adult) businesses cause secondary effects on the community which are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, including unlawful and unhealthy activities; unlawful sexual activities, including public sexual indecency and prostitution; sexual encounters of a casual nature; and risk of spread of sexually transmitted and possibly fatal diseases. 
(b)  Areas of the community surrounding adult businesses are beset by higher incidences of sexually related crimes, street crime, and property crimes; greater demand on police resources; lower property values; litter from sexual devices, materials and packaging; and other problems. 
(c)  Incidents are reported of lack of strict age verification procedures and of admission of underaged juveniles as patrons into an adult entertainment establishment. 
(d)  Adult businesses require reasonable locational restrictions and spacing requirements to protect residential areas and other uses which are frequented by children from the documented negative secondary effects which occur with these businesses and to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. 
(e)  Preventing concentration of adult businesses in proximity to each other and on the same site or in the same building is a reasonable means to prevent intensification of negative secondary effects from these businesses in the immediately surrounding area and on the community generally. 
(f)  Establishing regulations on the location of adult businesses will disperse any secondary effects; allow more effective utilization of police resources; allow more effective law enforcement monitoring of the adult businesses and prevention of illegal negative secondary effects of adult businesses; and will facilitate enforcement of the provisions of this zoning ordinance and other state and local laws, thereby furthering the substantial governmental interest in protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
2.  It is the intent of this section to regulate the location of adult business establishments so as to protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city and its visitors, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult businesses and their secondary effects. 
3.  This section has neither the purpose, nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communications or communicative materials, including sexually oriented business. 
4.  It is not the purpose or intent of this section either to restrict or deny lawful access by adults to sexually oriented materials or to deny accesses by the distributors of sexually oriented materials to their intended market. 
5.  It is not the purpose or intent of this section to impose judgment on the content or merits of any constitutionally protected form of speech or expression. 
B.  Prohibited locations of any type of adult use or sexually oriented business: 
1.  An operator of a sexually oriented business is in violation of this ordinance if the business is operated in a zoning district, which does not expressly permit that type of adult use in said zoning district. 
2.  In addition to being located in a proper zoning district, an operator commits a violation if the adult business is operated within one thousand (1,000) feet of an existing: 
(a)  Church; 
(b)  Public or private school; 
(c)  Public park; 
(d)  Agricultural or residentially zoned property; 
(e)  Child care center; 
(f)  Designated historic district; or 
(g)  Other adult business. 
3.  The measurement of the one thousand (1,000) foot distance for the purposes of subparagraph 2 above, shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the property line of an existing church, school, child care center, or adult business, or from the boundary line of a public park, agricultural or residentially zoned property or designated historic district, to the nearest property line of the property sought to be used as a sexually oriented business. 
4.  The measurement of the one thousand (1,000) foot distance for the purposes of subparagraph 2 above shall also include churches, schools, child care centers, agricultural or residentially zoned properties, public parks, or other adult uses which are located in an adjoining city or county which are within the one thousand (1,000) foot distance of the nearest property line of the property sought to be used for an adult use or sexually oriented business within the City of Glendale. 
5.  A person commits a violation if they cause or permit the establishment or operation of more than one (1) adult use or sexually oriented business in the same building or structure, or on any portion of the site. 
C.  Submittal or application for adult use or sexually oriented business: 
1.  Application for adult business shall be submitted to the planning department for review. The application shall include a narrative statement describing the nature of the business for determination of conformity with a listed adult business use. The application shall also include a site plan and Maricopa County assessor parcel map clearly identifying surrounding properties with depiction of the required distances from the uses detailed in paragraph B of this section. This application shall state the distance from each of the uses identified in paragraph B of this section. 
2.  Review of site application for completeness of information shall be completed within ten (10) days of the submission of the application. The applicant will be notified by first class mail if the application is complete or requires additional information. 
D.  Provisions for existing nonconforming uses: 
1.  An adult business otherwise lawfully operating prior to the adoption of this ordinance, that was lawfully established and maintained under prior zoning ordinance provisions within the one thousand (1,000)-foot distance regulation of subsection B above, shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use. Such nonconforming use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except the use may be voluntarily changed by the operator to a conforming use within the property's zoning district which meets all other applicable requirements of city. 
2.  If two (2) or more adult businesses are located within one thousand (1,000) feet of one another and otherwise lawfully operating, the adult business which was first established and continually operating is deemed the conforming use and the later established adult business is deemed the nonconforming use. Whether the later established adult business is entitled to be established or maintained as a legal, nonconforming use shall be determined under the requirements of D.1. above, Section 1.400, and state law. 
(Ord. No. 2089, § 3, 7-27-99) 
Section 7.600 - Wireless Communication Facilities. 
7.601 - General Provisions. 
A.  All wireless communication facilities shall have an identification plaque no larger than 12 inches by 12 inches permanently affixed which clearly identifies the name, address, and emergency phone number of the provider. No other identification or sign as defined by the Zoning Ordinance is permitted on monopoles or related facilities. 
B.  The minimum setbacks for the zoning district shall apply to all towers, equipment shelters, and accessory buildings. The dimensions of the entire lot or parcel shall apply and not the dimensions of the leased area. 
C.  Adequate screening from off-site views shall be required as determined at the time of Design Review. 
D.  Any monopole, tower, or alternative tower structure which is not in use for six (6) months shall be removed by the property owner. The removal shall occur within ninety (90) days of the end of such six (6) month period. If the alternative tower structure includes an extension or replacement of the original structure, the structure shall be returned to the original height and condition. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 5, 4-28-98) 
7.602 - Monopoles. 
A.  New monopoles must be separated by a minimum distance of one-quarter (1/4) mile from any other monopole. 
B.  Monopole must be setback from residential zoned properties a minimum distance of twice the height of the height of the tower. 
C.  Monopoles must be setback from any arterial or major arterial street a minimum of one hundred and fifty (150) feet. 
D.  Monopole towers and antennas shall not be illuminated or display warning lights unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other federal or state authority. 
E.  Any access road to a monopole site shall be paved. 
F.  One (1) paved parking space shall be provided on site unless otherwise provided on adjacent property. 
G.  All new monopoles over fifty (50) feet in height shall be constructed to allow for collocation by other wireless providers. The applicant shall demonstrate that the engineering of the tower and the placement of ground mounted facilities will not preclude other providers. The owner of the proposed tower must certify in writing that the tower will be available for use by other wireless communication providers on a economically reasonable and non-discriminatory basis. 
(Ord. No. 2002, § 5, 4-28-98) 
7.603 - Amendments to Existing Monopoles. 
A.  Existing monopoles include all wireless related monopoles or towers approved or amended through the special use district (SUD) prior to May 28, 1998. 
B.  An amendment to existing monopole is required to add additional antennas, add height to the monopole, replace the monopole with a larger pole, or add additional ground equipment to the facility. 
C.  Any amendment to an existing monopole requires approval of a conditional use permit as outlined in Section 3.902F. 
(Ord. No. 2249, § 1, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2264 § 1, 6-5-02) 
Section 7.700 - Freeway Development Standards. 
7.701 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide the appropriate and necessary off-site and on-site improvements to protect and enhance the livability of properties near the Agua Fria Freeway (State Route 101). 
(Ord. No. 2127, § 1, 3-28-2000) 
7.702 - General Requirements. 
A.  All residential development and other noise sensitive land uses located within one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet of the Agua Fria (Loop 101) right-of-way boundary shall comply with the provisions of this section. 
B.  Residential development shall include single residences, multi-residences and mobile home residences. 
C.  Noise sensitive land uses shall also include churches, schools, child care facilities, nursing homes and similar facilities. 
D.  All residential development and other noise sensitive uses within one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet of the Agua Fria Freeway right-of-way boundary shall submit a sound attenuation plan prior to rezoning, preliminary plat, lot split, or design review approval. 
E.  Billboard Signs and Digital Billboard Signs are prohibited on property located within the Scenic Corridor. 
(Ord. No. 2127, § 1, 3-28-2000; Ord. No. 2976, § 4, 2-23-16) 
7.703 - Sound Attenuation Plan. 
A.  The sound attenuation plan shall include a noise analysis of the property that details the projected freeway noise levels based on the most current projected traffic volumes available from the Maricopa Association of Governments. The time period for the projected traffic volumes and traffic characteristics shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) years from the date of the submittal. 
B.  The sound attenuation plan shall include the proposed attenuation measures needed to guarantee that the projected exterior noise levels on the property shall not exceed the (Leq) sixty-two (62) dBA noise level. This noise measurement method is the method used by the Arizona Department of Transportation (ADOT) and the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). 
C.  The sound attenuation plan shall include a certification by an acoustical engineer or registered architect as to the projected noise levels on the site and that the sound attenuation measures will meet the (Leq) sixty-two (62) dBA noise level. 
(Ord. No. 2127, § 1, 3-28-2000) 
7.704 - Sound Attenuation Improvements. 
A.  Sound attenuation improvements shall include all measures necessary to meet the required standard including freeway noise walls and earthen berms. 
B.  The sound attenuation measures shall utilize designs that minimize the visual impact on the site with appropriate use of colors and materials. The landscape plan proposed for any site subject to the freeway development standards shall include additional landscape treatments to minimize the visual impacts of walls or berms. 
(Ord. No. 2127, § 1, 3-28-2000) 
7.705 - Administration. 
A.  The City Engineer or designee will review the sound attenuation plan and its proposed improvements for compliance with the intent of this section. 
B.  The approval of the sound attenuation plan is required prior to any rezoning, preliminary plat, lot split, or design review approval. 
C.  If the City Engineer or designee determines that the sound attenuation plan does not meet the intent of this section that decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission consistent with the procedures outlined in Section 3.607. 
(Ord. No. 2127, § 1, 3-28-2000) 
Section 7.800 - Medical Marijuana. 
7.801 - Medical Marijuana Dispensary Offsite Cultivation Location. 
    A Medical Marijuana Dispensary Offsite Cultivation Location shall be permitted only in the Light Industrial (M-1) and Heavy Industrial (M-2) zoning districts, subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
A.  Applicant shall provide: 
1.  Name(s) and location(s) of the affiliated offsite medical marijuana dispensary associated with the cultivation operation. 
2.  A copy of the operating procedures adopted in compliance with A.R.S. § 36-2804(B)(1)(c). 
3.  A survey sealed by a registrant of the State of Arizona showing the location of the nearest medical marijuana dispensary or cultivation location if within 10,560 feet. 
4.  Site plan, floor plan, building permits for occupancy change, and a security plan. 
5.  If the application is by an agent for the owner of the property, the owner's authorization must include an explicit acknowledgement from the owner that the owner knows that the proposed use of the property is as a medical marijuana offsite cultivation location. 
B.  Shall be located in a permanent building and may not be located in a trailer, cargo container or motor vehicle. 
C.  Shall not permit on-premise consumption. 
D.  Shall not be located within 5,280 feet of any other Medical Marijuana Dispensary, Medical Marijuana Dispensary Offsite Cultivation Location, Medical Marijuana Infusion (or Manufacturing) Facility, or Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation Location. This distance shall be measured from the exterior walls of the building or portion thereof in which the businesses are conducted or proposed to be conducted. 
E.  Shall not be located within 1,320 feet of a residentially zoned property. This distance shall be measured in a straight line from the exterior walls of the building or portion thereof in which the business is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the zoning boundary line of the residentially zoned property. 
F.  Shall not be located within 1,320 feet of an elementary, secondary or high school. This distance shall be measured in a straight line from the exterior walls of the building or portion thereof in which the business is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the property line of the protected use. 
G.  Shall provide for proper disposal of marijuana remnants or by-products, and not to be placed within the facility's exterior refuse containers. 
H.  There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, or odors into the environment from the facility. 
I.  There shall be no retail sales at the facility. 
J.  The offsite cultivation location must comply with the security requirements of A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1. 
K.  Shall be a maximum 25,000 gross square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1, 2-22-11) 
7.802 - Medical Marijuana Dispensary. 
    Medical Marijuana Dispensary shall be permitted only in the General Office (G-O), General Commercial (C-2), and Heavy Commercial (C-3) zoning districts, subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
A.  Applicant shall provide: 
1.  Name and location of the offsite cultivation location, if applicable. 
2.  A copy of the operating procedures adopted in compliance with A.R.S. § 36-2804(B)(1)(c). 
3.  A survey sealed by a registrant of the State of Arizona showing the location of the nearest medical marijuana dispensary or cultivation location if within 10,560 feet. 
4.  Site plan, floor plan, building permits for occupancy change, and a security plan. 
5.  If the application is by an agent for the owner of the property the owner's authorization must include an explicit acknowledgement from the owner that the owner knows that the proposed use of the property is as a medical marijuana dispensary. 
B.  Shall be located in a permanent building and may not be located in a trailer, cargo container or motor vehicle. 
C.  Shall not provide outdoor seating. 
D.  Shall not permit on-premise consumption. 
E.  Shall be a maximum 6,000 gross square feet. 
F.  Shall not be located within 5,280 feet of any other Medical Marijuana Dispensary, Medical Marijuana Dispensary Offsite Cultivation Location, Medical Marijuana Infusion (or Manufacturing) Facility, or Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation Location. This distance shall be measured from the exterior walls of the building or portion thereof in which the businesses are conducted or proposed to be conducted. 
G.  Shall not be located within 500 feet of a residentially zoned property. This distance shall be measured in a straight line from the exterior walls of the building or portion thereof in which the business is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the zoning boundary line of the residentially zoned property. 
H.  Shall not be located within 1,320 feet of an elementary, secondary or high school. This distance shall be measured in a straight line from the exterior walls of the building or portion thereof in which the business is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the property line of the protected use. 
I.  Shall have operating hours not earlier than 8:00 a.m. and not later than 10:00 p.m. 
J.  Off-site delivery is prohibited. 
K.  Drive-through services are prohibited. 
L.  Shall provide for proper disposal of marijuana remnants or by-products, and not to be placed within the dispensary's exterior refuse containers. 
M.  There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, or odors into the environment from the dispensary. 
N.  The dispensary must comply with the security requirements of A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1. 
O.  A prominent and permitted sign stating "NO LOITERING IS ALLOWED ON OR IN FRONT OF THESE PREMISES" shall be located in a place that is clearly visible to patrons of the dispensary. As depicted by the signage, no loitering is allowed on or in front of the premises of the Medical Marijuana Dispensary. 
P.  Additionally, a security plan shall be submitted by the applicant in conjunction with design review approval. The security plan shall include provisions for the following: 
1.  An alarm system with a redundant power supply and circuitry to prevent deactivation. 
2.  A video surveillance system that at all times records all interior areas and the exterior perimeter. 
3.  A lighting system that at all times illuminates the interior areas and the exterior perimeter. 
4.  A plan for the reprogramming of all security codes and keys in the event an employee resigns or is terminated. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1, 2-22-11; Ord. No. O18-16, § 1, 3-27-18) 
7.803 - Medical Marijuana Infusion (or Manufacturing) Facility. 
    Medical Marijuana Infusion (or Manufacturing) Facility shall be permitted only in the Light Industrial (M-1) and Heavy Industrial (M-2) zoning districts, subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
A.  Applicant shall provide: 
1.  Name(s) and location(s) of the affiliated offsite Medical Marijuana Dispensary associated with the infusion (or manufacturing) facility. 
2.  A copy of the operating procedures adopted in compliance with A.R.S. §36-2804(B) (1) (c). 
3.  A survey sealed by a registrant of the State of Arizona showing the location of the nearest Medical Marijuana Dispensary, Medical Marijuana Dispensary (No Cultivation), Medical Marijuana Dispensary Offsite Cultivation Location, or Medical Marijuana Infusion (or Manufacturing) Facility if within 10,560 feet. 
4.  Site plan, floor plan, building permits for occupancy change, and a security plan. 
5.  If the application is by an agent for the owner of the property, the owner's authorization must include an explicit acknowledgement from the owner that the owner knows that the proposed use of the property is for a medical marijuana infusion (or manufacturing) facility. 
B.  The Facility shall be located in a permanent building and may not be located in a trailer, cargo container or motor vehicle. 
C.  The Facility shall not be located within 5,280 feet of any other Medical Marijuana Cultivation, Medical Marijuana Dispensary, Medical Marijuana Dispensary Offsite Cultivation Location, Medical Marijuana Infusion (or Manufacturing) Facility, or Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation Location. This distance shall be measured from the exterior walls of the building or portion thereof in which the businesses are conducted or proposed to be conducted. 
D.  The facility shall not be located within 1,320 feet of a residentially zoned property. This distance shall be measured in a straight line from the exterior walls of the building or portion thereof in which the businesses are conducted or proposed to be conducted to the zoning boundary line of the residentially zoned property. 
E.  The Facility shall not be located within 1,320 feet of an elementary, secondary or high school. This distance shall be measured in a straight line from the exterior walls of the building or portion thereof in which the business is conducted or proposed to be conducted to the property line of the protected use. 
F.  The Facility shall provide for proper disposal of marijuana remnants or by-products, and not to be placed within the facility's exterior refuse containers. 
G.  There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, or odors into the environment from the facility. 
H.  There shall be no retail sales at the facility. 
I.  Shall not permit on-premise consumption. 
J.  The Facility must comply with the security requirements of A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1. 
K.  Shall be a maximum 10,000 gross square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1, 2-22-11) 
7.804 - Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation Location. 
    Medical Marijuana Designated Caregiver Cultivation location shall be permitted only in the Light Industrial (M-1) and Heavy Industrial (M-2) zoning districts, subject to all rules adopted by the Arizona Department of Health Services and the following conditions and limitations: 
A.  Shall be located in a permanent building and may not be located in a trailer, cargo container or motor vehicle. 
B.  Shall not permit on-premise consumption. 
C.  The location shall provide for proper disposal of marijuana remnants or by-products, and not placed within the location's exterior refuse containers. 
D.  There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, or odors into the environment from the location. 
E.  There shall be no retail sales at the location. 
F.  More than one designated caregiver may co-locate cultivation locations as long as the total cultivation area does not exceed 250 square feet. 
G.  The designated caregiver location must comply with the security requirements of A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 28.1. 
H.  If the application is by an agent for the owner of the property, the owner's authorization must include an explicit acknowledgement from the owner that the owner knows that the proposed use of the property is for a medical marijuana designated caregiver cultivation location. 
(Ord. No. 2763, § 1, 2-22-11) 
Section 7.900 - Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes. 
A.  Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes are subject to the approval of a Temporary Use Permit (TUP) as well as the submission of a signed affidavit from the person requesting the TUP stating that the requestor has complied with Arizona state law regarding Donation/Recycling Drop-off Boxes and has the permission of the property owner to place the Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Box on the relevant property. 
B.  Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes may be permitted as an accessory use to all permitted non-residential uses within a residential zoning district pursuant to this article. 
C.  Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes shall be located on a paved surface. 
D.  Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes shall not be located within the front or side yard setbacks, required landscaped areas or within required parking spaces. 
E.  Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, or be located within the public right-of-way, drive aisles, fire lanes, loading zones, or any other location that may cause hazardous conditions, or constitute a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
F.  There shall be no more than one (1) Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Box on lots or parcels or shopping complexes/centers less than one (1) acre in size, no more than two (2) Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes on lots or shopping complexes/centers of one (1) to three (3) acres in size, and no more than four (4) Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes on lots or complexes/centers greater than three (3) acres in size. No more than two donation boxes shall be clustered together in any one location. 
Donation Box Allotment 
Property or Premises/Complex Size up to 1 acre = 1 Box. 
1-3 Acres = 2 Boxes *. 
3 + Acres = 4 Boxes * 
* No more than 2 (two) Donation Bins shall be clustered together in any one location. 
G.  Each Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Box shall have a firmly closing and locking lid, shall be clearly marked to identify the specific items and materials to be collected for donation, and shall be clearly marked to identify the City of Glendale Temporary Use Permit number. The numbers shall be a minimum of 2 inches high and located on the deposit face of the box. The mark shall identify if the entity is a non-profit or for profit organization. 
H.  The name and local telephone number of the entity obtaining the TUP shall be affixed to the box on an area no larger than one foot by one foot. 
I.  Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes shall have a capacity no greater than 6 cubic yards. 
J.  All donated items must be collected and stored in the Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Box and all contents cleared no less than once a week. Any items or materials left outside of the Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes shall be removed within 24 hours of discovery or notification, whichever occurs first. If a container is damaged or vandalized, it must be repaired or removed within 5 business days of discovery or notification. If there is a public health, safety or welfare concern pursuant to the authority granted to the City, the container must then be removed within 24 hours of discovery or notification. 
K.  It is the joint responsibility of the property owner or authorized agent and the entity obtaining the TUP to keep the area around the Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes free of litter and debris, and remove any graffiti within 24 hours of discovery or notification, whichever occurs first. 
L.  It is the responsibility of the entity obtaining the TUP to maintain the Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Box in good condition that is rust and dent free. 
M.  Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes not located or maintained in compliance with this Article may be subject to revocation of the Temporary Use Permit (TUP). 
N.  The City may consider prior permit revocations, prior notices of violation, and fraudulent application information when granting or denying new Temporary Use Permits for Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes. 
O.  Any Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Box (including its contents) which is determined to be unauthorized, unpermitted, or is otherwise in violation of this ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be removed pursuant to those provisions. 
P.  The property owner shall control the Temporary Use Permit. The permittee or drop box operator does not control the Temporary Use Permit unless he/she is also the property owner. As such, the property owner or authorized agent may rescind his/her authorization for the Donation/Recycling Drop-Off box at any time and the permit shall be revoked. Property owners may remove a Donation/Recycling Drop-Off box in accordance with Arizona state law. 
Q.  Arizona state law governing drop boxes applies to Donation/Recycling Drop-Off Boxes. 
(Ord. No. O17-51, § 7, 10-24-17) 
APPENDIX A ZONING - SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
APPENDIX A ZONING - ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS 
1.  Zoning Ordinance of the City of Glendale, Arizona, adopted by the City Council on June 22, 1993 by Ordinance Number 1772 New Series. Ordinance effective date, July 23, 1993. 
2.  Ordinance 1805, adopted May 10, 1994. Amended Sections 3.104 and 3.803. 
3.  Ordinance 1812, adopted July 24, 1994. Added Sections 5.121 through 5.132. 
4.  Ordinance 1839, adopted April 11, 1995. Adopted Official Supplementary Zoning Map ZMA-1. 
5.  Ordinance 1840, adopted May 23, 1995. Amended Sections 5.842(B)(8) and 5.844(D). 
6.  Ordinance 1856, adopted November 14, 1995. Added Maps 6A, 7 and 8 to the Special Building Heights and Floor Area Ratio Maps. 
7.  Ordinance 1868, adopted February 27, 1996. Adopted Official Supplementary Zoning Map ZMA-2. 
8.  Ordinance 1874, adopted March 12, 1996. Amended Sections 2.300, 5.612, 5.620, 7.103, 7.104, 7.105 and 7.109. Adopted Official Supplementary Zoning Map ZMA-3. 
9.  Ordinance 1896, adopted July 23, 1996. Added Sections 4.300(31) and 6.600. 
10.  Ordinance 1901, adopted September 24, 1996. Amended Section 7104. 
11.  Ordinance 1902, adopted September 24, 1996. Added Section 5.754(t). 
12.  Ordinance 1912, adopted December 10, 1996. Amended Section 2.300. 
13.  Ordinance 1913, adopted December 10, 1996. Adopted Official Supplementary Zoning Map ZMA-4. 
14.  Ordinance 1914, adopted December 10, 1996. Adopted Official Supplementary Zoning Map ZMA-5. 
15.  Ordinance 1932, adopted March 25, 1997. Amended Section 7.104. 
16.  Ordinance 1935, adopted April 22, 1997. Added Section 6.700; amended Sections 7.104 and 7.107. 
17.  Ordinance 1947, adopted June 24, 1997. Amended Sections 2.300 and 7.105. 
18.  Ordinance 1952, adopted July 22, 1997. Added Sections 3.304, 3.305, 3.520-3.524. Amended Sections 3.303, 3.702, 3.802, 3.902 and 6.202. 
19.  Ordinance 1954, adopted September 9, 1997. Amended Sections 5.204, 5.304, 5.324 and 7.504. 
20.  Ordinance 1959, adopted September 30, 1997. Amended Section 7.404. 
21.  Ordinance 1966, adopted October 28, 1997. Amended Section 5.204. 
22.  Ordinance 1988, adopted February 2, 1998. Amended Section 7.104. 
23.  Ordinance 1999, adopted April 14, 1998. Amended Section 7.104. 
24.  Ordinance 2002, adopted April 28 1998. Added Sections 3.902(F), 3.912, 5.103(D), 5.107(B), 5.123(E), 5.128(B), 5.203(F), 5.209(C), 5.303(E), 5.310(C), 5.323(F), 5.327(D), 5.413(E), 5.417(B), 5.423(C), 5.427(D), 5.433(C), 5.437(D), 5.443(C), 5.447(D), 5.503(C), 5.507(C), 5.523(B), 5.524(F)-(H), 5.527(C), 5.543(C), 5.544(B)-(D), 5.547(C), 5.612A, 5.616(B), 5.713(B), 5.714(H)-(J), 5.717(D), 5.733(B5.734(C)-(E), 5.738(C), 5.753(C), 5.754(U)-(W), 5.759(C), 5.773(D), 5.774(D)-(F), 5.813(D), 5.814(G)-(I), 5.819(B), 5.843(B), 5.844(F)-(H), 5.848(C), 5.863(B), 5.864(N)-(P), 5.868(C), 5.908(B), 7.506, 7.600-7.602, Table 3-A. Amended Sections 2.300, 3.904, 6.503(H). 
25.  Ordinance 2028, adopted October 13, 1998. Amended Section 7.403. 
26.  Ordinance 2029, adopted October 13, 1998. Added Section 5.754(X). 
27.  Ordinance 2030, adopted October 13, 1998. Added Section 5.752 (M). Amended Section 5.732. 
28.  Ordinance 2037, adopted October 27, 1998. Adopted Official Supplementary Zoning Map ZMA-6. 
29.  Ordinance 2062, adopted February 23, 1999. Amended Section 5.613. 
30.  Ordinance 2089, adopted July 27, 1999. Added Section 7.510. Amended Sections 2.300, 5.754, 5.773, 5.774, 5.843, 5.844, 5.863 and 5.864. 
31.  Ordinance 2090, adopted July 27, 1999. Added Sections 5.313-5.3185. Amended Sections 5.300 and 5.301. Repealed Section 5.309. 
32.  Ordinance 2104, adopted October 12, 1999. Added § 3.812. Amended Section 3.809. 
33.  Ordinance 2105, adopted October 26, 1999. Amended Sections 5.524 and 5.544. 
34.  Ordinance 2114, adopted December 14, 1999. Added Sections 5.843(D) and 5.844(H). 
35.  Ordinance 2115, adopted January 11, 2000. Amended Section 6.602. 
36.  Ordinance 2120, adopted February 22, 2000. Amended Special Development Standards Map A-4. 
37.  Ordinance 2121, adopted February 22, 2000. Amended Section 5.717. 
38.  Ordinance 2127, adopted March 28, 2000. Added Sections 7.700-7.705. 
39.  Ordinance 2136, adopted May 9, 2000. Amended Section 2.300. 
40.  Ordinance 2166, adopted October 24, 2000. Added Section 7.507. Amended Section 5.103. 
41.  Ordinance 2176, adopted December 19, 2000. Added Sections 5.734(F) and (G), 5.754(W) and (X) and 5.774(F) and (G). 
42.  Ordinance 2177, adopted December 19, 2000. Added Sections 5.701-5.7094 and 5.782-5.794. Amended Sections 2.300, 4.300, 7.104(C)(1) and (C)(3)(E), 7.201(A) and 7.202(A)(2) and Table 3 of Section 5.800. 
43.  Ordinance 2193, adopted May 29, 2001. Amended Section 3.201. 
44.  Ordinance 2203, adopted July 24, 2001. Amended Special Development Standards Map 5. 
45.  Ordinance 2232, adopted December 12, 2001. Adopted Official Supplementary Zoning Map ZMA-7. 
46.  Ordinance 2254, adopted May 14, 2002. Amended Section 7.104. 
47.  Ordinance 2260, adopted June 11, 2002. Amended Sections 3.201, 3.709(B)(2) and 7.109(C). 
48.  Ordinance 2264, adopted June 25, 2002. Adopted Official Supplementary Zoning Map ZMA-8. 
49.  Ordinance 2280, adopted October 22, 2002. Amended Sections 2.300 and 7.104. 
50.  Ordinance 2372, adopted March 23, 2004. Added Sections 7.104(C)(1.5) and (2.5). 
51.  Ordinance 2386, adopted June 22, 2004. Amended Sections 2.300, 5.103(B), 5.123(C), 5.203(C), 5.303(B), 5.316(B), 5.323(B), 5.413(B), 5.423(B), 5.433(B), 5.443(B), 5.503(B) and 7.502. 
52.  Ordinance 2393, adopted July 13, 2004. Adopted Official Supplementary Zoning Map ZMA-9. 
53.  Ordinance 2441, adopted May 24, 2005. Adopted Official Supplementary Zoning Map ZMA-10. 
54.  Ordinance 2463, adopted September 27, 2005. Adopted Official Supplementary Zoning Map ZMA-11. 
55.  Ordinance 2763, adopted February 22, 2011. Amended Section 2.300. Added Section 7.800. 
56.  Ordinance 2773, adopted June 14, 2011. Added Section 6.800. Amended Sections 7.103 and 7.104. Rezoned to add the Glendale Centerline Overlay District as an Overlay District. Amended Zoning Map to reflect the placement of the Glendale Centerline Overlay District. 
57.  Ordinance 2805, adopted June 26, 2012. Amended Section 2.300. Amended Sections 7.103(F), (K), and 7.106. Added Section 7.110. Amended various sections of the Zoning Ordinance for billboards. 
58.  E-mail, March 19, 2012. Update to Map 2, Appendix A, Special Development Standards of the Zoning Ordinance. 
59.  Ordinance 2976, adopted Feb. 23, 2016. Amended Section 2.300. Amended Section 5.910. Added Section 6.900. Amended Sections 7.7101, 7.103, and 7.702. 
60.  Ordinance No. O17-51, adopted October 24, 2017. Amended Section 2.300. Added Sections 3.920-3.923. Renumbered Sections 3.920 and 3.921 as Sections 3.930 and 3.931. Amended Section 5.705.F. Added Section 5.706. Renumbered Sections 5.706-5.7094 as Sections 5.707-5.709.5. Amended Section 5.714.K. Added Section 5.715. Renumbered Sections 5.715-5.720 as Sections 5.716-5.721. Amended Section 5.734.H. Added Section 5.735. Renumbered Sections 5.735-5.741 as Sections 5.736-5.742. Amended Section 5.754.Z. Added Section 5.755. Amended Section 5.774.H. Added Section 5.775. Renumbered Sections 5.775-5.781 as Sections 5.776-5.781.1. Amended Section 5.786.J. Added Section 5.787. Renumbered Sections 5.787-5.794 as Sections 5.788-5.795. Added Section 5.905. Renumbered Sections 5.905-5.913 as Sections 5.906-5.914. Added Section 7.900. 
61.  Ordinance No. 018-16, adopted March 27, 2018. Amended Section 7.802, Medical Marijuana Dispensary. 
APPENDIX B - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FEE SCHEDULE Effective October 1, 2014[1] 
BUILDING SAFETY 
FEE GENERAL NOTES 
Building Plan Review Fees . Plan review fees pay for the evaluation of plans to determine compliance with adopted codes and ordinances. These fees are based on a percentage of the calculated building permit fee with a minimum charge for each application. Payment of the plan review fee is in addition to the building permit fee and is non-refundable after plans are accepted and the review is started. 
Building Permit Fees . Building inspections are financed by building permit fees. Permit fees for new buildings, additions, and pools are based on the valuation (total construction costs) of the buildings or structure. The determination of the value or valuation will be made on the basis of the Building Valuation Data published in the International Code Council Building Safety Journal and by other valuation criteria approved by the Building Official. Other types of permits have fees based on the amount of time estimated to inspect the project until completion. 
In addition to the basic level of inspection services offered, additional inspection services are available through prior arrangement with the Building Safety Department and with payment of the appropriate fee. These services include after-hours, weekend or holiday inspections, re-inspections, optional (not required) inspections and requests for time-specific inspections. 
Miscellaneous Fees . Miscellaneous fees are those fees that do not fall under the plan review or inspection areas. These fees are generally based on an hourly rate but may be set on standard administrative costs for providing service. 
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES General Services:  Permit Faxing (charged once, faxed in or out) $12.00  Permit Record Change (incl. address change) $36.04  Plan Reproduction Fee (8.5 × 11 and 11 × 17) $3.59 per page  Plan Reproduction Fee $116.51 plus printing costs  Record Retention Fee (commercial, residential, T.I. plans) 1% of permit ($10.00 min.)  Refund of Permit Fee (no inspections made) 20% of permit ($50.00 min.) Expired Permits: Permits expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by the permit has not commenced within 180 days from the date of the permit, or any permit shall expire 180 days after the last approved inspection. (See section 105.5 of the 2012 International Building Code and City of Glendale Ordinance.)  Renewals prior to expiration 50% of original permit  Renewals after expiration 100% of new permit fees  Work prior to issuance of permit 200% of new permit fees Appeals/Modifications/Formal Interpretations: Request for modifications or alternate materials and methods per Section 104 of the City of Glendale Ordinance must first be made to the Building Official, who will conduct the initial review.  Initial Review/Non-Structural $116.51 per hr. (2 hr. min.)  Initial Review/Structural $116.51 per hr. (2 hr. min.)  Requests for Code Modifications or Formal Interpretations from Building Official $116.51 per hr. (3 hr. min.)  Renewal of Approval $120.05 (for 3 years)  Board of Appeals   Single Family Residential $300.42   Non-Single Family $420.59  Lot Combination, Building Code Covenant and Use Agreement, Non-Build Easement Requests $116.51 per hr. (1 hr. min.) Damaged Buildings:  Administration $116.51 per hr. (1 hr. min.)  Investigation $116.51 per hr. (1 hr. min.)  Appeal to Hearing Officer $721.05 Phased Submittals: Plan Review of Phased Designs for New Construction and Additions (foundation only, shell building, etc.). Projects built with phased or partial permits require significantly more coordination time for the plan review and inspection process than do projects built under a single permit.  Initial Plan Review Application 100% of plan review fee per building  Subsequent Plan Review Submittals (for each phase) 75% of permit based on valuation of submittal Optional Plan Review Services:  P.A.S.S. (Permits and Safety Sequence) 75% of permit based on valuation of submittal times three (3)  Building Safety Pre-Plan Submittal Meeting $116.51 per hr. (1 hr. min.)  Staff Consultation and Research $116.51 per hr. (2 hr. min.)  Revisions - (Plan review of changes made to approved plans either before or after permit is issued. Revisions that expand the scope of a permit require a new permit and fees.) $116.51 per hr. (1 hr. min.)  Deferred Submittals $116.51 per hr. (2 hr. min.) Certificate of Occupancy:  Certificate of Occupancy Included in original permit fee  First Temporary Certificate of Occupancy (TCO) $503.67 for a max. of 30 days  First 30 day extension of TCO $1,007.34 for an additional 30 days  Second 30 day extension of TCO $2,014.71 for an additional 30 days It is expected that no project shall exceed 90 days operation under a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. Should a third or subsequent extension occur, the fee will double that of the previous extension. For example, the third extension would be $4029.36, the fourth extension would be $8058.72, etc.  Change of Occupancy or Use: (Requires both of the following)   Plan Review $116.51 per hr. (2 hr. min.)   Inspection $108.42 per hr. (2 hr. min.)  Copy of Certificate of Occupancy $72.63 per copy  Certificate of Occupancy: Tenant Space - no work $108.42  
RESIDENTIAL FEES Plan Review Fees: Plan review fees are due when the permit application is submitted. For combination permits, plan review fees for electrical, mechanical, and plumbing reviews will be collected at the time of permitting. Standard Plans:  Base Plan Only-Building 75% of permit fee (min. $116.51)  Base Plan plus variations 75% of permit fee (min. $116.51) + $57.28 per EA additional elevation or change to building footprint  Electrical Plan Review 75% of the electrical permit fee (min. $116.51)  Plumbing Plan Review 75% of the plumbing permit fee (min. $116.51)  Mechanical Plan Review 75% of the mechanical permit fee (min. $116.51)  Site Plan Review $58.25 per permit  Third or Subsequent Review of Plans $116.51 per hr. (1 hr. min.)  Annual Renewal of Standard Plans $58.25 per plan  Revisions - Plan review of changes made to approved plans before or after permit issued $116.51 per hr. (1 hr. min.) Revisions that expand the scope of a permit require new permit and fees.  Truss Calculation Review - Truss package submitted separately from building permit plans or revisions to the truss package are required after permit is issued. $116.51 per hr. (2 hr. min.) Custom Home, Remodel, Room Addition Plans:  Building Plan Review 75% of the building permit fee (min. $116.51)  Electrical Plan Review 75% of the electric permit fee (min. $116.51)  Plumbing Plan Review 75% of the plumbing permit fee (min. $116.51)  Mechanical Plan Review 75% of the mechanical permit fee (min. $116.51)  Third or Subsequent Review of Plans $116.51 per hr. (1 hr. min.)  Revisions - (Plan review of changes made to approved plans before or after permit issued.) $116.51 per hr. (1 hr. min.) Revisions that expand the scope of a permit require new permit and  Truss Calculation Review - Truss package submitted separately from building permit plans or revisions to the truss package are required after permit is issued. $116.51 per hr. (2 hr. min.) Permit Fees: Permit fees are based on the valuation of the project, or portion of the project represented by each separate permit. Valuation of the work shall be the estimated cost as determined by the Building Official based on nationally recognized standards and shall include the value of materials, labor, overhead, and profit. See Table 3B (which is the valuation chart) to determine the value of the project. Fees for all permits will be collected at the time of permitting. Building Permit:  Per building Based on value, see Table 3A Demolition Permit:  Per structure $55.95 per structure Electric Permit :  Base Permit Fee $28.24  Electrical Service - 200A or less $36.64  Electrical Service - over 200A $74.66  Electrical Clearance - (Inspection not included w/Electrical permits) When required by utility company to energize service $108.42 per request  Temporary Power Meter Installation $144.21  Sub panels $36.64  Appliances - 1 HP or less- dishwasher, cook tops, ranges, wall a/c, washing machines, garbage disposals, water heaters, clothes dryers, space heaters, trash compacters $5.69 EA  Livable Floor Area $0.063 SF  Receptacles/Switches/Outlets:   First 20 fixtures $1.29 EA   Additional fixtures $0.84 EA  Lighting Fixtures:   First 20 fixtures $1.29 EA   Additional fixtures $0.84 EA  Miscellaneous $21.85 EA Mechanical Permit:  Base Permit Fee $28.24  Air Handlers $12.78  Evaporative Coolers $12.78  Furnaces:   100K BTU or less $17.79   over 100K BTU $21.85  Appliance Vents $8.71 EA  Vent Fans $8.71 EA  Exhaust Hoods $12.78  All-in-one HVAC $17.79  Piggy-backed HVAC (w/evap) $30.57  Miscellaneous equipment/appliances $12.78 EA  Repairs/additions to existing equipment $16.45 Mobile Home Plan Review and Permit Fees:  Plan Review $116.51 ($58.25 for 1/2 hr.)  Site Plan Review $54.05 per permit  Installation $144.13 per unit  Electrical Upgrade/New Service $108.42 per unit Plumbing Permit:  Base Permit Fee $28.24  Fixtures $11.17 EA  Sewer $29.61  Water Piping $5.69 100 LF (100 FT min.)  Drainage Piping $5.69 100 LF (100 FT min.)  Water Heater $14.77  Gas Piping:   5 outlets or less $7.38   each additional outlet $1.29 EA  Gas Clearance - (Inspection not included with Mechanical/Plumbing permits) When required by utility company to establish service $108.42 per request  Lawn Sprinkler System-(includes backflow device) $17.79 EA  Miscellaneous equipment/appliances $11.77 EA  
COMMERCIAL FEES Plan Review Fees: Plan review fees are due when the permit application is submitted. For combination permits, plan review fees for electrical, mechanical, and plumbing reviews will be collected at the time of permitting.  Building Plan Review 75% of the building permit fee (min. $116.51)  Electrical Plan Review 75% of the electrical permit fee (min. $116.51)  Plumbing Plan Review 75% of the plumbing permit fee (min. $116.51)  Mechanical Plan Review 75% of the mechanical permit fee (min. $116.51)  Site Plan Review - For previously approved standards -carports, retaining walls, and bus shelters $54.05 per permit  Third or Subsequent Review of Plans $116.51 per hr. (1 hr. min.)  Revisions - Plan review of changes made to approved plans before or after permit issued $116.51 per hr. (1 hr. min.) Revisions that expand the scope of a permit require new permit and  Truss Calculation Review - When truss package is submitted separate from building permit plans or revisions to truss package are required after permit is issued $116.51 per hr. (2 hr. min.)  Plan Review Services Not Otherwise Listed - Plan review of changes made to approved plans before or after permit issued $116.51 per hr. (1 hr. min.) Revisions that expand the scope of a permit require new permit and fees. Permit Fees: Permit fees are based on the valuation of the project, or portion of the project represented by each separate permit. Valuation of the work shall be the estimated cost as determined by the Building Official based on nationally recognized standards and shall include the value of materials, labor, overhead, and profit. See Table 3B (which is the valuation chart) to determine the value of the project. Fees for all permits will be collected at the time of permitting.  Minimum Commercial Permit Fee $108.42  Demolition Permit $120.16 per structure  Building Permit Based on value, see Table 3A Temporary Power:  Meter Installation $144.21  Power Pole or Pedestal $28.24  Distribution System - In addition to pole or pedestal fee construction sites, decorative lights, Christmas tree lots, pumpkin patches, etc. $14.77 Electrical Permit:  Base Permit Fee $55.95  Electrical Service:   200A or less $36.64   201A-999A $74.66   over 1000A $108.42 per hr. (3 hr. min.)  Electrical Clearance - (At a single site address) When required by utility company to energize service $108.42 per request Gas Clearance - (At a single site address) When required by utility company to establish service $108.42 per request Appliances:  Less than 1 HP $5.69 EA  More than 1 HP $14.77 EA Receptacles/Switches/Outlets:  First 20 fixtures $1.30 EA  Additional fixtures $0.84 EA Lighting Fixtures:  First 20 fixtures $1.29 EA  Additional fixtures $0.84 EA  Theatrical-type $1.29 EA  Pole or platform mounted $1.29 EA Power Apparatus:  1 HP or less $5.69 EA  more than 1 HP less than 10 HP $14.77 EA  more than 10 HP less than 50 HP $29.55 EA  more than 50 HP less than 100 HP $59.48 EA  more than 100 HP $89.51 EA Bus ways, each 100 LF $8.71 EA 100 LF Miscellaneous $27.98 EA Multi-Family Residential Only:  Livable Floor Area $0.057 SF Mechanical Permit: Base Permit Fee $55.95 Furnaces and All-in-One HVAC (Package Units):  100K BTU or less $17.79 EA  over 100K BTU $21.85 EA  Floor Furnace $17.79 EA  Suspended, Recessed, Floor Mounted $17.79 EA Heat Pump - Split System $30.57 EA Piggy-back HVAC (w/evap) $30.57 EA  100K BTU or less $17.79 EA  over 100K BTU $21.85 EA Repairs/additions to existing equip. $16.45 EA Air Handlers:  Less than 10,000 CFM $12.78 EA  More than 10,000 CFM $21.43 EA Evaporative Coolers $12.78 EA Ventilation and Exhaust:  Appliance Vents $8.71 EA  Compensation Air Circulation System $12.78 EA  Exhaust Hoods:   Type I $167.88 EA   Type II $12.78 EA  Product Conveying Exhaust System $12.78 EA  Vent/Exhaust Fan $8.71 EA Refrigeration Condensors $12.78 EA Refrigeration Evaporators $12.78 EA Incinerators, Commercial and Industrial $17.43 EA Boilers/Compressors/Absorption Systems:  = 3 HP or 100K BTU/h $17.43 EA  > 3 HP but = 15 HP or > 100K and < 500K $32.60 EA  > 15 HP and = 30 HP or > 500K and < 1,000,000 BTU/h $44.76 EA  >30 HP and = 50 HP or = 1,000,000 BTU/h and <1,750,000 BTU/h $66.62 EA  >50 HP or = 1,750,000 BTU/h $111.33 EA Miscellaneous equipment/appliances $12.78 Chilled/Hot Water Piping (Hydronic) $5.69 per 100 LF (100 FT min.) Plumbing Permit:  Base Permit Fee $55.95  Fixtures $11.77 EA  Sewer $29.61  Private Sewer Collector:   1-100 FT $0.70 per LF ($38.51 min.)   101-1,000 FT $72.09 plus $0.28/LF   over 1,000 FT $342.50 plus $0.10/LF  Waste Pretreatment Interceptor $23.90 EA  Roof Drains (inside bldg) $11.77 EA  Water Piping $5.69 per 100 LF (100 FT min.)  Drainage Piping $5.69 per 100 LF (100 FT min.)  Water Heater $14.57 EA  Gas Piping:   5 outlets or less $7.38   over 5 outlets $1.29 EA  Lawn Sprinkler System - (includes backflow device) $17.79 EA  Atmospheric Type Vacuum Breaker $14.77  Backflow Devices not Atmospheric: $78.09 per device  Miscellaneous equipment/appliances $11.77 EA Swimming Pools and Spa Permits:  Site Plan Review $54.05 per permit  Secondary Barrier $54.05 per permit  Plan Review 75% of total permit  Building Permit:   In Ground Based on value, see Table 3A   Above Ground Based on value, see Table 3A   Spas/Hot Tubs Based on value, see Table 3A  Electrical Permit $59.48  Plumbing Permit:   Public Pool $109.65   Public Spa $73.00   Private Pool $73.00   Private Spa $36.34 Sign Permits:  Sign Plan Review 75% of building permit fee (1/2 hr. min. @ $58.25)  Building Permit:   Subdivision Advertising/Directional Sign $72.09 per sign   Construction/Development Sign $72.09 per sign  Promo. Pennants, Balloons, Banners, Displays $30.03 per occasion (10 days)  Permanent Commercial Sign:   Face Change Only $30.03 per sign   No Electric $72.09 per sign   With Electric $108.42 per sign  Billboards: $72.09 per sign   EMB Fee Based on value, see Table 3A   With Electric $108.42 add per sign  Flag Poles $72.09 per pole  Electric Permit $72.09 per sign Fence/Wall Permits:  Structural Plan Review $116.51 ($58.25 min. for 1/2 hr.)  Building Permit:   Perimeter residential subdivision walls $0.12 per SF   Fence walls over 6 FT in height $0.12 per SF   Retaining walls of any height $0.19 per SF Backflow Prevention:  Annual Processing Fee $78.09 per site  Permit Fee $78.09 per device  Hydrant Backflow Permit $68.66 per hydrant Miscellaneous Permits:  Carnivals and Circus Events:  Plan Review 75% of permit  Building Permit $240.34  Electrical Permit (includes generator) $28.24 EA   Rides, Displays $8.71 EA   System Lighting/Booths $8.71 EA  Haunted Houses/Amusements:  Plan Review 75% of permit  Building Permit $180.26  Electrical Permit (includes generator) $28.24 EA   Rides, Displays $8.71 EA   System Lighting/Booths $8.71 EA   Special Events $120.16  Spray Booths $180.26 ($86.58 EA additional)  Shopping Mall Events $300.42 Inspections:  Inspections Outside of Normal Business Hours:   Weekdays $134.30 per hr. (2 hr. min.)   Saturdays, Sundays, Holidays $134.30 per hr. (3 hr min.)  Inspections $108.42  Re-Inspections $108.42 EA inspection (2 hr. min.)  Inspections of Buildings to be Relocated $108.42 per hr. (1 hr. min.)  Investigations $108.42  
TABLE 3A BUILDING PERMIT FEES 
Total Valuation Fee $1.00 to $500.00 $28.24 $501.00 to $2,000.00 28.24 for the first $500.00 plus $3.65 for each additional $100.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.00 $2,001.00 to $25,000.00 $82.99 for the first $2,000.00 plus $16.82 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00. $25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $469.85 for the first $25,000.00 plus $12.12 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00. $50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $772.85 for the first $50,000.00 plus $8.40 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00. $100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $1192.85 for the first $100,000.00 plus $6.71 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00. $500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $3876.85 for the first $500,000.00 plus $5.70 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00. $1,000,001.00 and up $6726.85 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $4.38 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. Note: Valuation chart on the following page may be updated in accordance with Building Standards Magazine or as published. Current publication utilized is Feb. 2014.  
Table 3B 
Group Type of Construction IA IB IIA IIB IIIA IIIB IV VA VB A-1 Assembly, theaters, w/stage 229.03 221.51 216.1 207.06 194.68 189.07 200.1 177.95 171.21 A-1 Assembly, theaters w/out stage 209.87 202.35 196.94 187.9 175.62 170.01 180.94 158.89 152.15 A-2 Assembly, nightclubs 177.89 172.85 168.07 161.49 151.98 147.78 155.8 137.68 132.99 A-2 Assembly, restaurants, bars, banquet halls 176.89 171.85 166.07 160.49 149.98 146.78 154.8 135.68 131.99 A-3 Assembly, churches 211.95 204.43 199.02 189.98 177.95 172.34 183.02 161.22 154.48 A-3 Assembly, general, community halls, libraries, museums 176.88 169.36 162.95 154.91 141.73 137.12 147.95 125 119.26 A-4 Assembly, arenas 208.87 201.35 194.94 186.9 173.62 169.01 179.94 156.89 151.15 B Business 182.89 176.17 170.32 161.88 147.55 142.00 155.49 129.49 123.76 B Business - shell 146.31 140.94 136.26 129.50 118.04 113.60 124.39 103.59 99.01 B Business - tenant improvement 36.58 35.23 34.06 32.38 29.51 28.40 31.10 25.90 24.75 E Educational 195.85 189.10 183.56 175.25 163.21 154.58 169.21 142.63 137.99 F-1 Factory and industrial, moderate hazard 108.98 103.99 97.83 94.17 84.37 80.56 90.16 69.50 65.44 F-2 Factory and industrial, low hazard 107.98 102.99 97.83 93.17 84.37 79.56 89.16 69.50 65.44 H-1 High Hazard, explosives 102.01 97.02 91.86 87.20 78.60 73.79 83.19 63.73 N.P. H-234 High Hazard 102.01 97.02 91.86 87.20 78.60 73.79 83.19 63.73 58.67 H-5 HPM 182.89 176.17 170.32 161.88 147.55 142.00 155.49 129.49 123.76 I-1 Institutional, supervised environment 180.72 174.14 169.28 161.12 149.06 145.04 161.12 133.69 129.43 I-2 Institutional, hospitals 308.5 301.79 295.93 287.5 272.14 N.P. 281.1 254.09 N.P. I-2 Institutional, nursing homes 213.56 206.85 200.99 192.56 179.22 N.P. 186.16 161.17 N.P. I-3 Institutional, restrained 208.37 201.66 195.80 187.37 174.54 167.98 180.97 156.48 148.74 I-4 Institutional, day care facilities 180.72 174.14 169.28 161.12 149.06 145.04 161.12 133.69 129.43 M Mercantile 132.61 127.00 121.79 116.21 106.35 103.15 110.52 92.05 88.36 M Mercantile - shell 106.09 101.60 97.43 92.97 85.08 82.52 88.42 73.64 70.69 M Mercantile - tenant improvement 26.52 25.40 24.36 23.24 21.27 20.63 22.10 18.41 17.67 R-1 Residential, hotels 182.28 175.70 170.83 162.68 150.87 146.84 162.68 135.49 131.23 R-2 Residential, multiple family 152.86 146.27 141.41 133.25 122.04 118.01 133.25 106.66 102.41 R-3 Residential, one- and two-family 143.93 139.97 136.51 132.83 127.95 124.61 130.57 119.73 112.65 R-4 Residential, care/assisted living facilities 180.72 174.14 169.28 161.12 149.06 145.04 161.12 133.69 129.43 S-1 Storage, moderate hazard 101.01 96.02 89.86 86.2 76.6 72.79 82.19 61.73 57.67 S-2 Storage, low hazard 100.01 95.02 89.86 85.2 76.6 71.79 81.19 61.73 56.67 S-2.1 Public Parking Garage 53.99 53.99 53.99 53.99 N.P. N.P. 53.99 N.P. N.P. U Utility, miscellaneous 77.1 72.64 68.12 64.64 58.13 54.28 61.62 45.49 43.33   a. Private Garages use Utility, miscellaneous 
  b. Unfinished basements (all use group) = $15.00 per sq. ft. 
  c. For shell buildings other than B or M occupancies, use 80% of the sq. ft. values provided. 
  d. Tenant Improvements for other than B and M occupancies, use 20% of sq. ft. values provided. 
  e. N.P. = not permitted 
The Valuation chart is provided by the International Code Council and published in The Building Safety Journal annually.  
ENGINEERING FEES PLAN REVIEW FEES Plan Review, Grading, Drainage and SWPPP:  First Plan Review $340.26 per sheet  Second Plan Review $340.26 per sheet  Third Plan Review $340.26 per sheet  Revisions $340.26 per sheet Construction Drawings (Civil) :  First Plan Review $340.26 per sheet  Second Plan Review $340.26 per sheet  Third or Subsequent Review $340.26 per sheet  Revisions $340.26 per sheet  Owner Occupied Single-Family Residence Fee (10% of plan review fee) $34.00 Drainage Report Review:  First Review $340.26 per review  Second Review $340.26  Third or Subsequent Review $340.26 per review Minor Land Division  Minor Land Division $1,045.40 PERMIT FEES Right of Way Permit:  Base Fee $120.16  Paving $0.48 SY  Manholes/Water Valve Adjustment $54.05 EA  Curb and Gutter $0.28 LF  Valley Gutter $0.35 SF  Sidewalk $0.08 SF  Sidewalk Ramps $30.03 EA  Driveway - Residential $30.03 EA  Driveway - Commercial $240.34 EA  Catch Basin/Scuppers $120.16 EA  Public Water, Sewer and Storm Drain Permit:  Base Fee $120.16  Hydrant Flow Test $60.09 EA  Water Line Trench $1.16 LF  Sewer Line Trench $0.94 LF  Storm Drain Trench $1.18 LF  Irrigation (12" and larger) $1.18 LF  Manholes $54.05 EA  Wet Taps $420.59 EA Grading and Drainage Permit:  Base Fee $120.16  Paving (on site) $0.48 SY  Catch Basin/Scuppers (private) $120.16 EA  Manholes/Drywells (private) $54.05 EA  Storm Drain/Private Irrigation (12" and larger) $1.18 LF Dry Utility Permit:  Base Fee $210.28 EA  Trench (R/W) Paved $0.70 LF  Trench (R/W) Unpaved $0.48 LF  Pits $12.00 EA  Utility Cabinet 30" and above in height $144.13 EA  Man Holes $54.05 EA  Seal Coat $0.90 SY  First Plan Review $180.26 per sheet  Second Plan Review $120.16 per sheet  Third or Subsequent Review $180.26 per sheet  Revisions $120.16 per sheet Emergency Permits:  Emergency Permit Annual Fee $600.86 annually  Emergency Permit Asphalt Restoration $210.28 Administrative Fees  Inspection Services $100.72 per hr.  Inspection Services - Overtime $134.30 per hr.  Re-Inspection $78.92 per hr. (EA inspection)  Investigation Fee-Work Done w/o Permit $300.42 Permit Time Extension or Reinstatement:  Within 180 days of expiration or termination 50% of current fee  After 180 days of expiration or termination 100% of current fee  
PLANNING FEES Zoning Administration:  Zoning or Interpretation Letter $193.62  Zoning Verification Letter $136.53  Construction Trailers/Manufactured Buildings $80.58  Seasonal Sales/Temporary Events $80.58  Residential Administrative Relief $205.94  Commercial Administrative Relief $507.03  Administrative Review $507.03 Appeals:  Planning Director decision appealed to Board of Adjustment $496.95  Planning Commission action appealed to City Council $396.21  Board of Adjustment appealed to Superior Court $396.21 Continuances:  Continuance at the request of applicant $261.91 General Plan Amendments:  Major Map Amendment $4.002.58 plus $106.32 per acre  Minor Map Amendment $2,005.76 plus $106.32 per acre  Major Text Amendment $4.002.58  Minor Text Amendment $2,005.76 Rezoning:  Single Residence Districts $2,157.98 plus $106.32 per acre  Multiple Residence Districts $3,232.50 plus $106.32 per acre  Overlay Districts (PRD, AIO, SCO, HP) $2,157.98 plus $106.32 per acre  Planned Area Development (PAD) District $3,232.50 plus $106.32 per acre  All Other Districts $4,307.02 plus $106.32 per acre  Amendment to any Approved Stipulation $1,074.51  Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment $4,002.58 any length of text, section or topic  Concurrent Review Processes:  General Plan Amendment - Minor $1,002.87  General Plan Amendment - Major $2,001.28  Rezoning Single Family Districts $1,078.99 plus $106.32 per acre  Rezoning Multiple Residence Districts $1,616.25 plus $106.32 per acre  Rezoning Overlay Districts (PRD, AIO, SCO, HP) $1,078.99 plus $106.32 per acre  Rezoning Planned Area Development (PAD) District $1,616.25 plus $106.32 per acre  Preliminary Plat $810.36 plus $27.98 per lot  Design Review $830.49 plus $106.32 per acre  Subdivisions:  Development Master Plan $1,522.21 plus $106.32 per acre  Preliminary Plat $1,620.72 plus $27.98 per lot  Preliminary Plat Time Extension $349.19  Final Plat $2,722.09 plus $27.98 per lot Conditional Use Permits:  Convenience Use $2,380.71  All Others $1,110.32  Appeal to City Council $396.21  Conditional Use Permit as a Result of Unauthorized Construction/Installation $3,964.50 Variances:  Single Residence $210.40  All Others $1,477.45  Variance as a Result of Unauthorized Construction/Installation $391.73 single residence  Variance as a Result of Unauthorized Construction/Installation $2,216.17 all others Group Homes:  Site Review $106.32  Site Reservation $106.32 Medical Marijuana Facilities:  Site Review $235.25  Site Reservation $235.25  Preapplications:  Planner Pre-application $141.01  Team Pre-application $528.30 Miscellaneous:  Third and Subsequent Reviews of Application 50% of initial (base) fee  Planner Consultation $55.95  Design Review:   Design Review as a result of Unauthorized $2,491.51   Construction/Installation   Design Review Waiver Letter $82.82   Design Review - Minor $624.56   Design Review - Major $1,661.01 plus $106.32 per acre   Design Review-Single Family Home Product $27.98 per lot Construction Drawings (Landscaping):  First Plan Review $340.26 per sheet  Second Plan Review $340.26 per sheet  Third or Subsequent Review $340.26 per sheet  Revisions $340.26 per sheet Landscape Irrigation Permit:  Base Fee $420.59 EA  Sprinkled Area in Right-of-Way $0.04 SF  
TRANSPORTATION SERVICE FEES: Traffic Engineering Plan Reviews:  First Plan Review $340.26 per sheet  Second Plan Review $340.26 per sheet  Third Plan Review $340.26 per sheet  Revisions $340.26 per sheet Construction Inspection:  Street Light $44.76 EA pole  Plan Review, Traffic Control:  First Plan Review $44.76 per submittal  Second Plan Review $22.38 per submittal  Third Plan Review $44.76 per submittal Barricaded Lane Restrictions:  Temporary Traffic Control Device Installation and Removal Certification $559.65  Arterial Streets $139.91 per lane, per day, up to 1/2 mile  Collector Streets $83.94 per lane, per day, up to 1/4 mile  Residential Streets $83.94 per day, up to 1/4 mile  Alley Closure $83.94 per day, 1 block  Sidewalk Closure $83.94 per day Barricade Manual Violations (Civil Sanctions):  Presenting an imminent risk of death or injury to the public within public right-of-way $1,678.93  Restricting roadway without proper certification, a barricade permit and an approved traffic control plan for more than thirty minutes $1,119.29  Restricting traffic during peak hours without authorization of the City's Transportation Director or designee $1,119.29  Failing to correct or cure violations within the time period stated in a warning notice $1,119.29  Restricting traffic at a signalized intersection without active work occurring and an off-duty Glendale and/or sworn Police Officer or Maricopa County Sheriff in uniform not present $1,119.29  Violating restrictions, limits, times, and locations of the Barricade Use permit $559.65  Missing or improper advanced-warning signs $559.65  Missing or improper use of barricades and channelizing devices $559.65  Leaving advance-warning signs facing traffic after restriction has been removed, per direction $279.80  Leaving traffic control in the right-of-way twenty-four (24) hours after Barricade Use Permit has expired $279.80  Rendering a Bus Stop inaccessible without relocating it or making other accommodations $279.80  Use of unacceptable quality of traffic control as shown in the City of Phoenix Barricade Manual $279.80  Annual Utility Permit $12,939.31 per year Civil sanctions doubled . In addition, the City may double any civil sanction under this article up to a maximum amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2500.00) for continuing violations within a twenty-four (24) hour period. Each calendar day shall be considered a separate period for the purposes of issuing civil sanctions.  
FIRE DEPARTMENT FEES CONSTRUCTION PERMITS Access Gates:  Access: To install or modify access gates across a fire apparatus access road, or to modify any fire apparatus access road or fire lane, or to modify firefighter pedestrian access into a facility or premises. $300.86  Alternative surface Fire Apparatus Access Roads Install/Modify $300.86 Automatic Fire Protection Systems:  Automatic Sprinkler System - New Installation $300.86 (min. fee)   First 10,000 SF $0.052 SF   Area over 10,000 SF $0.017 SF Note: Each riser will be calculated as a separate system. No system can exceed 52,000 SF  For each floor level above or below the grade floor level, add $89.52  For each in-rack storage system add $300.86 Exception: There shall be no permit fee for installing a 13-D residential sprinkler system in a Group R, Division 3 Occupancy that is not used for commercial purposes such as, but not limited to, assisted living or group home use.  Automatic Sprinkler System - Modification:   1-20 heads $225.64    21-100 heads $329.51   101-500 heads $590.98  System modifications over 500 heads shall be considered new systems. See New Installation above  Modifications not requiring changing or adding sprinkler heads $300.86  Fire Service Mains:   First 200 FT $322.36   Each additional 200 FT, or fraction thereof $225.64  Private Hydrants $89.52 EA   Modifications, per hydrant $89.52   Piping modifications $300.86   Private fire hydrants, remove from service use or operation. $300.86  Fire Pumps:   Single pump $752.14   Each additional pump $601.72   Modifications not requiring a pump test $300.86   Modifications requiring a pump test $451.28 Note: Small booster pumps may be permitted as part of other systems. The multiple pump advantage shall be applied when plans are submitted and work is performed concurrently. Clean Agent, Dry Chemical, Carbon Dioxide, and Other Special Extinguishing Systems:  1-5,000 SF $376.06  Each additional 5,000 SF or fraction thereof $300.86 Automatic Hood Systems:  Single system $300.86  Each additional system $150.40  Modification, each system $150.40 Standpipes:  1-10 outlets $300.86  Each additional 1-4 outlets, add $150.40  Modification $300.86 Battery Systems  > 50 gallons - Installation $300.86  Fire Alarm System - New Installation:  SF of area covered by alarm system:  Up to 10,000 SF $488.89  10,001-52,000 SF $729.78  Each additional 52,000 SF or fraction thereof $343.84  For each floor level above or below the grade floor level, add $89.52 Fire Alarm System - Modification:  1-10 devices $300.86  Each additional device over 10 $31.34 Note: Devices shall include, but not be limited to, all initiating and signaling devices such as pull stations, smoke and heat detectors, and audible and visual alarms. Fire Alarm Panel - Installation Only:  SF of area covered by alarm system:  Up to 10,000 SF $488.89  10,001-52,000 SF $729.78  Each additional 52,000 SF or fraction thereof $343.84  For each floor level above or below the grade floor level, add $89.52 Fire Protection System Monitoring  Fire Protection System Monitoring $225.64  Compressed Gas Systems:  Installation includes cylinder and all piping, valves and related equipment. $601.72  Compressed Gas System, Modification. If the work performed involves more than 50% of the system, the fees for a new installation shall apply. $300.86 Fire Fighter Breathing Air Systems:  Installation $752.14  Modification $376.06 Flammable/Combustible Liquids  To install, construct or alter equipment, plants, terminals, wells, refineries, distilleries and similar faculties where flammable and combustible liquids are produced, processed, transported, stored, dispensed or used. $451.28  Tank Installation-first tank $451.28  Tank Installation-each additional tank $300.86  Tanks with fixed fire protection systems, add $300.86  Tanks installed in a vault, add $300.86 Flammable/Combustible Liquid Tanks  Modifications $451.28  Tank removal, per tank $300.86  Abandon a tank in place $300.86 Hazardous Materials:  First tank $451.28  Each additional tank $300.86  Hazardous Materials Liquid Tank: Modifications $451.28  Tanks with fixed fire protection systems, add $300.86  Tanks installed in a vault, add $300.86  Tank removal, per tank $300.86  Install, repair, close, abandon, or modify any facility or area $752.14 Cryogenic Fluid Systems:  Install $451.28  Modify $300.86 Industrial Oven Installation  Industrial Oven Installation $300.86 Liquefied Petroleum Gases:  LP-Gas system installation. $451.28  Systems with fixed fire protection equipment, add $300.86  LPG System - Modification, each system: $300.86 Spraying or dipping:  Installation of spray booths, rooms, areas, or dip tanks  Single $451.28  Each Additional $300.86  Modification, each $300.86 Tents, Canopies, and Other Membrane Structures:  First $333.08  Multiple:   Each additional on the same site $150.40 OPERATIONAL PERMITS  Aerosol Products $89.52  Amusement buildings, to operate a special amusement building: $89.52 annually  Amusement buildings, to operate a special amusement building: $601.72 temporary  Battery Systems - Installation   See Construction Permit Section: To maintain lead acid battery systems and VRLA battery systems > 50 gallons $89.52  Carnivals and Fairs, See Outdoor Assembly Events  Compressed Gasses - Storage, use, and handling > permit amounts $89.52  Covered Mall buildings   Place or construct temporary structures $300.86   To use open flame producing equipment in a mall $300.86   Cars in Malls, see Vehicle Display  Cryogenic Fluids, See Hazardous Materials  Dry Cleaning Plants   To change to a more hazardous fluid $300.86  Exhibits and Trade Shows   Aggregate Area Used:   1-5,000 SF $300.86   5,001-50,000 SF $451.28   Greater than 50,000 SF $752.14  Explosives   Manufacture, storage, sale or use of explosives, explosive material, or blasting agents, fireworks or pyrotechnic special effect materials $89.52   Blasting fee for the use, handling and storage of explosives used primarily for construction or demolition, 30-day permit $451.28  Fireworks, Outdoor Displays   First show $902.57   Repeat shows at same site $150.40 per hr. standby fee (2 hr. min.)  Flame Effects Material: Use and Handling:   First show $902.57   Repeat shows at same site $150.40 per hr. standby fee (2 hr. min.)  Flammable and Combustible Liquids   Storage, use and handling of Class I, II, III - A Liquids $89.52 annually   To operate a temporary vehicle fueling station $225.64   Pump-over or pump-out storage tanks $225.64  Hazardous Materials:   Storage, use and handling > the permit amounts for hazardous materials in Tables 105.6.9, 105.6.11, or 105.6.20. (For F/C liquids see above) $192.50 annually   Cryogenic fluids > quantities in Table 105.6.11. $192.50 annually   Organic coatings: manufacturing > 1 gallon per day $89.52 annually   Pump over or pump out storage tanks $225.64  HPM to store, handle or use HPM materials $192.50 annually  High piled storage > 500 SF $89.52  Hot work operations, permanent $89.52 permanent  Hot work operations, temporary $300.86 temporary  LP Gases:   Storage and use $89.52   Temporary use of LPG inside buildings $300.86  Magnesium: processing > 10 pounds $89.52  Open Burning $150.40  Open flames or torches in a hazardous fire area $300.86  Organic coatings: Manufacturing > 1 gallon per day, See  Hazardous Materials   Outdoor assembly events, carnivals, fair, festivals, etc. $300.86   Place of assembly, to operate a Group A $89.52  Pyrotechnic Special Effects: Use and handling:   First show $902.57   Repeat shows at same site $150.40 per hr. standby fee (2 hr. min.)  Pyroxylin plastics:   Storage use and handling > 25 pounds $89.52  Special Events   Special events, Major (as defined in www.glendaleaz.com/fire/special_event_handbook.cfm) $1,053.00   Special events, Minor (as defined in www.glendaleaz.com/fire/special_event_handbook.cfm) $451.28   Special events, extension of premises, each occurrence $300.86   Spraying and dipping operations $89.52   Vehicle Display: The display of liquid or gas fired vehicles or equipment inside a Group A, M, or Covered Mall building, except automotive dealership showrooms. $89.52  Inspection Fees:   Inspections requested for other than normal duty hours: Mon. thru Fri. 7 a.m. to 4 p.m. $150.40 per hr. (2 hr. min.)   Stand by Fee $150.40 per hr. (2 hr. min.)   Hospitals, group homes, nursing care, supervisory care, behavior health, assisted living. The fee schedule is based on the number of licensed beds as determined by the licensing agency. $7.12 per bed ($150.40 min.)  Child and Adult day-care   Licensed for 50 or less $150.40   Greater than 50 $300.86   Construction inspection fee, shall be assessed for each additional inspection after two follow up inspections $223.85 or the original permit fee (whichever is less)  Inspection Fees:   Annual Inspections: $313.68   2 Year Inspections: $156.84   4 Year Inspections: $52.27   Existing building inspection fee, shall be assessed for each additional inspection after two follow up inspections $150.40 per hour (1 hr. min.)   Operating without a permit (Applies to all permits) 300% of permit fee   Plan Review Application fee: Due upon submittal, non-refundable (Applies to all plan reviews) $44.78 (non-refundable)   Third Review and subsequent reviews (Applies to all plan reviews) $150.40 per hr. (2 hr. min.)   Revisions (Applies to all plan reviews) $150.40 per hr. (1 hr. min.)   Expedited plan review (Applies to all plan reviews and includes P.A.S.S. projects) 300% of permit fee   Minimum plan review fee when none of the above apply (Applies to all plan reviews) $150.40 per hr. (2 hr. min.)  Renewal of expired permit:   Within 180 days of expiration 50% of current permit fee   After 180 days of expiration 100% of current permit fee  Operational Service Fees:   Photographs (CD) $9.01  Fire/EMS field incident reports $4.49 plus $.86 per page after 1st page  Alternate means and methods or code modification requests. Fee due upon submittal of request. $451.28  Technical Report Review $752.14  Records research for specific information, per address $150.40 or fraction thereof (min. $73.44)  Staff consultation and research $150.40 or fraction thereof (min. 1 hr.)  
UTILITY SERVICES FEES WATER METER FEES: Meter Size  0.75 inch $120.16  1 inch $210.29  1.5 inch $480.69  2 inch $600.87  3 inch $1,802.63  4 inch $2,643.87  6 inch $4,807.02  8 inch $9,183.78  Hydrant Install/Relocate Fee $90.13 plus $1,642.63 deposit  Marker Ball Inspection Fee $89.52  1 inch to 3/4 inch Fitting Fee $57.07  Service Line Relocate Fee up to 13 FT $120.98 PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES: Significant Industrial User Permit Application Fee: Permit for significant industries that have the potential to damage the sewer and treatment plant infrastructure. $2,163.14 Annual Permit Maintenance Fee: Annual maintenance to help defray the costs of monitoring, inspections, enforcement actions and preparation of reports. $1,141.66 Grease Interceptor Re-Inspection Fee: Fee to encourage compliance with grease interceptor pumping requirements for restaurants and businesses that are required to maintain grease interceptors to prevent entry of grease and oil into the sewer system. $120.16 per visit, after 2 initial visits Non-Significant Industrial User 'B Level' Permit Application Fee: Permit for non-significant industrial users that have the potential to damage the sewer and treatment plant infrastructure. $223.84 Non-Significant Industrial User 'B Level' Permit Annual Maintenance Fee: Annual maintenance fee to help defray the costs of monitoring, inspections, and enforcement actions of non-significant industrial users. $179.07 Grease Bearing Waste Discharger Fee: Annual maintenance fee for compliance inspections of restaurants and others that are required to maintain grease interceptors to prevent entry of oil and grease into the sewer system and to minimize odor complaints. $179.07 Temporary Permit or Manhole Entry Permit: Maintenance fee to defray costs of permitting and inspections. $89.52 issuance Water Main Re-Test Fee: Fee intended to provide incentive to contractors to properly flush and prepare water lines constructed to serve new development. Failure to prepare the lines results in repeated testing by the Water Quality Lab and increased costs. $149.53 per riser, after 2 initial tests General Fees:  New Account $22.39  Delinquent Account Fee (Previously Delinquent Collection Fee) $50.35  Collection Agency Referral Refer to Glendale City Code, Chapter 2 Article 1, Sec 2.4  Insufficient Fund Check $26.96  After Hour Reconnect $72.76  Door Tag $16.81  Broken Meter Lock $33.58  Meter Tampering $72.76  Unauthorized Use $72.76  Disconnect Notice $1.12  Miscellaneous Field Visit $22.39  Late Charge (On Past Due Balance) 1.50% Deposit Fees:  Residential Meter (single family) $200.00  Other Property Types - Up to 1 1/2 meter $250.00  Other Property Types - 2" and larger meter $300.00  Lien Fee $21.14 Meter Test Fees:  Meter Bench Test - 1" and smaller $67.15  Meter Bench Test - 1 1/2" and larger $111.91  Meter Field Test - 1 1/2" and larger $22.38  
(Res. No. 4839, § 1(Exh. 1), 8-12-14; Res. No. 4956, §§ 1, 2(Exh. 1), 5-26-15) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Resolution No. 4839, §§ 1, 2(Exh. 1), adopted Aug. 12, 2014, effective Oct. 1, 2014, which is hereby declared a public record, three copies of which are on file in the Office of the City Clerk, repealed and reenacted App. B in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former App. B pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of July 1, 2009; Res. No. 4441, § 1, adopted Nov. 23, 2010; and Res. No. 4472, § 1, adopted April 12, 2011. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1963 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1963 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1963 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete, or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Section Section 
this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-4 1-3 1-5 1-4 1-6 1-5 1-9 1-6 2-1 1-7 1-7 2-1 2-121 2-1.1-2-1.3 Repealed by Ord. 1380 2-1.4 2-19 2-2 2-16 2-3 2-17 2-4 2-18 2-9 2-51 2-10 2-101 2-11 2-102 2-12 2-103 2-13 2-104 2-14 2-105 2-15 2-106 2-16 2-107 2-17 13-1 2-23 28-16 2-23-2-26 28-17 2-27 28-20 2-28 28-21 2-29 28-22 2-30 28-18 2-32 28-19 2-33 28-23 2-34 28-24 2-36 20-16, 20-17 2-36.1-2-36.3 20-17 2-36.4 20-19 2-36.5(c-i) 20-21 2-36.6 20-20 2-36.6(a), (b) 20-18 2-37 16-2 2-38 29-3 2-39 2-166 2-40 2-166 2-41 2-167 2-42 2-168 2-43 2-169 2-44 2-170 2-51-2-55 Repealed by Ord. 1569 2-61 28-41 2-61-2-63 28-42 2-62 28-43 2-64 28-44 2-65 28-43 3-1 4-1 3-2 4-2 3-5 4-4 3-8 4-5 3-12 4-21, 4-26 3-14 Repealed by Ord. 2183 3-15 Repealed by Ord. 2183 3-16(a-c) 4-23 4-1 5-1 4-2 5-2 4-3 5-3 4-4-4-6 5-4 4-7-4-8 5-5 4-11 Repealed by Ord. 1918 4-12-4-13 5-8 4-14 5-9 4-15 5-10 4-17 Repealed by Ord. 1918 4-19 Repealed by Ord. 1918 4-20 5-26 4-21 5-27 4-22 5-28 4-23 5-29 4-24 5-28 4-25-4-27 5-30 4-28 5-31 4-29 5-32 4-32 5-30 4-34 5-46 4-35 5-48 4-36 Repealed by Ord. 1918 4-38 5-49 4-41 5-33 4-42 5-30 4-43 5-7 5-32 5-1 6-1 5-2 6-3 5-3 6-4 5-4 6-5 5-5 6-6 5-6 6-7 5-7 6-8 5-8 6-9 5-10 6-2 5-11 Repealed by Ord. 2186 6-1 8-1 6-2 8-2 6-3-6-6 8-25 6-7 8-26 6-8 8-3 6-9 8-4 6-10 8-5 6-11 8-6 6-12 8-21 6-13 8-24 6-14 8-22 6-15 8-22 6-16 8-23 6-17 8-7 6-18 8-7 8-1 14-1 8-3 14-3 14-4 8-4(b) 14-7 8-4(c) 14-4 8-5 14-6 10-1 2-122 10-2-10-5 Repealed by Ord. 1878 12-2 16-3 12-3 16-4 12-4 16-1 12-6 16-16 15-1 30-4 15-7-15-8 25-3 15-9 26-5 16-1-16-4 Repealed by Ord. 1423 18-1 22-1 18-3 22-34 18-4 22-27 18-5 22-29 18-6 22-27 18-7 22-31 18-9 22-35 18-11 22-3 18-12 22-32 22-33 18-32 22-26 22-32 18-32.5 22-4 18-32.6 22-5 18-32.7 22-36 18-32.8(a)(2), (c) 22-7 18-32.9 22-2 18-86 3-1 18-87 3-2 18-88 3-3 18-89 3-4 18-90 3-5 18-91 3-6 18-92(A) 3-1 18-95 3-62 18-96 3-63 18-97 3-64 18-98 3-63 18-99 3-61 18-100(A) 3-7 18-100(B) 3-8 18-100(C) 3-9 18-101 3-10 18-102 3-11 18-103 3-12 18A-1-18A-3 Repealed by Ord. 1392 19-1 Repealed by Ord. 1392 19-1.1 Repealed by Ord. 1392 19-3-19-5 Repealed by Ord. 1392 19-7.1-19-7.2 Repealed by Ord. 1392 19-7.4-19-7.5 Repealed by Ord. 1392 19-21-19-22 Repealed by Ord. 1392 19-24-19-37 Repealed by Ord. 1392 19-40 Repealed by Ord. 1392 19-41 26-2 19-44-19-47 Repealed by Ord. 1392 19-48 26-3 19-49 Repealed by Ord. 1392 19-50 Repealed by Ord. 2186 19-51 Repealed by Ord. 2186 19-52-19-54 Repealed by Ord. 2186 19-55 Repealed by Ord. 2186 19-56 Repealed by Ord. 2186 21-1, 21-2 Repealed by Ord. 2186 21-4-21-7 26-54 21-9 26-51 21-9.1-21-9.3 26-36-26-38 21-10 26-21 21-13.1 26-71 21-14.1-21-14.3 Repealed by Ord. 1834 21-16-21-18 26-53 21-19, 21-20 25-1 21-21.1 26-22 21-38-21-40 Repealed by Ord. 2077 21-43 Repealed by Ord. 2077 21-44 20-2 21-45 20-3 21A-1 27-37 21A-2 27-38 21A-3 Repealed by Ord. 1944 21A-4 Repealed by Ord. 1944 21A-5 27-41 21A-6 27-42 21A-7 27-16 21A-8-21A-10 27-17 21A-11 27-18 21A-12 27-19 21A-13(a) 27-20 21A-13(b) 27-19 21A-13(c) 27-20 21A-(c)-(j) 21-21 21A-14 Repealed by Ord. 1944 21A-15(a) Repealed by Ord. 1944 21A-15(b) Repealed by Ord. 1944 21A-15(c) Repealed by Ord. 1944 21A-15(d) Repealed by Ord. 1944 21A-15(e) Repealed by Ord. 1944 21A-15(f) Repealed by Ord. 1944 21A-15(k) Repealed by Ord. 1944 21A-15(l) Repealed by Ord. 1944 21A-15(m) Repealed by Ord. 1944 21A-15(n) Repealed by Ord. 1944 21A-15(o) 27-71 21A-15(p)-(z) Repealed by Ord. 1944 22-1 21-136 22-2 21-146 22-3 21-147 22-4(a) 21-147 22-4(b) 21-149 22-5 21-148 22-6 21-150 22-7 21-151 22-7(a) 21-153 22-7(b) 21-152 22-8 21-154 22-9 21-146 24-1 29-4 24-2 29-5 24A-1 2-246 24A-2, 24A-3 2-147 24A-4 2-248 24A-5-24A-8 2-249 24A-9 Repealed by Ord. 1605 24A-10, 24A-11 2-250 24A-12 2-251 25A-1 28-81 25A-2-25A-5 28-83-28-86 26-1 26-4 26-3 30-24, 30-36 26-3.7 20-1 26-4 30-37 26-5 30-41 26-6 30-40 26-7 30-38 26-8 30-42 26-9 30-24 26-10 30-41 26-11 30-21 26-13 30-1 26-14 30-22 26-15, 26-16 30-23 26-16 30-36 26-17, 26-18 30-63 26-19-26-21 30-64-30-66 26-22 30-67 26-23 30-61 26-24 30-62 26-25 30-68 26-26 30-2 26-27 30-3 27-1 32-2 27-2, 27-3 32-3 27-4 32-5 27-5 32-1 29-1 33-16 29-2 33-36 29-2.1, 29-2.2 33-37 29-2.3 33-38 29-2.4 33-39 29-3 33-40 29-3.1, 29-3.2 33-40 29-4 33-51 29-4.1 33-53 29-4.2 33-54 29-4.3, 29-4.4 33-73 29-5 33-57 29-6 33-77 29-7, 29-8 33-71 29-9 33-52 29-10 33-76 29-11 33-52 29-12 33-25 29-12.1 33-55 29-12.2 33-56 29-13 33-58 29-13.1 33-75 29-14-29-18 33-78-33-82 29-17.1-29-17.4 33-81 29-19 33-17 29-19.1 33-18 29-20-29-23 33-19-33-22 29-20.1-29-20.3 33-19 29-24 33-74 29-25 33-23, 33-24 29-25.1 33-59 29-25.2 33-60 29-26 33-72 29-26.2 33-26 29-27 33-101, 33-106 29-28.1-29-28.3 33-102, 33-104 29-29, 29-30 33-126 29-31-29-33 33-127-33-129 29-34 33-142 29-35 33-141 29-36 33-143 29-37 33-130 29-38 33-130 29-39 33-156 29-40 33-158 29-41 33-159 29-42 33-157 29-43, 29-44 33-171 29-45-29-52 33-172-33-179 29-53 33-201 29-54 33-182 29-55-29-57 33-180 29-58 33-181 29-59(a) 33-183 29-59(b) 33-182, 33-202 29-59(c) 33-202 29-59(d) 33-216 29-59(e), (f) 33-202 29-60-29-62.4 33-204 29-64 33-107 29-65-29-68 33-216-33-219 29-69 Repealed by Ord. 1830 29-70 33-221 29-71(a), (b) Repealed by Ord. 1830 29-71(c) Repealed by Ord. 1830 29-71(d)-(i) Repealed by Ord. 1830 29-71(e)-(n) Repealed by Ord. 1830 29-72(a), (b) Repealed by Ord. 1830 29-72(c) Repealed by Ord. 1830 29-72(d), (e) Repealed by Ord. 1830 29-72(f), (g) Repealed by Ord. 1830 29-73, 29-74 Repealed by Ord. 1830 29-73.1 Repealed by Ord. 1830 29-75-29-78 33-238 29-79 33-239 29-80-29-82 33-230-33-242 29-83 33-242 29-84(a) Repealed by Ord. 1830 29-84(b)-(d) 33-109 29-85-29-87 33-243-33-245 29-89 33-246 29-90-29-93 33-256-33-259 29-94 33-111 29-95 33-105 29-96(a) 33-109 29-96(b) Repealed by Ord. 1830 29-96(c) 33-110 30-1 19-1 30-2 19-3 30-3 19-2 30-4(A) 19-4 30-4(B) 19-5 30-4(C) 19-41 30-4(E) 19-26, 19-61 30-4(F) 19-6 30-5(A)-(D) 19-62-19-65 30-6(A)-(G) 19-76-19-82 30-7(A), (B) 19-42 30-7(C)-(H) 19-43-19-48 30-8-30-10 19-26-19-28 30-11 19-9 30-12 19-10 30-13, Art. V 19-49 30-14 19-7 30-15 19-8  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1963 Code. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1963 code. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code 243 12-13-60 Repealed by Ord. 1772 280 11-14-61 Repealed by Ord. 1772 321 10-23-62 Repealed by Ord. 1772 339 3-12-63 Repealed by Ord. 1772 395 2-9-65 Repealed by Ord. 1772 416 7-27-65 Repealed by Ord. 1772 492 9-12-67 Repealed by Ord. 1772 528 5-28-68 Repealed by Ord. 1772 533 7-9-68 Repealed by Ord. 1772 558 3-11-69 Repealed by Ord. 1772 562 3-25-69 Repealed by Ord. 1772 615 5-26-70 Repealed by Ord. 1772 621 6-23-70 Repealed by Ord. 1772 669 4-26-71 Repealed by Ord. 1772 675 6-22-71 Repealed by Ord. 1772 676 6-22-71 Repealed by Ord. 1772 690 8-24-71 Repealed by Ord. 1772 702 10-26-71 Repealed by Ord. 1772 709 11-23-71 Repealed by Ord. 1772 757 9-26-72 Repealed by Ord. 1772 758 9-26-72 Repealed by Ord. 1772 759 9-26-72 Repealed by Ord. 1772 808 7-24-73 Repealed by Ord. 1772 875 4-8-75 Repealed by Ord. 1772 882 1-28-75 Repealed by Ord. 1772 890 4-8-75 Repealed by Ord. 1772 891 4-8-75 Repealed by Ord. 1772 893 5-13-75 Repealed by Ord. 1772 894 5-13-75 Repealed by Ord. 1772 938 7-21-76 Repealed by Ord. 1772 943 8-10-70 Repealed by Ord. 1772 957 12-14-76 Repealed by Ord. 1772 998 10-25-77 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1005 12-13-77 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1024 6-13-78 1 Repealed by Ord. 2077 1033 8-8-78 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1039 9-12-78 1 28-41-28-44 1041 9-12-78 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1042 9-26-78 2 2-247 9-6-78 3 2-248 1045 10-10-78 2 6-3 6-3-6-8 2(5-9) 6-10 1051 10-24-78 1 6-3 2 6-4 1053 10-24-78 1 30-37 1055 11-14-78 1 21-96 22-31 1057 11-30-78 1 28-41, 28-42 1058 12-12-78 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1060 12-26-78 2 5-1-5-14 5-1-5-5 5-26-5-33 5-46-5-52 30-81 30-92 1061 1-23-79 1 26-3 1062 12-26-78 2 5-6-5-14 30-83-30-86 2(4-38) 5-48 1063 2-13-79 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1074 2-4-79 2(Art. I, § 1) 2-67 2(Art. I, § 2) 2-68 2(Art. I, § 3) 2-66 2(Art. II, § 1, 2) 2-69 2(Art. III, § 1-3) 2-70-2-72 2(Art. IV) 2-73 2(Art. V, § 1.2) 2-74 2(Art. VI) 2-75 1076 5-8-79 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1080 5-22-74 3 5-30 1081 5-22-79 1 5-1 30-81 1095 10-9-79 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1096 10-30-79 1 28-81 28-83 28-84 28-85 28-86 1097 11-13-79 2 20-1 20-16 20-17 20-17 20-19, 20-20 2(2-36.6) 20-18, 20-21 1101 12-11-79 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1110 2-13-80 30-2, 30-3 1112 2-13-80 1 16-16 1117 5-13-80 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1134 9-9-80 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1137 9-8-80 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1143 11-25-80 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1148 12-23-80 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1150 12-23-80 1 27-87-27-100 1151 1-27-81 Repealed by Ord. 2053 1163 4-28-81 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1165 5-26-81 1 3-1-3-12 3-1 3-36-3-44 3-61-3-64 1167 6-9-81 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1170 6-23-81 2 33-16-33-26 33-36-33-40 33-51-33-60 33-71-33-82 33-101-33-107 Repealed by Ord. 1830 33-109-33-111 33-126-33-130 33-141-33-143 33-141 33-156-33-159 33-171-33-183 33-201-33-205 33-216-33-219 Repealed by Ord. 1830 33-238-33-246 33-256-33-259 1172 7-14-81 1 2-282 1174 7-28-81 1 33-72 2 33-130 1175 7-28-81 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1178 8-25-81 1 6-4 1180 9-8-81 1 5-1 30-81 1186 11-24-81 1 30-40 1190 1-5-82 4 15-1 1193 3-9-82 Art. I, § 1 31-1 Art. I, § 2 31-2 Art. II, § 2 31-3 Art. III, § 1(A) 31-21 Art. III, § 1(B) 31-5 Art. III, § 2 31-36 Art. III, § 3(A)-(C) 31-51-31-53 Art. III, § 4(A)-(D) 31-66-31-69 Art. III, § 5(A)-(D) 31-66-31-69 Art. III, § 5(A)-(C) 31-82-31-84 Art. III, § 5(D) 31-81 Art. IV, § 1-5 31-111-31-115 Art. V, § 1 31-131 Art. V, § 2 31-132 Art. VI, § 2 31-96 Art. VII, § 1-7 31-146-31-152 Art. VIII, § 1-7 31-166-31-172 Art. IX 31-6 Art. X 31-4 Art. XI 31-7 1194 3-23-82 1 8-6 1198 4-27-82 1 2-16 1206 7-6-82 1 2-122(a) 1208 7-13-82 1 5-3 1213 8-24-82 1 5-30 1214 8-24-82 1 21-96 22-31 1215 8-24-82 1 21-148 1223 12-29-82 1 33-77 1224 12-28-82 1-3 7-16-7-18 5 7-19 6 7-17 12-28-78 7 7-20 1226 4-12-83 1 2-227 2 2-226 3 2-229 4, 5 2-228 6 2-231 7 2-230 1231 5-3-83 2 33-101 33-105, 33-106 Repealed by Ord. 1830 33-221 Repealed by Ord. 1830 33-238 33-239 33-242 33-246 1233 6-7-83 3.101 2-137 3.102 2-136 3.103 2-138, 2-139 3.104 2-139 3.104(1) 2-144 3.105 2-141 3.106 2-142 3.107 2-140 3.108 2-143 3.109 2-145 3.110-3.115 2-146-2-151 1237 6-28-83 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1243 7-21-83 1 30-40 1251 9-13-83 1 2-228 1254 10-4-83 1 2-202 2 2-201 3 2-203 4 2-204 5-8 2-205 9-11 2-206-2-208 1255 10-11-83 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1260 12-27-83 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1261 1-10-84 2 9-16 3 9-17-9-23 1262 1-10-84 1 16-16 2 16-17-16-21 1266 1-24-84 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1271 3-27-84 1 2-19 1274 4-24-84 13-2 1276 4-24-84 1 33-72 1277 4-24-84 1 33-130 1280 5-1-84 24-42 2 24-58 3 Repealed by Ord. 2186 1281 5-2-84 1 31-132 1283 6-12-84 1 31-132 1292 7-14-84 1 33-130 1295 7-31-84 1 19-1-19-10 19-26-19-28 19-41-19-49 19-61-19-65 19-76-19-82 1298 9-4-84 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1300 9-25-84 1(24-3) 2-52 1301 9-25-84 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1302 9-25-84 1 Repealed by Ord. 1772 2 Repealed by Ord. 2186 1304 10-23-84 1 27-42 1310 10-23-84 1(19-49) 24-60 1312 11-6-84 1, 2 24-161 1319 11-6-84 1(12A-1) 17-1 1(12A-5) 17-7 1(12A-6) 17-11 1(12A-9(3)-9(5)) 17-41-17-44 2(12A-2-12A-4) 17-2-7-4 2(12A-6) 17-4 2(12A-7) 17-5 2(12A-8) 17-12 2(12A-9(1), (2)) 17-28 2(12A-9(5)-12A-9(11)) 17-43-17-49 2(12A-10) 17-10 2(12A-11) 17-8 2(12A-12) 17-13 2(12A-13) 17-14 2(12A-14) 17-50 2(12A-16) 17-9 2(12A-17) 17-27 2(12A-18) 17-28 2(12A-19, 12A-20) 17-26 2(12A-21-12A-27) 17-29 2(12A-28) 17-6 1320 11-13-84 1, 2 33-77 1325 12-4-84 1(13-1) 18-2 1(13-2) 18-1, 25-21 1(13-3) 18-2, 18-3 1(13-4) 18-4 1(13-5) 18-6 1(13-6) 18-31 1(13-7, 13-8) 18-32 1(13-9) 18-9 1(13-9-13-13) 18-33-18-37 1(13-14) 18-52 1(13-15) 18-53 1(13-16-13-18) 18-67-18-69 1(13-19-13-21) 18-101-18-103 1(13-22-13-25) 18-104 1(13-26) 18-11 1(13-27) 18-14 1(13-28-13-34) 18-105-18-111 1(13-36) 18-104 1(13-37-13-39) 18-126-18-128 1(13-40) 18-9 1(13-41) 18-12 1(13-42) 25-24 1(13-43) 18-13 1(13-44) 18-12 1(13-45) 18-8 1(13-46) 18-7 25-22 1(13-47) 18-38 1(13-48) 18-5 1(13-49) 18-7, 25-22 1(13-51) 18-141 1(13-52) 18-10 1(13-53-13-55) 18-144 1(13-56) 18-145 1(13-57) 18-143 1(13-58) 18-142 1(13-59) 18-146 1(13-60) 18-145 1(13-61) 18-39 1(13-62) 25-23 1(13-63-13-68) Repealed by Ord. 2186 1326 12-11-84 1 21-96 1334 1-22-85 1 28-82 2 28-81 28-83 28-84 28-85 28-86 1335 1-22-85 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1336 1-22-85 1 31-3 1-22-85 2 31-67 3 31-84 4 31-67 1340 2-12-85 1 Repealed by Ord. 1772 2 27-131 27-171 27-211 1345 3-5-85 1 2-248 1348 3-19-85 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1366 7-2-85 1 2-19(b) 1378 7-30-85 1(26-28-26-32) 30-51-30-55 1379 7-30-85 1-8 Adopting ordinance, p. vii 1380 7-30-85 1       Rpld 13-1 1(2-1.1) 13-2 1(2-1.2) 13-4 1(2-1.3) 13-3 1(2-1.4-2-1.6) 13-5-13-7 1384 10-1-85 1 11-1-11-4 1386 10-22-85 1 18-12 1392 11-26-85 1       Rpld 24-1-24-8, 24-21-24-23, 24-40-24-43, 24-45-24-60, 24-161 2       Added 24-1-24-3, 24-10-24-16, 24-30-24-37, 24-50-24-63, 24-80-24-81, 24-90-24-96, 24-100, 24-101, 24-110-24-112, 24-120-24-123, 24-130-24-139, 24-150-24-153, 24-160-24-161, 24-170-24-178, 24-190 3 26-3 1397 1-14-86 1 7-1, 7-2 1399 2-4-86 1 33-24 2 33-27-33-29 1400 2-4-86 1 21-161-21-173 1406 4-8-86 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1407 4-8-86 1 23-1-23-15 2 24-61(c) 1408 4-8-86 1 9-16-9-22 1409 4-8-86 1 30-5 2 30-101-30-120 3 Repealed by Ord. 2186 1410 4-8-86 1 9-18 2 Repealed by Ord. 2016 3 16-51-16-60 1411 4-8-86 1 16-16 2 Repealed by 2016 3       Rpld 16-18       Rnbd 16-19-16-21       as 16-18-16-20 1414 4-22-86 1 33-271-33-286 1415 4-22-86 1 33-261-33-270 1416 5-6-86 1 26-23 1423 5-27-86 1       Rpld 2-281, 2-282 2 2-281-2-285 3 2-291-2-293 1425 5-27-86 1 28-16-28-21, 28-23, 28-24 2 28-25 1426 5-27-86 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1430 6-10-86 1 4-25 1431 6-10-86 1 21-16, 21-17, 21-26 21-51-21-59 1433 6-24-86 1 18-7, 18-9 1434 6-24-86 1 18-1 2 18-151-18-153 1435 7-1-86 1 7-1, 7-2 1437 7-1-86 1 33-51 2 33-56 3 33-73 4 33-127 5 33-129 6 33-143 1440 7-22-86 1 18-18-18-20 1444 8-26-86 1 10-31 1446 8-26-86 1 28-81-28-86 1451 9-23-86 1 18-15-18-17 1452 9-23-86 1 2-216-2-219 1453 10-14-86 1 6-1 2 6-4.1 3 6-3, 6-4, 6-6, 6-8, 6-9 1454 10-21-86 1 25-1 2 Repealed by Ord. 2186 1456 10-21-86 1 33-83 1458 11-10-86 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1459 11-10-86 1 24-82(b) 1460 11-10-86 1 18.5-1-18.5-17 1461 11-25-86 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1462 11-25-86 1 31-132(13) 1464 12-9-86 1 26.5-1-25.5-10 1465 12-23-86 1 24-91 (note) 1472 1-27-87 1 24-91 (note) 1478 1-27-87 1 27-101, 27-102 1479 2-3-87 1 18-1, 18-5, 18-12(c) 2 18-129, 18-141, 18-144(b), (c), 18-145(b) 3 18-151-18-153 1480 2-10-87 1 2-266 1483 3-10-87 1 25-50-25-58 2 25-58(note) 1487 3-24-87 1 2-251 1488 3-24-87 1 21-16 2       Rpld 21-16, 21-17, 21-26 21-51-21-59 3 Ch. 21, Art. II (note) 1489 4-7-87 1 9-18 1490 4-18-87 1 16-5 1496 6-9-87 1 33-16 2 33-86-33-99 1497 6-9-87 1 Repealed by Ord. 2077 1500 6-23-87 1 17-2, 17-5, 17-10(a), (b), 17-14(4), 17-15, 17-26(b)(1)d, 17-26(b)(8), 17-28(a), (c)(1), 17-41(b), 17-43 17-47       Rpld 17-48(3) 1504 7-28-87 1 5-1 2       Rpld 5-30(b), (c)       Added 5-30(b)       Rnbd 5-30(d)-(f)       as (c)-(e) 3 30-83, 30-84, 1505 7-28-87 30-85(a) 1506 7-28-87 30-86-30-88 1507 8-25-87 1 27-20(a) 1 7-1 1 19-7 2 19-10 3, 4 19-43, 19-44 5 19-49 6 19-62 7, 8 19-64, 19-65 1512 9-22-87 9 19-76 10, 11 19-80, 19-81 1 Repealed by Ord. 1772 2 Repealed by Ord. 1772 3 Repealed by Ord. 1772 4 Repealed by Ord. 1772 5 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1517 11-10-87 1 Repealed by Ord. 1938 1518 11-10-87 1 27-103 1521 11-24-87 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1536 4-12-88 1 18-12(e), (h), (i) 1537 4-12-88 1 2-16 1538 4-12-88 1-3 21-17 1540 5-10-88 1 Repealed by Ord. 1834 1541 5-24-88 2 6-1 3 6-3 4 6-6(c), (d) 5 6-7(b) 6 6-8(f) 7 6-9(b) 8 6-20-6-25 1542 5-24-88 1 28-13, 28-14 2 28-22 3 28-26 3 Repealed by Ord. 1772 4 Repealed by Ord. 1772 5 Repealed by Ord. 1772 6 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1546 6-14-88 1 27-111-27-123 1547 6-14-88 1 18-12(j) 2 33-40(a) 3 33-78 4       Rpld 33-180 5 33-182(b) 6 33-202(d) 1549 6-14-88 1 16-6 1550 6-14-88 1 Repealed by 2016 1551 6-14-88 1 Repealed by 2016 1552 6-28-88 1-7 21-17(note) 1555 7-26-88 1 21-86 1557 7-26-88 1       Rpld 2-66-2-75       Added 2-66-2-75 1559 8-23-88 1 30-62 2 30-69 1561 9-13-88 1       Rpld 31-1-31-7, 31-21, 31-36, 31-51-31-53, 31-66-31-69, 31-81-31-84, 31-96, 31-111-31-115, 31-131, 31-132, 31-146-31-152, 31-166-31-172       Added 31-1-31-4, 31-21-31-25, 31-41-31-45, 31-71, 31-72, 31-81, 31-91-31-97, 31-111-31-117, 31-131, 31-141, 31-151 1562 9-13-88 1 18-1, 18-2, 18-3(a), 18-4-18-6, 18-9-18-11, 18-32, 18-33, 18-35, 18-38, 18-66, 18-68, 18-70-18-73, 18-102, 18-104(a), (b), (f), (g), 18-105, 18-112-18-114, 18-126, 18-141, 18-144(a), 18-145(a), 18-154       Deleted 18-128, 18-129 18-143 1567 11-8-88 1       Rnbd 26-53 as 25-66 2 25-61-25-68 1568 11-8-88 1 28-41-28-44 1569 11-8-88 1       Rpld 11-16-11-19 1570 11-8-88 2 18-1, 18-7, 18-12 (c)-(e), 18-15-18-17, 18-32(a)(1), (2), 18-53(a), 18-104(g), (h) 18-105, 18-107, 18-108, 18-110(a), 18-113(b), 18-127, 18-144(a), 18-145(a) 1571 11-22-88 1, 2 20-3, 20-4 1573 12-13-88 1 Repealed by Ord. 1906 1574 12-13-88 1-8 12-17 (note) 1577 12-27-88 1 33-83 1580 1-10-89 1 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1581 1-10-89 1-8 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1589 2-28-89 1 2-123 1593 3-28-89 1-2 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1594 3-28-89 1 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1596 4-4-89 1 21-17(note) 1597 4-11-89 1 31-21(a)(4) 2 31-91, 31-93, 31-97 3 31-117 1598 4-25-89 1-2 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1605 6-13-89 1 2-136-2-151 2 2-171-2-174 3 2-246-2-251 1608 6-27-89 1-3 21-17(note) 1609 6-27-89 1 33-173 1610 7-12-89 1 Repealed by Ord. 2186       Rpld 25-47(c) 1612 7-12-89 1 21-17(note) 1617 8-29-89 1 26-72 1618 9-12-89 1       Added 15-3 1621 9-12-89 1 30-81, 30-83-30-93 1622 9-26-89 1-3 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1624 11-7-89 1 Repealed by Ord. 2241 2 Repealed by Ord. 2241 3 Repealed by Ord. 2241 4 Repealed by Ord. 2241 5, 6 Repealed by Ord. 2241 1627 12-5-89 1 Repealed by Ord. 2241 1629 12-12-89 1 32.5-1-32.5-8 1633 2-27-90 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1635 3-13-90 1 28-2 1636 3-27-90 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1640 4-10-90 1 33-91(c) 33-94(c) 1643 5-22-90 1 25-1 2 Repealed by Ord. 2186 3, 4 Repealed by Ord. 2186 5 Repealed by Ord. 2186 1644 5-22-90 1(1) 2-72(c) (2) 2-228(a) (3) 2-282(a) (4) 7-17(a) (5) Repealed by Ord. 1938 (6) 20-17(a) (7) 27-17(a) (8) 28-17(a) (9) Repealed by Ord. 1772 2(1) 2-72(f) (2) 2-228(a) (3) 2-282(a) (4) 7-17(a) (5) 20-20 3 10-111(f) 4 27-19 5 7-17(a) 1646 6-26-90 1, 2 21-17(note) 1647 6-26-90 1 13-8 1648 7-24-90 1 21-197-21-200 1654 10-30-90 1 19-46 2 19-76(b) 3 30-62 4 30-68 5 30-70 1657 11-27-90 1       Rpld 16-51-16-60       Added 16-51-16-55 1658 11-27-90 1 16-16 2 Repealed by Ord. 2016 3       Rpld 16-18       Amnd 16-19 1659 12-11-90 1 30-4 2 33-16 1664 1-8-91 1, 2, 3 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1668 2-12-91 1 21-88 2 21-147 3 22-27 1670 2-26-91 1       Rpld 22-7 1671 2-26-91 1 33-72.1 1673 3-26-91 1 25-70-25-76 1677 4-9-91 1 24-91 (note) 1678 4-9-91 1-2 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1680 4-23-91 1 6-21(i) 2 6-22(a)(4) 3 6-24 1682 4-23-91 1 15-2 1683 4-23-91 1, 2 32-3(b), (c) 1689 5-28-91 1 5-28 1690 5-28-91 1 5-1 2 5-9 3 5-15 4 5-56-5-59 1693 6-25-91 1 2-226-2-232 1697 7-9-91 1       Amnd 24-91(note) 1701 10-29-91 1       Rpld 18.5-1-18.5-17       Added 18.5-1-18.5-18 1703 11-5-91 1-4 21-17(note) 1704 11-26-91 1 29-6 1710 2-4-91 1 2-145(1)e. 2 2-146(a), (g) 1713 4-7-92 1 33-16 2 33-90 3 33-92(c) 4 33-97(a) 1717 5-26-92 1       Added 28-3 1721 6-2-92 1 3-1 2 3-2 3 3-4, 3-7 4       Rpld 3-36-3-60       Added 3-36-3-46 5 3-64 1722 6-2-92 1 4-1 2 4-4 3       Rpld 4-22       Added 4-22 4 4-23 5       Rpld 4-26, 4-27       Added 4-26, 4-27 1723 6-2-92 1 5-1-5-4 2       Rpld 5-6       Added 5-6 3 5-10, 5-13 4       Added 5-16 5 5-26-5-31, 5-33 6       Added 5-34-5-36 7 5-46-5-55 8       Added 5-66-5-70 1724 6-2-92 1       Rpld 21-1-21-160       Added 21-1-21-160 2 21-161, 21-164-21-167 3 21-180 4       Rpld 21-181-21-196       Added 21-181-21-192 5       Rpld 21-197-21-200 1725 6-2-92 1 21-1. 21-2 2       Rpld 22-6       Added 22-6 3       Rpld 22-9       Added 22-9 4 22-26, 22-27 5       Rpld 22-28       Added 22-28 6 22-29, 22-31, 22-32, 22-33, 22-35, 22-36 1727 6-23-92 1       Added 2-2 1730 7-28-92 1       Added 26-53 1731 7-28-92 1 Repealed by Ord. 1772 1741 11-3-92 1 Repealed by Ord. 2241 2 Repealed by Ord. 2241 3 Repealed by Ord. 2241 4       Added 7-30-7-34 1743 11-24-92 1 2-16 1746 12-22-92 1 21-101 1753 1-26-93 1       Rpld 27-36       Added 27-36 2 Repealed by Ord. 1944 3 27-42 4       Rpld 27-86-27-100 1758 3-9-93 1 21-4 1765 5-11-93 1       Added Repealed by Ord. 2184 1770 6-8-93 1       Added 13-9 1772 6-22-93 1       Added App. A. §§ 1.100, 1.201-1.208, 1.301-1.302, 1.401-1.404, 2.100, 2.200, 2.300, 3.101-3.106, 3.201, 3.301-3.303, 3.401-3.404, 3.501-3.502, 3.601-3.608, 3.701-3.714, 3.801-3.811, 3.901-3.911, 3.920-3.921, 4.100, 4.200, 4.300, 5.101-5.110, 5.201-5.213, 5.301-5.312, 5.321-5.329, 5.411-5.419, 5.421-5.429, 5.431-5.439, 5.441-5.449, 5.501-5.510, 5.521-5.530, 5.541-5.550, 5.611-5.619, 5.711-5.720, 5.731-5.741, 5.751-5.754, 5.756-5.762, 5.771-5.781, 5.811-5.822, 5.841-5.851, 5.861-5.871, 5.901-5.913, 6.101-6.107, 6.201-6.206, 6.301-6.305, 6.309-6.310, 6.401-6.406, 6.501-6.506, 7.101-7.109, 7.201-7.204, 7.301-7.302, 7.304-7.305, 7.401-7.404, 7.501-7.505       Rpld 23-1-23-15 1773 6-22-93 1       Amend 28-3 1793 12-14-93 1 9-31-9-38 1794 12-14-93 1 24-3 2       Rpld 24-82 3       Added 24-190-24-199 1795 12-14-93 1 13-4-13-7 1796 1-11-94 1 18-1 2 18-104 3 18-114 4       Added 18-115 1798 2-22-94 1       Amnd 16-16 2       Amnd Repealed by 2016 3       Amnd 16-19, 16-20 1800 2-22-94 1 33-16 2 33-19 3       Rpld 33-20 4 33-21-33-22 5 33-36-33-38, 33-40 6 33-71-33-74 7 33-79-33-81 1803 3-22-94 1 Repealed by 2015 1805 5-10-94 1       Amnd App. A. §§ 3.104, 3.803 1808 6-14-94 1       Amnd 33-217(a) 1812 7-12-94 1       Added App. A, §§ 5.121-5.132 1817 7-26-94 1       Amnd 1-7 2       Added Art. I       Amnd 13-8 3       Added Art. II, §§ 13-21-13-25 1819 9-27-94 1       Added Div 4. §§ 2-300-2-310 1826 12-13-94 1       Amnd 2-201-2-215 1830 1-24-95 1       Amnd 33-101 2       Rpld 33-108       Added 33-108 3       Rpld 33-220       Added 33-220 4       Amnd 33-221 5       Rpld 33-231, 33-232       Added 33-231, 33-232 6       Rpld 33-233       Added 33-233 7       Rpld 33-234-33-237 8       Amnd 33-238 1832 2-14-95 1       Amnd 21-102 1834 2-28-95 1       Rpld 26-52       Added 26-52-26-56 2       Rnbd 26-53-26-54 1837 4-11-95 1       Amnd 21-132 2       Amnd 21-125 1838 4-11-95 1       Amnd 30-2, 30-3 1840 5-23-95 1       Amnd App. A, §§ 5.842 2 5.844 1841 5-23-95 1       Amnd 24-91 1849 7-25-95 1       Adds 2-267 2       Amnd 2-282 3 2-301(b) 4       Rpld 7-17(c), 7-31(c) 5       Rpld 20-17(c) 6       Amnd 27-17(c), 27-20 7       Rpld 28-42(c) 1855 10-24-95 1       Added 28-100-28-105 1859 11-28-95 1       Amnd 22-1-22-8, 22-26-22-36 1862 1-9-96 1       Added 2-311-2-315 1867 1-23-96 1       Amnd Chapter 8 Title 2       Added 8-51-8-58 3       Amnd 24-3 4       Amnd 24-170 1874 3-12-96 1       Amnd Art. II, § 2.300 Art. V, §§ 5.612, 5.620 Art. VIII, § 7.103, 7.104, 7.105, 7.109 1878 3-12-96 1       Rpld 2-186, 2-187 2       Added 2-186 1889 6-11-96 1       Added 9-16(a)(13) 1896 7-23-96 1       Added App. A § 4.300(31) 2       Added App. A § 6.600 1901 9-24-96 1       Amnd App. A § 7.104 1902 9-24-96 1       Added App. A § 5.754(T) 1903 10-22-96 1       Added 28-125-28-149 2       Amnd 28-83-28-85 3       Added 28-106-28-124 (Reserved) 4       Amnd 33-72 5       Amnd 33-130 1906 11-12-96 1 Repealed by Ord. 2303 1907 11-26-96 1       Amnd 19-2 2       Added 19-66 1909 11-26-96 1       Amnd 7-1, 7-2 3       Added 7-3 1912 12-10-96 1       Amnd App. A § 2.300 1916 12-10-96 1       Amnd 3-38(b), 3-39(a)(2-5), (b)(1, 3-5), 3-39(c), 3-40(c) 1917 12-10-96 1       Amnd 4-1       Added 4-6, 4-7       Amnd 4-23, 4-25, 4-26(c-e) 1918 12-10-96 1       Amnd 5-1, 5-2, 5-3, 5-4(c-d), 5-5-5-7       Rpld 5-8, 5-12-5-16       Added 5-8-5-12 2       Amnd 5-26, 5-27, 5-29-5-32, 5-34-5-36 3       Amnd 5-46-5-49 4       Amnd 5-56(a)(10, 11) 5       Amnd 5-69       Added 5-71 1919 12-10-96 1       Amnd 21-1-21-4, 21-23-21-24, 21-41, 21-42       Added 21-41.01-21-41.03 2       Rpld 21-43-21-49       Added 21-43-21-46 3       Amnd 21-132, 21-135, 21-138 4       Amnd 21-151, 21-154, 21-157       Added 21-158 5       Amnd 21-161-21-174       Added 21-175-21-177 6       Amnd 21-180-21-182, 21-185, 21-186, 21-188, 21-190-21-193       Added 21-194-21-195 1931 3-11-97 1       Added 2-53 1932 3-25-97 1       Amnd App. A § 7.104 1935 4-22-97 1       Amnd App. A §§ 7.104(C)(3), 7.107       Added App. A § 6.700 1938 4-22-97 1       Rpld 10-111 1944 5-27-97 1       Amnd Art. I, 27-1-27-3 2       Amnd 27-17-27-21 3       Amnd 27-36-27-38, 27-41-27-42, 27-71       Rpld 27-39-27-40, 27-56-27-70       Added 27-43-27-55, 27-72-27-75, 27-81-27-89 4       Amnd 27-101, 27-103       Amnd 27-111, 27-121       Rpld 27-122, 27-123 1947 6-24-97 1       Amnd App. A § 2.300 2       Added App. A § 7.105(J) 3       Added App. A, Map No.9 1949 6-24-97 1       Amnd 33-84 1952 7-22-97 1       Amnd App. A § 3.303 2       Added App. A §§ 3.304, 3.305 3       Added App. A § 3.520-3.529 4       Amnd App. A § 3.702 5       Amnd App. A § 3.802 6       Amnd App. A § 3.902 7       Amnd App. A § 6.202 8       Amnd 31-22, 31-23       Added 31-26, 31-27 1954 9-09-97 1       Amnd App. A § 5.204, 5.304, 5.324 2       Amnd App. A § 7.504 1959 9-30-97 1       Amnd App. A § 7.404 1960 9-30-97 1       Amnd 21.1-480 1966 10-28-97 1       Amnd App. A § 5.204 1969 11-25-97 1       Rpld 33-40(c) 1973 11-25-97 1       Added 32.5-5(k) 1977 12-09-97 1       Added 19-90-19-101 1982 1-13-98 1       Amnd 11-1-11-4 1987 1-27-98 1       Amnd 21.1-100 2       Amnd 21.1-465 3       Amnd 21.1-660 4       Added regulation 21.1-100.5 1988 2-10-98 1       Amnd App. A § 7.104 1991 2-10-98 1       Added 28-127(f) 1993 2-24-98 1       Added 25-80-25-86 1998 3-24-98 1       Amnd 2-226, 2-228, 2-229, 2-231       Added 2-233 1999 4-14-98 1       Amnd App. A § 7.104 2002 2-28-98 1       Amnd App. A § 2.300 2       Added App. A §§ 3.902(F), 3.912 2       Amnd App. A § 3.904 3       Added App. A §§ 5.103(D), 5.107(B), 5.123(E), 5.128(B), 5.203(F), 5.209(C), 5.303(E), 5.310(C), 5.323(F), 5.327(D), 5.413(E), 5.417(B), 5.423(C), 5.427(D), 5.433(C), 5.437(D), 5.443(C), 5.447(D), 5.503(C), 5.507(C), 5.523(B), 5.524(F)-(H), 5.527(C), 5.543(C), 5.544(B)-(D), 5.547(C), 5.612A, 5,616(B), 5.713(B), 5.714(H)-(J), 5.717(D), 5.733(B), 5.734(C)-(E), 5.738(C), 5.753(C), 5.754(U)-(W), 5.759(C), 5.773(D), 5.774(D)-(F), 5.813(D), 5.814(G)-(I), 5.819(B), 5.843(B), 5.844(F)-(H), 5.848(C), 5.863(B), 5.864(N)-(P), 5.868(C), 5.908(B), Table 3-A 4       Amnd App. A § 6.503(H) 5       Added App. A §§ 7.506, 7.600-7.602 3209 (Res.)  5-26-98 5       Amnd 2-19(a) 2014 7-28-98 1       Amnd 21.1-100, 21.1-110, 21.1-266, 21.1-425, 21.1-435, 21.1-445, 21.1-450, 21.1-455, 21.1-465, 21.1-480, 21.1-556, 21.1-660 2015 7-28-98 1       Rpld 9-16-9-23       Added 9-16-9-21, 9-23 2016 7-28-98 1       Amnd 16-16 2       Rpld 16-17 2       Added 16-17 3       Amnd 16-19, 16-20 4       Amnd 16-52 2028 10-13-98 1       Amnd App. A § 7.403 2029 10-13-98 1       Rpld App. A § 5.752(D)(2)(b) 2       Added App. A § 5.754(X) 2030 10-13-98 1       Amnd App. A §§ 5.732, 5.752 2036 10-13-98 1       Added Ch. 29.1 2       Amnd 25-1 3       Amnd Repealed by Ord. 2186 4       Amnd 25-46 2046 12-8-98 1       Amnd 32-2 2       Amnd 32-3 3       Added 32-4 2053 12-8-98 1       Rpld Ch. 10       Added Ch. 10 2058 1-12-99 1       Amnd 33-158, 33-159 2059 1-26-99 1       Added Ch. 21.2 2062 2-23-99 1       Amnd App. A § 5.613 2070 3-9-99 1       Amnd 20-3 2       Amnd 20-4 3       Added 20-5 2073 3-23-99 1       Added 18-143 2076 5-11-99 1       Amnd 21.2-1-21.2-151 2077 5-11-99 1       Amnd 4-7 2       Amnd 5-1, 5-5 3       Amnd 5-26, 5-27 4       Amnd 21-3, 21-4 5       Amnd 21-166 6       Rpld 21-180-21-195 7       Amnd 22-1 8       Amnd 22-28 9       Rpld 26-86-26-89 2085 7-13-99 1       Amnd 8-54 2       Amnd 8-55 3       Amnd 8-57 4       Amnd 8-58 2089 7-27-99 1       Amnd App. A § 2.300 2       Amnd App. A §§ 5.754, 5.773, 5.774, 5.843, 5.844, 5.863, 5.864 3       Added App. A § 7.510 2090 7-27-99 1       Amnd App. A §§ 5.300, 5.301 2       Rpld App. A § 5.309 3       Added App. A §§ 5.313-5.3185 2104 10-12-99 1       Added App. A § 3.812 2       Amnd App. A § 3.809 2105 10-26-99 1       Amnd App. A §§ 5.524, 5.544 2106 10-26-99 1       Amnd 18-1 2       Amnd 18-3(a)-18-5(a) 2       Amnd 18-7(c), 18-8, 18-9(a)-(b), 18-10, 18-11, 18-12(e), (i) 3       Amnd 18-14, 18-31, 18-32(a)(2) 4       Added 18-40 5       Amnd 18-102(b), 18-103, 18-104(h) 6       Rpld 18-114 7       Amnd 18-144(b) 8       Added Art. V, §§ 18-160-18-168 2112 12-14-99 1       Amnd 21.1-110 2       Amnd 21.1-415 3       Amnd 21.1-416 4       Amnd 21.1-417 5       Rpld 21.1-418 6       Amnd 21.1-444 7       Amnd 21.1-445 8       Amnd 21.1-450 9       Amnd 21.1-460 10       Amnd 21.1-465 11       Amnd 21.1-470 12       Amnd 21.1-475 13       Amnd 21.1-575 14       Amnd 21.1-660 15       Amnd 21.1-100.4 2113 12-14-99 1       Amnd 18-110 2114 12-14-99 1       Added App. A, §§ 5.843(D), 5.844(H) 2115 1-11-00 1       Amnd App. A, § 6.602 2121 2-22-00 1       Amnd App. A, § 5.717 2126 3-28-00 1       Amnd 2-51 2127 3-28-00 1       Added App. A, §§ 7.70-7.705 2128 3-28-00 1       Added 9-2 2136 5-9-00 1       Amnd App. A, § 2.300 2138 5-30-00 1       Amnd 2-66-2-74, 2-76-2-90, 2-91 2147 6-27-00 1       Amnd 28-126, 28-127 2       Amnd Ch. 28, Table 1 2155 7-25-00 1       Amnd 26-57 2       Amnd 27-46 2157 7-25-00 1       Rpld 21.1-420 2158 7-25-00 1       Amnd 20-17, 20-19 2       Amnd 27-17, 27-20 2165 10-24-00 1       Added 21.3-1-21.3-7 2166 10-24-00 1       Amnd App. A, § 5.103 2       Added App. A, § 7.507 2176 12-19-00 1       Added App. A, § 5.734(F) and (G) 2       Added App. A, § 5.754(W) and (X) 3       Added App. A, § 5.774(F) and (G) 2177 12-19-00 1       Amnd App. A, § 2.300 2       Amnd App. A, § 4.300 3       Added App. A, §§ 5.701-5.7094 4       Added App. A, §§ 5.782-5.794 4       Amnd App. A, Table 3 of Section 5.800 5       Amnd App. A, § 7.104(C)(1) and (C)(3)(E) 6       Amnd App. A, §§ 7.201(A) and 7.202(A)(2) 2183  2-13-01 1       Amnd 4-1-4-7 2       Amnd 4-21, 4-22, 4-25-4-28       Rpld 4-23, 4-24       Rnbd 4-25-4-28       as 4-23-4-26 2184  2-13-01 1       Amnd 2-136-2-151       Rpld 2-155, 2-156 2       Amnd 2-171-2-173, 2-175       Rpld 2-174       Rnbd 2-175       as 2-174 3       Amnd 2-246-2-251       Rpld 2-252 2185  2-13-01 1       Added 2-268 2186  2-27-01 1       Rpld 6-5.1 2       Amnd 18-1 3       Amnd 24-94 4       Amnd 25-1-25-7 5       Rpld 25-2-25-7 6       Amnd 25-21-25-24 7       Rpld 25-25-25-30 8       Added 25-36-25-41 9       Rpld 25-46-25-48 10       Amnd 25-64 11       Amnd 25-67 12       Rpld 26-1 13       Amnd 29.1-4, 29.1-21 2189  3-27-01 1       Added 15-4 2193  5-29-01 1       Amnd App. A, § 3.201 2203  7-24-01 1       Amnd App. A, §§ 5.101-5.109 2205  7-24-01 1       Amnd 21.1-510 2       Added 21.1-553 3       Amnd 21.1-570 2206  7-24-01 1       Amnd App. A, §§ 2.300 and 5.754 2209  9-25-01 1       Amnd 15-4 2211  9-25-01 1       Added 2-155 2       Added 2-156 2220 10- 9-01 1       Amnd Ch. 28, Table 1 2222 10-30-01 1       Amnd 17-11 2227 11-13-01 1       Amnd 33-173 2229 11-27-01 1       Amnd 21.1-400-416, 21.1-425-430, 21.1-435-445, 20.1-450-480, 21.1-600 2230 12-11-01 1       Amnd 9-16 2240  2-12-02 1       Added 32.5-9 2241  2-12-02 1       Added Div. VI, §§ 2-316-2-325 2       Rpld Ch. 7, Art. II 2242  2-12-02 1       Amnd 13-2, 13-4-13-8 2       Added Ch. 13, Art. III 2244  2-12-02 1       Amnd 13-9 2249  3-26-02 1       Added 7.603 2254  5-14-02 1       Amnd 7.104 2260  6-11-02 1       Amnd 2-2 1       Added 2-3 2       Amnd 9-17, 9-18, 9-21, 9-23 3       Amnd 16-17 4       Amnd 28-2(b)-3 5       Amnd 30-4, 30-85, 30-104 6       Amnd 31-23(c), 31-24(a)(1)(iii), 31-115(a)(1)(iii), 31-151 7       Amnd 3.201, 3.709(B)(2), 7.109(C) 3582 (Res.)  6-11-02 1(Exh. A)       Added App. B 2264  6-25-02 1       Amnd App. A, Map ZMA-8 2273  7-23-02 1       Amnd 3-38 2       Amnd 5-30 3       Amnd 5-69 4       Amnd 21-22 5       Amnd 21-167 6       Amnd 21.2-29 7       Amnd 22-31 8       Amnd 30-85 2280 10-22-02 1       Amnd App. A, § 2.300 2       Amnd App. A, § 7.104 2298  1-28-03 2       Amnd 21.1-470 2299  1-28-03 1       Amnd 24-91 2303  1-28-03 1       Rpld 2-20       Added 2-20 2325  6-24-03 1       Amnd 11-1-11-4 (Tabled and replaced by Ord. 2330) 2328  7- 8-03 1       Rpld 21.1-445(k) 2329  7- 8-03 1       Amnd 25-1 2       Added 25-20 2330  7- 8-03 1       Amnd 11-1-11-4 2332  7-22-03 1       Amnd 25-1 2       Added 25-90 2333  7-22-03 1       Added 28-131 2334  9- 9-03 1       Rpld 8-1-8-50 2       Rnbd Art. III as Art. I 2337  9-23-03 1       Amnd 18-110 2345 10-14-03 1       Amnd 18-110 2349 10-28-03 1       Rpld 9-16-9-30       Added 9-16-9-30 2       Rpld 16-5       Added 16-5 3       Amnd 16-16 4       Rpld 16-17       Added 16-17 5       Amnd 16-52, 16-54 2354 11-25-03 1       Added 5-13 2       Amnd 21-1 3       Added 21-28 2359 12-16-03 1       Added Div. 3, § 26-65 2369  2-24-04 1       Rpld App. A, § 5.102E. 2372  3-23-04 1       Added App. A, § 7.104(C)(1.5), (2.5) 2378  5-25-04 1       Amnd Ch. 28, Table 1 2384  6-1-04 1       Amnd 33-83 2       Added 33-100-33-100.6 2386  6-22-04 1       Amnd App. A, § 2.300 2       Amnd App. A, § 5.103B. 2       Amnd App. A, § 5.123C. 2       Amnd App. A, § 5.203C. 2       Amnd App. A, § 5.303B. 2       Amnd App. A, § 5.316B. 2       Amnd App. A, § 5.323B. 2       Amnd App. A, § 5.413B. 2       Amnd App. A, § 5.423B. 2       Amnd App. A, § 5.433B. 2       Amnd App. A, § 5.443B. 2       Amnd App. A, § 5.503B. 3       Amnd App. A, § 7.502 2393  7-13-04       Added App. A, Map ZMA-9 2399  7-27-04 1       Added 2-34 2400  7-27-04 1       Rpld 22-1-22-8, 22-26-22-36       Added 22-1-22-5, 22-8, 22-9, 22-26-22-36 2404  9-14-04 1       Amnd 33-101 2       Amnd 33-106(b) 3       Amnd 33-174(b) 4       Amnd 33-220(11)-(13) 5       Amnd 33-221(d)(1)j 6       Amnd 33-231(3)       Rpld 33-231(14)       Rnbd 33-231(15)-(17)       as 33-231(14)-(16) 7       Amnd 33-232(3) 8       Amnd 33-238(b), (d)       Added 33-238(e)-(g) 9       Amnd 33-240(b) 10       Rpld 33-244 2416 12-14-04 1       Amnd 13-8(a) 2417 12-14-04 1       Amnd 33-232(3) 2421  1-11-05 1       Added 24-80(b)-(e) 2       Amnd 24-120(a)(5) 3       Amnd 24-130 4       Rpld 24-131 5       Amnd 24-132(b) 6       Rpld 24-133-24-135 7       Amnd 24-136(a)-(c) 8       Amnd 24-139 2422  1-25-05 1       Amnd 22-1 2       Rpld 22-4, 22-9 3       Rpld 22-26(b)       Rnbd 22-26(c), (d)       as 22-26(b), (c) 4       Amnd 22-33, 22-34       Rpld 22-35(a)(8) 2431  3-22-05 1       Amnd 32.5-5(a)       Added 32.5-5(l) 2432  3-22-05 1       Amnd 25-38 2       Amnd 29.1-33 2433  5-10-05 1       Added 2-76-2-88 2441  5-24-05       Added App. A, Map ZMA-10 2448  6-28-05 1       Amnd 9-17 2       Amnd 9-20 2454  7-26-05 1       Amnd 6-1 2       Rpld 6-21-6-25       Added 6-21-6-25 2455  7-26-05 1       Amnd 13-6 2       Amnd 13-7 2463  9-27-05 1       Added App. A, Map ZMA-11 2473 12-13-05 1       Rpld 8-51-8-58       Added 8-51, 8-52 2474 12-13-05 1       Amnd 2-226-2-230 2480  1-24-06 1       Added 13-9(d) 3948 (Res.)  4-11-06 3(Exh. A)       Amnd 2-19(a) 2502  5-9-06 1       Rpld 21.1-480(d) 2514  6-13-06 1       Amnd 28-127, Table 1 2531 10-24-06 1       Rpld App. A, §§ 3.701-3.707       Rpld App. A, § 3.710       Rnbd App. A, §§ 3.708, 3.709, 3.711-3.714       as App. A, §§ 3.701-3.706 2532 10-24-06 1       Amnd App. A, § 2.300 2       Added App. A, § 5.773F. 2541  1-23-07 1       Amnd 24-3(o) 2       Rpld 24-53(d) 3       Amnd 24-58(a) 4       Amnd 24-61(a)       Amnd 24-62 5       Added 24-64-24-68 6       Added 24-82 7       Amnd 24-120(a)(5) 8       Amnd 24-191 9       Amnd 25-22 10       Amnd 26-2 11       Amnd 26-3 12       Rpld 27-45(d), (e)       Rnbd 27-45(f)       as 27-45(d) 2545  2-13-07 1       Added App. A, § 6.502I. 2546  2-13-07 1       Added 26-68, 26-69 2556  3-13-07 1       Amnd 33-101 2       Amnd 33-233 2558  3-27-07 2       Amnd 24-36 3       Added 24-44-24-49 4033 (Res.)  3-27-07 1(App. B)       Amnd App. B 2563  5- 8-07 1       Amnd 33-76 2       Amnd 33-83 2575  6-26-07 1       Rpld 9-16-9-21, 9-23       Added 9-16-9-22 2589  9-25-07 1       Added 21.1-120       Amnd 21.1-405       Amnd 21.1-410       Amnd 21.1-415-21.1-417       Amnd 21.1-422(a)       Amnd 21.1-425       Amnd 21.1-427       Amnd 21.1-430       Amnd 21.1-435       Amnd 21.1-444       Amnd 21.1-445       Amnd 21.1-447       Amnd 21.1-450       Amnd 21.1-455       Amnd 21.1-460(a)       Amnd 21.1-470       Amnd 21.1-475       Amnd 21.1-480 2590 10- 9-07 1       Amnd App. A, §§ 3.102-3.104 2       Amnd App. A, § 3.303       Amnd App. A, § 3.305 3       Amnd App. A, §§ 3.901, 3.902       Amnd App. A, § 3.904       Amnd App. A, §§ 3.907-3.912 2591 10- 9-07 1       Amnd 27-81(a) 2       Rpld 30-81-30-93 3       Added 29.2-1, 29.2-4, 29.2-5, 29.2-8-29.2-13, 29.2-20, 29.2-25-29.2-34, 29.2-40, 29.2-41 29.2-45, 29.2-46 2603 11-27-07 1       Amnd 5-1, 5-2       Amnd 5-12, 5-13 2       Amnd 5-26       Amnd 5-29       Amnd 5-32 2604 11-27-07 1       Amnd 21-1, 21-2 2       Added 21-47 3       Amnd 24-120 4       Added 24-210, 24-211 2607 12-11-07 1       Rpld Ch. 21.1       Added Ch. 21.1 2627  3-25-08 1       Rpld 24-173 2       Added 25-100-25-105 2661 10-28-08 1       Amnd 21.1-100 2       Added 21.1-280-21.1-290 3       Amnd 21.1-300 4       Amnd 21.1-415-21.1-417       Amnd 21.1-465 2676  3-10-09 1       Amnd 13-22 2687  6-23-09 1       Amnd 13-5       Amnd 13-7, 13-8 2       Amnd 13-28, 13-29  7- 1-09(Ord.)       Rpld App. B       Added App. B 2698  8-25-09 1       Added 13-9(e) Council Mtg.  3-23-10 Officials pg. iii 2727  6-22-10 1 21-1 21-41(b), (c) 2       Rnb 21-41(d), (e)       as 21-4(e), (f)       Added 21-41(d) 3       Added 21-48 2732  6-22-10 1       Rpld 3-1-3-12 3-36-3-46 3-61-3-64       Added 3-1-3-11 3-36 3-36.1 3-37-3-46 3-46.1, 3-46.2 3-47 3-61-3-64 2734  8-31-10 1 13-24 2750 11- 9-10 1       Rpld 16-16-16-20       Added 16-16-16-21 2       Rpld 16-51-16-55       Added 16-51-16-54 2753 11-23-10 2 28-42(a) 28-44 4441(Res.) 11-23-10 1 App. B 2763  2-22-11 1 App. A, § 2.300 2       Added App. A, § 7.800       Added App. A, Zoning Amendments, 55. 2764  2-22-11 1       Added 21.4-1-21.4-4 21.4-11-21.4-15 E-mail  3-18-11 Officials, pg. iii 2769  4-12-11 1       Rpld 33-40       Added 33-40 4472(Res.)  4-12-11 1 33-83(Note) App. B 2772  6-14-11 1       Rpld 21.1-1, 21.1-100 21.1-110, 21.1-115 21.1-120 21.1-200, 21.1-210 21.1-220, 21.1-300 21.1-230, 21.1-240 21.1-250, 21-1-260 21.1-266, 21.1-270 21.1-300, 21.1-305 21.1-310, 21.1-320 21.1-330, 21.1-350 21.1-360, 21.1-370 21.1-400, 21.1-405 21.1-410, 21.1-415-21.1-417 21.1-422, 21.1-425 21.1-427, 21.1-430 21.1-432, 21.1-435 21.1-444, 21.1-445 21.1-447, 21.1-450 21.1-455, 21.1-460 21.1-465, 21.1-470 21.1-475, 21.1-480 21.1-500, 21.1-510 21.1-515-21.1-21.1-517 21.1-520, 21.1-530 21.1-540-21.1-542 21.1-545, 21.1-546 21.1-550, 21.1-553 21.1-555, 21.1-556 21.1-560, 21.1-565 21.1-570-21.1-572 21.1-575, 21.1-577 21.1-578, 21.1-580 21.1-580, 21.1-590 21.1-595-21.1-597 21.1-600, 21.1-610 21.1-620, 21.1-630 21.1-640, 21.1-640 21.1-650, 21.1-660 21.1-100.1-21.1-110.5 21.1-115.1, 21.1-120.1 21.1-200.1, 21.1-250.1 21.1-250.1, 21.1-270.1 21.1-270.2, 21.1-300.1 21.1-300.2, 21.1-310.1 21.1-350.2, 21.1-350.3 21.1-360.1, 21.1-360.2 21.1-405.1, 21.1-405.2 21.1-415.1-21.1-415.3 21.1-416.1, 21.1-416.2 21.1-425.1, 21.1-435.1 21.1-435.2, 21.1-445.3 21.1-450.1-21.1-450.5 21.1-455.1 21.1-460.1-21.1-460.6 21.1-465.1-21.1-465.4 21.1-470.1, 21.1-475.1 21.1-520.2, 21.1-555.1 21.1-571.1 2773  6-14-11 1       Added App. A, § 6.800 2 App. A, §§ 7.103.C., 7.104.C., D. 3, 4       Added App. A, Zoning Amendments, 56 4491  6-14-11 1       Added 21.1-1-21.1-120       Added 21.1-200-[21.1]-290       Added 21.1-300-21.1-370       Added 21.1-400-21.1-485       Added 21.1-500-21.1-597       Added 21.1-600-21.1-660       Added Regs. 21.1-100.1-21.1-571.1 2774  6-28-11 1       Rpld 16-1-16-6       Added 16-1-16-9 2784  9-13-11 1       Rpld 2-20 1(Exh. A)       Added 2-20 2785 10-11-11       Added 33-290-33-292 33-300-33-303 33-310-33-316 2786 11-22-11 1       Rpld 28-127(Tbl. 1) Attch.       Added 28-127(a), (d), (e) 28-129 28-130(a) 2792 12-13-11 1 13-9  3-19-12(E-mail) App. A, Map #2       Added App. A, Zoning Amendments, 57 2801  4-24-12 1       Added 26-70.1-26-70.8 2       Rpld 21-44(4) 21-173 2802  5-22-12 1 25-24(f), (i) 2 25-64(a) 2805  6-26-12 1 App. A, § 2.300 2 App. A, § 7.103.F., K. App. A, § 7.106.A. 3       Added App. A, § 7.110 1-3       Added App. A, Zoning Amendments, 58 2806  6-12-12 1 21.1-447 2807  6-12-12 1 21.1-405(a) 21.1-410(a) 21.1-415(a) 21.1-416(a) 21.1-417(a) 21.1-422(a) 21.1-425(a) 21.1-427(a) 21.1-430(a) 21.1-435(a) 21.1-444 21.1-445(a) 21.1-450(a) 21.1-455(a) 21.1-460(a) 21.1-470(a) 21.1-475 21.1-480(a) 21.1-610(a), (b), (f) 2809  6-26-12 1       Added 21.1-460(d) 2       Added 21.1-610(e)  8- 2-12(E-mail) Officials pg. iii 2819 10- 9-12 1       Added 2-321-2-325 2821 10-23-12 1       Rpld 9-16-9-22       Added 9-16-9-23 2829 12-11-12 1 13-6(b), (c) 2837  1-22-13 1 2-32(a), (d)  2-13-13(E-mail) Officials pg., 
iii 2838  2-26-13 1       Added 2-4 2843  5-14-13 1 21.1-100 2       Rpld 21.1-310(j) 3 21.1-422(c) 4 21.1-445(s)       Added 21.1-445(t) 6 21.1-540 21.1-580 2849  6-25-13 1       Added 2-54 2850  6-25-13 1       Added 2-326-2-330 Notice of Errata  6-17-13 9-17 2858  8-13-13 1 2-16 2861  9-24-13 1 18-53(d)       Added 18-53(e), (f) 2863 11-13-13 2 17-50 4742(Res.) 11-13-13 1       Added Ch. 17(note) 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 17-1-17-15       Added 17-1-17-14 2(Exh. A)       Rpld 17-26-17-29       Added 17-26-17-29 3(Exh. A)       Rpld 17-41-17-50       Added 17-41-17-52 2870  1-14-14 1 33-84 2871  1-14-14 1 2-3 2874  1-28-14 1 26-22 2880  2-25-14 1 13-27 2881  2-25-14 1       Rpld 2-300-2-303 2886  4- 8-2014 1 16-8 2891  5-13-2014 1       Rpld 28-125-28-131 2       Added 28-125-28-139 3       Rpld 28-127(Tbl. 1) 2892  5-27-2014 1       Rpld 2-201-2-209       Added 2-201-2-213 2       Added 2-214-2-221 3       Rnmd Ch. 2, Art. V., Div. VI       as Ch. 2, Art. V., Div. VII       Rnmd 2-216-2-219       as 2-222-2-225 2899  6-24-2014 1 25-66(d) 2901  8-12-2014 1 2-3 2902  8-12-2014 1 3-5 2 3-6 3 3-38 4839(Res.)  8-12-2014 1       Rpld App. B 2(Exh. 1)       Added App. B 3 App. B, ed. note 2907 10-14-2014 1       Rpld 2-321-2-325 2925 12-18-2014 1       Rpld 21.1-300-21.1-370 2       Rpld 21.1-300.1, 21.1-300.2 21.1-310.1 21.1-350.1-21.1-350.3 21.1-360.1, 21.1-360.2 4 21.1-540 21.1-580 4911(Res.) 12-18-2014 1(Exh. A)       Added 21.1-300-21.1-380 4956(Res.)  5-26-2015 1       Rpld App. B., Table 3B 2(Exh. 1)       Added App. B., Table 3B 2944  6-23-2015 1 21.1-100 21.1-200 21.1-417 21.1-425 21.1-445 21.1-450 21.1-460 21.1-462 21.1-465 21.1-480 21.1-660 Reg. 21.1-120 Reg. 21.1-460.1       Rpld 21.1-120 21.1-445(t) 21.1-465(q) 21.1-660(q)       Rpld Reg. 21.1-120.1 2945  6-23-2015 1 21.2-4 21.2-31 21.2-46 21.2-74 21.2-113 21.2-134 4997(Res.)  6-23-2015 1(Exh. A) 21.1-100       Rpld 21.1-120 21.1-200 21.1-417 21.1-425 21.1-445 21.1-450 21.1-460       Added 21.1-462 21.1-465 21.1-480 21.1-660       Rpld Reg. 21.1-120.1 Reg. 21.1-460.1 4998(Res.)  6-23-2015 1(Exh. A) 21.2-4 21.2-31       Added 21.2-46       Added 21.2-74       Added 21.2-113       Added 21.2-134 2972  1-12-2016 1 2-186(c) 2976  2-23-2016 1 App. A, Art. 2, § 2.300 2 App. A, Art. 5, § 5.910 3       Added App. A, Art. 6, §§ 6.901-6.903 4 App. A, Art. 7, § 7.101 App. A, Art. 7, § 7.103 App. A, Art. 7, § 7.702 2984  4-12-2016 1 24-53(b) 2990  5-24-2016 1       Rpld 21-131-21-138       Added 21-131-21-141 2991  5-24-2016 1 21.1-320 2993  6-14-2016 1       Rpld 3-1-3-11       Rpld 3-36-3-47       Rpld 3-61-3-64       Added 3-1-3-11 2994  6-28-2016 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 18-1-18-168       Added 18-1-18-168 3001  8- 9-2016 1 2-3(d) 3003  9-27-2016 1(Eh. A)       Rpld ch. 33, art. II, div. 1, §§ 33-16-33-29, div. 2, §§ 33-36-33-40, div. 3, §§ 33-51-33-60, div. 4, §§ 33-71-33-84, div. 5, §§ 33-86-33-99, div. 6, §§ 33-100-33-100.6, art. III, div. 1, §§ 33-101-33-111, div. 2, §§ 33-126-33-130, div. 3, §§ 33-141-33-143, div. 4, §§ 33-156-33-159, div. 5, §§ 33-171-33-183, div. 6, §§ 33-201-33-205, div. 7, §§ 33-216-33-221, div. 8, §§ 33-231-33-233, 33-238-33-243, 33-245, 33-246, div. 9, §§ 33-256-33-259, art. IV, §§ 33-261-33-270, art. V, §§ 33-271-33-286, art. VI, div. 1, §§ 33-290-33-293, div. 2, §§ 33-300-33-304, div. 3, § 33-310, div. 4, §§ 33-311-33-316       Added ch. 33, art. I, §§ 33-1-33-14, 33-16, art. II, div. 1, § 33-17, div. 2, §§ 33-18-33-39, div. 3, §§ 33-51-33-58, div. 4, §§ 33-81-33-85, div. 5, §§ 33-86-33-99, art. III, div. 1, §§ 33-101-33-111, div. 2, §§ 33-126-33-130, div. 3, §§ 33-141-33-143, div. 4, §§ 33-156-33-159, div. 5, §§ 33-171-33-174, 33-176-33-179, 33-181, div. 6, §§ 33-217-33-221, div. 7, §§ 33-231-33-233, 33-238-33-246, div. 8, §§ 33-256-33-259, art. IV, §§ 33-261-33-270, art. V, §§ 33-271-33-286, art. VI, div. 1, §§ 33-290-33-293, div. 2, §§ 33-300-33-304, div. 3, § 33-310, div. 4, §§ 33-311-33-316, app. 1 3004  9-27-2016 1       Added 2-5 2 2-138 2-150 3033 12-20-2016 1 2-31-2-33 O17-06  1-24-2017 1       Rpld ch. 2, div. 8, §§ 2-326-2-330       Added ch. 2, div. 8, §§ 2-326-2-330 O17-18  5- 9-2017 1       Rpld 26-70.1-26-70.8       Added 26-70.1-26-70.8 2 21-44 21-173 O17-21  5-23-2017 1       Rpld 2-311-2-314       Added 2-311-2-313 O17-24  6-13-2017 1 2-51 O17-25  6-13-2017 1       Added 6-26-6-29 O17-49  9-26-2017 1 2-269 O17-51 10-24-2017 1 App. A, § 2.300 2, 3       Added App. A, §§ 3.920-3.923       Rnbd App. A, §§ 3.920, 3.921       as App. A, §§ 3.930, 3.931 App. A, § 5.705.F       Added App. A, § 5.706       Rnbd App. A, §§ 5.706-5.7094       as App. A, §§ 5.707-5.709.5 App. A, § 5.714.K       Added App. A, § 5.715       Rnbd App. A, §§ 5.715-5.720       as App. A, §§ 5.716-5.721 App. A, § 5.734.H       Added App. A, § 5.735       Rnbd App. A, §§ 5.735-5.741       as App. A, §§ 5.736-5.742 App. A, § 5.754.Z       Added App. A, § 5.755 App. A, § 5.774.H       Added App. A, § 5.775       Rnbd App. A, §§ 5.775-5.781       as App. A, §§ 5.776-5.781.1 App. A, § 5.786.J       Added App. A, § 5.787       Rnbd App. A, §§ 5.787-5.794       as App. A, §§ 5.788-5.795       Added App. A, § 5.905       Rnbd App. A, §§ 5.905-5.913       as App. A, §§ 5.906-5.914 7       Added App. A, § 7.900 R17-101 10-24-2017 1(Exh. A) 33-57, App. 1 O17-65 12-12-2017 1 2-16 2(Exh. B.) 33-174, App. 1 018-16  3-27-2018 1 App. A, § 7.802.E., I. 018-31  5- 8-2018 1       Added 21-180-21-185 018-55  8-14-2018 1 2-269 018-60  8-14-2018 1 16-8 O18-76 10-23-2018 1(Exh. A) 18-1 18-2(a)(1) 18-5(a) 18-7(b) 18-10 18-12 18-15-18-17 18-20 18-32 18-33(f) 18-35 18-66 ch. 18, Div. 4 18-70, 18-71 18-73 18-104, 18-105 18-111 18-113 18-126 18-141, 18-142 18-164 18-168 O18-77 10-23-2018 1 25-90(b)(4) O18-85 12-11-2018 1 App. A, § 6.950 App. A, § 7.301.A.2 O18-86 12-11-2018 1       Rpld 16-16, 16-17       Added 16-16, 16-17 2 16-51-16-53 O19-01  1-8-2019 1       Added 24-179 O19-19  2-12-2019 1 13-9(b) O19-20  2-12-2019 1 2-68(a) O19-21  2-12-2019 1       Added 2-40-2-42 O19-35  3-26-2019 1       Rpld 9-16-9-23       Added 9-16-9-22  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
A.R.S. Section 
this Code 1-104 1-212 1-5 (note) 1-213 1-4 1-214 1-4 21.1-1 1-215 21.1-450 21.1-465 21.1-480 21.1-660 1-215(6) 1-4 1-215(16) 5-27 (note) 1-215(19) 1-4 1-215(21) 1-4 1-215(22) 1-4 1-215(25) 1-4 1-215(28) 1-4 1-215(31) 1-4 1-216 1-4 1-243 1-4 1-252 1-6 (note) 2-301 Ch. 7 (note) 2-325 App. A, § 3.102 2-327 App. A, § 3.103 3-561-3-563 21.1-465 21.1-660 Tit. 4 4-2 29.2-30 4-101 21.2-131 4-101(3) 4-1 4-101(21) 4-1 4-101(22) 4-1 4-101(28) 4-1 4-101(29) 4-1 4-101(34) 4-1 4-111 4-1 4-201 4-21 (note) 4-203.2 4-1 4-203.3 4-1 4-223 4-23 (note) 4-226 4-3 (note) 4-241(A)(1-4) 24-210 4-244(9) 4-5 (note) 4-244(15) 4-4 (note) Tit. 5, Ch. 4 5-66, 5-67, 5-69 Tit. 5, Ch. 5, Art. I 21.1-460 5-101 5-8 (note) 5-404(I) 5-70 Tit. 8 25-82 9-240(B)(7) Ch. 16 (note) 9-240(B)(11) Ch. 16 (note) 9-240(B)(11) Ch. 11 (note) 9-240(B)(21) 1-4, Ch. 25 (note) 9-243 30-51 9-276(A)(7) 18-9 (note) 9-276(A)(15) Ch. 16 (note) 9-276(A)(18) 1-4 9-281 Charter (note) 9-301 Ch. 2, Art. III (note) 9-309 16-2 (note) 9-401 1-4 9-402 1-4 9-411 Ch. 20 (note) 9-461 Ch. 28 (note) 9-461.01 28-16 (note) 9-461.02 28-17 (note) 9-461.08 31-4 Tit. 9, Ch. 4, Art. 6.2 31-4 9-462.01 App. A, § 1.201 9-462.06(K) App. A, § 3.702 9-463(b) 31-4 9-463(c)(4) 31-24 9-463(1) 31-4 9-463(3) 31-4 9-463(6)(a) 31-4 9-463(6)(b) 31-4 9-463(6)(c) 31-4 9-463(9) 31-4 9-463.01(I) 31-25 9-463.02 31-4 9-463.05 21.1-415 21.1-417 28-83 (note) 28-125-28-128 28-130 28-134 28-138, 28-139 21.1-415 21.1-417 9-499.08 21.1-415 9-500.04 25-100 9-500.05 28-126 28-136 9-500.12 28-100, 28-103 9-500.12(B) 28-100 9-500.12(G), (H) 28-105 9-500.22 13-9(e) 9-500.27 25-100 9-505 21.1-465 21.1-470 9-507 10-14 9-801 9-16 (note), 16-16 (note) 9-807 9-18 9-821 Ch. 15 (note) 9-901 Ch. 29 (note) 11-1102 21.1-415-21.1-417 12-170 21.1-572 12-671 2-123 Tit. 12, Ch. 7, Art. 6 21-41.03 12-821.01 2-209 Tit. 13 6-27 Tit. 13, Ch. 1 1-7 13-105 25-58 13-707 1-7 (note) 13-802 1-7 (note) 13-804 1-7 (note) Tit. 13, Ch. 14 21.2-23, 21.2-72 13-1401 21.2-31, 21.2-51, 21.2-60 13-1602 20-2 (note) 13-2107 26-21 (note) 13-2402 16-4 (note), 26-22 (note) 13-2502 Ch. 26, Art. II, Div. 2 (note) 13-2508 26-22 (note) 13-2904 25-64 (note), 25-66 (note) 13-2907.01 26-21 (note) 13-3101 26-58 (note) Tit. 13, Ch. 32 21.2-23, 21.2-72 13-3403 26-71 (note) Tit. 13, Ch. 35 21.2-23, 21.2-72 Tit. 13, Ch. 35.1 21.2-23, 21.2-72 13-3899 6-3, 6-6 Tit. 13, Ch. 39 26-57 13-3903 6-3, 6-6 Tit. 15 21.1-270 21.1-465 15-2011 App. A, § 3.812 16-101 Ch. 15 (note) 16-591-16-593 15-1 17-101 6-26 Tit. 20 21-133 Tit. 20, Ch. 2 2-205 20-201 2-205 20-201 et seq. 2-218 20-762 21.1-445 22-401 Ch. 13 (note) 22-426 13-1 23-901.06 2-52 24-101 Ch. 6 (note) 24-153 6-9 24-362 6-2 24-363 6-2 24-366 6-3 (note) 24-366.01 Ch. 6 (note) 24-367 6-4 (note), 6-4.1 24-369 6-5 (note) 24-368 6-2 24-370 6-6 (note) 24-371 6-7 (note) 24-371(6) 6-24 24-372 6-8 (note) 24-373 6-10 (note) 24-374 6-2 24-375 6-2 24-376 Ch. 6 (note) 24-378 6-2 24-381 6-7 (note) 26-231 Ch. 16, Art. II (note) 26-301 Ch. 14 (note) 26-301 et seq. 17-29(c)(5)c. 26-302 14-2 (note 26-308 14-3 (note), 14-4 (note) 26-309 16-2 (note) 26-311 14-7 (note) 26-314 14-8 (note) 26-335 16-5 Tit. 26, Ch. 12 2-291 Tit. 28 8-51, 8-52, 24-53 Tit. 28, Ch. 3, Art. II 25-46 Tit. 28, Ch. 6, Art, 21 24-130 Tit. 28, Ch. 15, Art 4 21.1-266 Tit. 28, Ch. 16, Arts I, II 21.1-465 21.1-660 Tit. 28, Ch. 16, Art. IV 21.1-475 28-627(A)(8) Ch. 8 (note) 28-677 29-5 28-811 Ch. 8 (note) 28-817 8-5 (note) 28-872 24-120 (note) 28-881 24-67 26-3 and (note) 28-881 et seq. 24-67 26-3 28-1001-28-1031 24-172 28-1011 24-172 Tit. 28, Art. 14 26-3 Tit. 28, Art. 14.1 26-3 28-1600 24-139 28-3165 21.2-26 28-5739 21.1-465 Tit. 32, Ch. 9, Art. 2 13-9(c) 32-1021 et. seq. 13-9(c) Tit. 33, Ch. 10 18-1 Tit. 34 2-155 33-277 34-201 et seq. 28-136 35-321 Ch. 2, Art. 5, Div. 4 (note) Tit. 36, Ch. 28.1 App. A, § 7.801-7.804 36-495 33-101 36-582 App. A, § 2.300 36-601.01 25-52 36-1401 Ch. 2, Art. VIII, Div. 2 (note), 2-291 36-1403 Ch. 2, Art. VIII, Div. 2 (note) 36-1601 26-70.2 36-2801 21.1-100 36-2801(5) App. A, § 2.300 36-2801(11) App. A, § 2.300 21.4-1 36-2801(13) App. A, § 2.300 36-2804(B)(1)(b)(ii) App. A, § 2.300 36-2804(B)(1)(c) App. A, § 2.300 App. A, § 7.802-7.803 36-2821 18-152 37-1383(A)(5) 16-18 38-431.02 2-17 (note) 38-501 Charter, § 14 38-541 Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2 (note), 2-31 (note) 38-542 2-32 (note) 38-543 2-33 (note) 38-545 Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2 (note) 2-32 38-701 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 (note) 38-704 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 (note) 40-360 et seq. 17-9(a)(4) 40-360.21 10-73 41-1492.03 9-16(a)(9) 41-1750 2-51, 5-31, 5-69, 21-24, 21-81, 21-167, 21.2-29, 22-31 41-2142 21.1-100 41-2533(A) 2-145 41-2533(D) 2-145 41-2533(E) 2-145 41-2533(F) 2-145 41-2533(G) 2-145 41-2534(B) 2-145 41-2534(D) 2-145 41-2534(F) 2-145 41-2534(G) 2-145 Tit. 42 21.1-416.2 Tit. 42, Ch. 2, Art. 4 2-208 42-301 2-208 42-301 et seq. 2-220 Tit. 42, Ch. 6, Art. III 21.1-100 Tit. 42, Ch. 14 21.1-475 42-2051 et seq. 21.1-570 42-2059 21.1-553 42-5005 21.1-320, 21.1-330 42-5061(A)(49) 21.1-455 21.1-465 21.1-660 42-5106 21.1-100 42-5252 21.1-260 42-5351 21.1-100 42-6003 21.1-510 21.1-565 42-6005 21.1-500 21.1-510 42-6005(D) 21.1-100 42-6065 21.1-510 44-1302 21.1-260 44-1601 21-1 44-1627 21-1 45-315 9-34, 9-35 45-319 9-34, 9-35 45-576 31-25 45-604 21.1-100 21.1-415 21.1-465 21.1-660 45-1201 et seq. 17-9(b) 47-3101 2-123 47-3507 2-123 Tit. 48, Ch. 4, Art. VI 28-131 48-3601 et seq. 17-9(b)(5)(2) 48-3603 17-2 48-3604 17-2 48-3609(H) 17-9(a) 48-3610 17-2 
17-9 48-3613 17-9(a)(3) 17-50(a) 48-4234 21.1-260 tit. 49, ch. 2, arts. 3.1, 8 33-101 49-391 33-221 49-426 21.1-465 21.1-480 21.1-660 49-701 18-1 49-701.01 18-1 49-746 18-2, 18-3 49-742 Ch. 18, Art. III, Div. 3 (note) 49-480 21.1-465 21.1-480 21.1-660 49-831 18-1 49-901 18-152 49-922 18-1  
